Imprimatur,

ROBERTUS SAY, VICE-CANCELLARIUS OXON.
A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KING December. 31. 1665.

AT CHRIST-CHURCH IN OXFORD.

By R. ALLESTREE, D. D. one of the Canons of that Church.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

OXFORD, Printed by W. Hall, for James Allestree, and Richard Davis. A. D. 1666.

II. Chap. of St. Luke, part of the 34. verse. Behold this Child is set for the
fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken
against.
AND Simeon Blessed them, and said, etc. A Benediction sure of a most strange
importance: If to bring forth one that is to be a large destruction, if to be
delivered of a Child that must be for the fall of many, and the killing of the
Mother's self, be blessed; if Swords and Ruins be comforts, then my Text is
full of these: But if this be to Bless, what is it to forespeak and abode ill?
Yet however ominous and fatal the words are; they give us the event, and, the
design too of the Blessed Incarnation of the Son of God, the Child of this
Text and of this Season: a short view of Gods Counsel in it; and the Effects of
it. The Effects in these particulars.

1. This Child is for the fall of many. 2. For the rising again of many. 3. For
a sign: with the quality of that sign, he is for a sign that shall be spoken
against.
2. The Counsel and Design of this is signified in the word here (...): he is
set, and preordain'd to be all this.

First of the first effect, This Child is for the fall of many.

And here I shall but only name that way whereby many men set this Child for
their own fall, while they make his holy Time to be but a more solemn
opportunity of sinning: We know many celebrate this great Festival with Surfets
and Excesses usual appendages of Feasting; Oaths and Curses the ingredients of
Gaming; Dallyance and Lasciviousness the attendants of sporting, of all which
this seems as it were the Anniversary, a set time for their return. Thus indeed
the Israelites did solemnize the Birth of their Idol-Calf, They sat down to
Eat and Drink, and rose up to Exodus 32. 6
play. And must we celebrate this Child too like that Calf, because he was born
among Brutes? And must his Votaries also be of the Heard? And he live and be
worshipped always in a Stable? Because God became man, must men therefore
become beasts? Is it fit to honor that Child with Iniquity and Looseness, that
did come into the World upon designs of Holiness, to settle a most strict
Religion? Nothing can be more incongruous then this; and certainly there is
nothing of Gods Counsel in it. But to you whose time seems nothing else but a
constant Festival, always has the Leisure, and the Plenties, and the Sports
of one, who as to these things keep a Christmas all their life, this season as
it does not seem to challenge those things to it self peculiarly, so I shall
not now insist on them; but proceed to those ways by which Simeon did
Prophecy, This Child would be for the fall of many in Israel. And they are
three,

1. This Child whom I but now declared God had prepared to be the Glory of his
People V. 31, 32.
Israel, yet his Birth was so inglorious, and his Life answerable to it, shall
be so mean and poor, and his Death so full of shame and curse, that these shall
prove a scandal to his people, who shall be offended at them, and being
prepossest with prejudices of a Pompous Royal Messiah, they will not believe in
this, but reject a Savior that comes upon those disadvantages, which will
therefore prove occasions of falling to them.

That it was so is expressly said, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone,
a stone of stumbling, Romans 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 6.
and a rock of offense. And that it was so upon this account is clear, The
great ones cry out of him, This fellow we know not whence he is: John 9. 29.
They that seemed to know whence did upbraid him with it, Is not this the
Carpenter? Mar. 6. 3.
And therefore with a deal of scorn they question, Do any of the Rulers or the
Pharisees believe John 7. 48.
in him? Yea, Christ himself knew this would be so great a scandal that in the
11 Chapter of St. Matthew, in the close of many Miracles which he wrought on
purpose to demonstrate he was the Messiah he adds verse. 6. and Blessed is he
that shall not be offended in me. As if he thought his mean condition would
prove a greater argument against him then his mighty works were for him: and it
were a vaster Prodigy to see the Savior of the world, the promised Messiah,
poor and abject, then to see one cure the Blind, and heal the Lame and raise
the Dead; and they might think they had a stranger Miracle to confirm their
unbelief, then any he would work to make them believe in him.

And really, that the Kingdom of the Messiah, which the Prophets did express in
terms as high as their own Ecstasies and Raptures, in transported words, as if
it Vied with Gods Dominion, both for extent and for duration, should prove at
last an Empire only over twelve poor Fishermen and Publicans, and one of them
a Traitor too: And that He that was born this King, should be born in a Stable,
while he lived that he should not have an hole to put his Head in, nor his
Corpse in when he died, but his Grave too must be Charity, this would startle
any that did wait for the Redemption of Israel in those glorious expresses
which the Prophets tract it out in. To you indeed that are Votaries to this
Child, are confirmed Christians, these seeming disadvantages can give no
prejudice: However mean and abject his condition were, that cannot make you to
despise him, who from that must needs reflect how dear you were to God, when
for your sakes merely he became so mean and abject. He became poor, says St.
Paul, that you through his poverty might 2 Cor. 8. 9.
be made rich: He was made the Child of Man, that you might be made Sons of
God; it was to pay the price of your Redemption that he (...). Phil. 11. 7.
so emptied himself; thus he valued you; and men do not despise merely because,
and by those measures that, they are esteemed, these are not there turns of
love, its passionate, obliging, ravishing effects do not use to be thus
requited, this his great descent cannot occasion your fall, who know he
descended only to assume you up to glory. But it is worth inquiry, why, since it
was certain, that for this, this Child should be the fall of Israel; that for
this they would reject him, and the meanness of his condition would prove an
unremoveable obstruction to their belief, as it is to this day; Why yet he
would choose to be born in a condition so in the utmost extreme to his own
nature, so all contradiction to his Divinity, and so seemingly opposite to the
very end of his coming.

The Jew indeed, will find no excuse for his infidelity from this condition:
for what ever that were, yet those Miracles that made the Devils to confess
him, brought conviction enough to make Jews inexcusable. And it was obvious to
observe, that He who fed five thousand with five loaves and two fishes, till
they Matthew. 14. 19, 20, 21.
left more then was set before them, needed not to be in a condition of want or
meanness, if it were not otherwise more needful he should not abound. God, that
when He brought this first begotten Son into the world, said, Let all the
Angels of God worship him, might Heb. 1. 6.
have put him into an estate which all mankind most readily would have done
Homage too: as easily have dressed his Person with a blaze of Pomp and Splendour,
as his Birthday with a Star, If there had not been necessity it should be
otherwise. And such there was. For when the fullness both of time and iniquity
was come, when Vice could grow no further, but did even cry for Reformation,
and when the Doctrine that must come to give the rules of this Reformation, was
not only to wage War with flesh and blood, with those desires which
constitution gives, but which perpetual universal custom had confirmed, and
which their Gods also, as well as inclinations, did contribute to, which their
Original sin, and their Religion equally fomented; for Vice was then the
Worship of the world, Sins had their Temples, Theft its Deity, and Drunkenness
its God, Adultery had many, and to prostitute their bodies was most sacred, and
their very Altar-fires did kindle these foul heats, whence Uncleanness is so
often called Idolatry in Scripture: And besides all this, all the Philosophy,
and all the power of the world engaged in the belief and practice of this, and
resolved with all their wit and force to keep it so. When it was thus, the
Doctrine that must come to oppose, control, reform, all this must come either
armed with fire and sword, design to settle it self by conquest, or come in a
way of meekness and of suffering: The first of these Religion cannot possibly
design, because it cannot aim to settle that by violence, which cannot be
forced, and where it is force, is not Religion. One may as well invade, and hope
to get a conquest over thoughts, and put a mind in chains, and force a man to
will against his will. All such motives are incompetent to demonstrate
Doctrines, for how ever successful their force proves, yet it cannot prove the
Doctrines true; for by that Argument it proves that Religion that it settles
true, it proves that it destroys was true before, while it prevailed and had
the power. Had this Child come so, he had only given such a testimony to to the
truth of Christianity, as Heathenisme had before, and Turcisme has since: He
might indeed, have drowned the wicked world again in another deluge, of their
own blood: but sure, never had reformed it thus. Therefore, That Religion, that
must oppose the Customs, and the Powers of the world, upon Principles of Reason
and Religion, must do it by Innocence and Patience, by doing good, and (which
was necessary, then by consequence, as the world stood,) by suffering evil:
parting with all, not only the advantages, but necessaries of this life, and
life its self too, where they stood in competition, and were inconsistent with
men's duties, and their expectations: and by this means they must show the world
that their Religion did bring Heb. 7. 19.
in a better hope, then that which all the profits, pleasures, glories of this
world can entertain and flatter.

Thus they did, and thus they did prevail for the first ages of the Church,
were but so many centuries of men, that entertained Christianity with the
contempt of the world, and life it self. They, knew to put themselves into
Christ's Service and Religion, was the same thing, as to set themselves aside
for spoil and rapine, dedicate themselves to poverty and scorn, to racks and
tortures, and to Butchery it self. Yet they entered into it; did not only
renounce the pomps and vanities of the world in their Baptism, when they were
new born to God; quench their affections to them, in those waters, but
renounced them, even to the death; drowned their affections to them, in their
own heart blood: ran from the world into flames, and fled faster from the
satisfactions and delights of earth, then those flames mounted to their Element
and Sphere: In fine, they became Christians so, as if they had been Candidates
of Death, and only made themselves Apprentises of Martyrdom. Now, if it were
not possible, it should be otherwise then thus, as the world stood, then it was
necessary that the Captain Heb. 11. 10
of Salvation, should lead on, go before, this noble Army of Martyrs; if it
were necessary that they must leave all who followed Him, then it was not
possible that He should be here in a state of Plenty, Splendour, and
Magnificence, but of Poverty, and Meanness; giving an example to his followers,
whose condition could not but be such. To give which example, was it seems, of
more necessity, then by being born in Royal Purple, to prevent the fall of many
in Israel, who for his condition despised him.

I am not so vain, as to hope to persuade any from this great Example here, to
be in love with Poverty, and with a low condition, by telling them, this Birth
has consecrated meanness, that we must not scorn those things, in which our
God did choose to be installed, that humility is, it seems, the proper dress
for Divinity to show it self in. But when we consider, if this Child had been
born in a condition of Wealth and Greatness, the whole Nation of the Jews would
have received him; whereas that he chose, proved an occasion of falling to
them: Yet, that God should think it much more necessary, to give us an example
of Humility and Poverty below expression; then it was necessary that that whole
Nation should believe on him. When of all the Virgins of that People, which God
had to choose one out to overshadow, and impregnate with the Son of God, He
chose one of the meanest, (for he has regarded the low Luke 1. 48.
estate of his Handmaiden, said she,) and one of the poorest too, for she had
not a Lamb Luke 2. 24. compared with Lev. 18. 6, 8.
to offer, but was purifyed, in forma pauperis. When he would reveal this Birth
also, that was to be the joy of the whole Earth, he did it to none of that
Nation, but a few poor shepherds, who were laboring with midnight-watches
over their Flocks; none of all the great ones, that were then at ease, and lay
in softs, was thought worthy to have notice of it: Lastly, when the Angels make
that poverty a sign to know the Savior by. This shall be a sign unto you,
You shall Luke 11, 12
find the Babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a Manger: as if the
Manger were sufficient testimony to the Christ, and this great meanness were an
evidence 'twas the Messiah. From all these together, we may easily discover
what the temper is of Christianity. You see here the institution of your Order:
the Firstborn of the Sons of God, born but to such an Estate. And what is so
Original to the Religion, what was born and bred with it, cannot easily be
divided from it. Generatio Christi generatio populi Christiani, Chrysol.
natalis Capitis natalis Corporis. The body and the head have the same kind of
birth, and to that which Christ is born to, Christianity it self is born.
Neither can it ever otherwise be entertained in the heart of any man, but with
poverty of spirit, with neglect of all the scorns, and the calamities, yea, and
all the gaudy glories of this world, with that unconcernedness for it, that
indifference and simple innocence that is in children. He that receives Mat.
18. 3.
not the Kingdom of Heaven as a little Child, cannot enter thereinto, says
Christ: True indeed, when the Son of God must become a little child, that he
may open the Kingdom of Heaven to Believers. Would you see what humility and
lowliness becomes a Christian? see the God of Christians on his Royal
Birthday. A person of the Trinity, that he may take upon him our Religion,
takes upon him the form of Phil. 2. 6, 7.
a Servant; and He that was equal with God, must make himself of no Reputation,
if he mean to settle and be the Example of our profession. And then, when will
our high spirits* those that value an huffe of Reputation more then their own
souls, and set it above God himself, when will these become Christians? Is
there any more uncouth or detestable thing in the whole world, then to see the
great Lord of Heaven become a little one, and man that is less then nothing
magnify himself? to see Divinity empty it self, and him that is a worm, swell
and be puffed up: to see the Son of God descend from Heaven, and the sons of
Earth climbing on heaps of wealth, which they pile up, as the old Giants did
hills upon hills, as if they would invade that Throne which He came down from:
and as if they also were set for the fall of many, throwing every body down
that but stands near them, either in their way or prospect. Would you see how
little value all those interests that recommend this world, are of to
Christians? see the Founder of them choose the opposite extreme: not only to
discover to us, these are no accessions to felicity, This Child was the Son of
God without them: but to let us see that we must make the same choice too, when
ever any of those interests affront a duty, or solicit a good Conscience,
whenever indeed they are not reconcilable with innocence, sincerity, and
ingenuity. It was the want of this disposition and temper that did make the
Jews reject our Savior. They could not endure to think of a Religion that
would not promise them to fill their basket, and to set them high above Deuteronomy.
28. 1. 5.
all Nations of the Earth, and whose appearance was not great and splendid, but
looked thin and maigre, and whose Principles and Promises showed like the Curses
of their Law, Mar. 10 30
called for sufferings, and did promise persecution, therefore they rejected
him that brought it, and so this Child was for the fall of many in Israel.

2. This Child is for the fall of many by the holiness of his Religion: while
the strictness of the Doctrine which he brings, by reason of men's great
propensions to wickedness, and their inability to resolve against their Vices,
will make them set themselves against it, both by word and deed: for they will
contradict and speak ill of, yea, they will openly renounce, and fall away from
it and him.

1. For that reason they will contradict, speak ill of Him and of his
Doctrines: This is said expressly in the last words of my Text, He is for a sign
that shall be spoken against; that is, that very holiness both of his Life and
Doctrine, that shall make him signal, it shall make him be derided and
blasphemed. As if his being a (...) for Isai. 11. 10.
an Ensign lifted up, a Standard for all Nations, were not for them to betake
themselves to, but to level all their batteries against. Accordingly we find
they called him Beelzebub, because Mar. 10. 25. Mar. 3. 22.
he cast out Devils. And all this was foretold: for although he were fairer
then the children of men, Psalm. 45. yet Isa. 53. It is said, He has no form
nor comeliness, when we shall see him, there is no beauty in him, that we
should desire him, he is despised and rejected of men. Surely, because his
holiness did cloud and darken all his graces. Devotion in a countenance does
writh and discompose it, prints deformity upon it, and eyes lifted up with
ardency, look as bad as eyes distorted, set awry. Nay Majesty, when it was most
severe and pious, never yet could guard Religion from these scorns. David, that
great and holy King, says of himself, Psalm. 69. 10, 11, 12.
I wept and chasten'd my self with fasting, and that was turned to my reproof,
as if Repentance were among his crimes, and he must be corrected for his
discipline. I put on Sackcloth also, and they jested upon me, they that sat in
the gate spoke aegainst me, and the Drunkards made Songs upon me. Sure these
jolly men are not companions to those Angels, in whose presence Luke 15. 10
there is joy over one sinner that repents; that his virtue should be a
rejoicing, and a song to them too. Certainly the penitent man's tears do not
fill their cheerful bowls, nor his groans make those airs which they set their
drunken catches to. But that we may be sure it never will be otherwise, St.
Peter tells us, That in the last 2 Pet. 3. 3.
days there shall come scoffers, walking after their own lusts. Now the men of
our days have the luck to obey Scripture thus far as to make that Prophecy to
come to pass; for those scoffers are come in power and great glory. The
Psalmist tells us of a chair of scorners, as if these Psalm. 1. 1.
were the only men that speak ex cathedra: and sure scoffs and taunts at
Religion are the only things that may be talked with confidence a loud: They
imprint an Authority on what is said, and conversations that are most insipied
on all other scores, get account as they come up toward this practice: hence
they gain degrees, commence ingenious as they border on these Atheistical and
irreligious blasphemies; and when it is pure scorn, then it is in the Chair.

But it stays not there; For 2. Upon the same account of strictness of
Religion, men will fall off from, and openly renounce both Christ and his
Religion. This is that our Savior Joh. 3. 19.
himself found, Light (says he) is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than the light, because their deeds were evil. And he said of the
Pharisees, They repented not that Mat. 21. 3^
they might believe, as knowing it impossible that they could venture to
believe that Doctrine which condemned those courses they would not repent of.

And if I should affirm, that it is nothing else but men's unwillingness to be
obliged to those things, which if there be a God, and a Religion which this
Child was set to institute, they must account themselves obliged to; nothing
else but this, which makes them so unwilling to believe a God or Christ; yea,
openly renounce them both, and their Religion, I should have for this, not
only the late instance of a Na^ion in the Indies, which by institution of the
(...).
Portugals, was easily persuaded to embrace the Christian Creed, and was
Baptized into our Faith; but when they were required to lead their lives
according to Christ's Precepts, and renounce their Heathen Licenses, they chose
rather to renounce their Creed and Savior, and returned instantly to their
indulgent Heathenisme. But to this experience, give me leave to add this
reason, that it is not the difficulty of the mysteries of faith, and their
being above our comprehension, which makes them not to be received, because
there are as great difficulties in things that we are certain of. For in the
very sphere of Reason, within the lines and measures of her own infallability,
in things of which she does assure her self by diagrams and sense, yet she is
as much amazed as at those objects in the highest and remotest Regions of
faith, and Mathematics has her Paradoxes Myster. (ut vocari jo^e^)
Asymptoticum and Angul. contingent. etc
that stand in as great danger of a contradiction as any of Religions
mysteries, while reason cannot cape what she demonstrates, but is to seek how
those things can be possible which she proves most certain, and they are
incomprehensible to her, even when they are most evident: and then sure if we
can think there is a God, we must needs think He can do things we cannot
comprehend, when it is plain our reason cannot comprehend what she her self
does find out and create. It is not therefore contradiction to Reason, but to
Appetite, that makes things of Religion so incredible, which I thus demonstrate
to the Atheist.

Those very difficulties, to avoid which, he denies a God; to wit, Those of an
Eternal Being that is of himself; these very things he must and does
acknowledge in the being of the world, if that either be it self Eternal (as
the Atheist of the Peripatetick Tribe will have it) or else if its atoms, out
of which it was concreted, were: (as those of Epicurus heard assert.) In a
word, if they say the world or its materials were made, they grant a God that
made it; If they say they were not made, they assert then an Eternal Being of
its self; that is, They allow those difficulties for which they pretend to deny
a God.

There being therefore the same difficulties, (Greater I could prove them, from
the diverse natures of corporeal, and spiritual beings, for we are sure, in
bodies that are still in motion, and so subject to succession, those things are
impossible, but if there be a Being that is not in motion, and by consequence,
not subject to the laws of our time, all these knots untie themselves, those
difficulties vanish and have no place: But to say no more then I have showed,
there being the same difficulties,) in the Atheists hypothesis as in the other,
it is apparent, not the difficulties of belief, but practice, make him fix upon
his own against the common notions of the world. So, that it is not his
understanding, but his appetite frames his hypothesis, and without figure, it is
his will that he believes with. And it is most evident, that because men do not
love the precepts of Religion, would not have them be their duty, therefore
they would have the Doctrines of it not be truths; and in this they are the
Disciples only of their lusts, and because they cannot resolve to be otherwise,
therefore they resolve not to be Christ's Disciples, but reject him for his
holy Doctrines sake: and so this Child is for the fall of many.

But it were strange if upon this account, Christ should be for the fall of any
of us; who have learnt a trick to reconcile his severe Doctrines, and our Sins
together. Where Vice most abounds, though it be willful, and men persevere in
it, they are so far from finding any reason to fall off from him, or from his
Gospel for this, that they therefore take the faster hold of it, rely upon Him
with the bolder, stronger confidence. As if good old Simeon were mistaken, when
he thought, because men would not leave those sins which Christ so threatened,
therefore they would leave him: because they could not bear those his hard
sayings, to pull out the lust and the Eye too: cast away the treasures of
unrighteousness, and the right hand that receives them also; therefore they
would cast off him, for, for this reason they betake themselves to him more
eagerly, devolve and cast themselves upon him with assurance. It Is possible
indeed that the new Christian'd Indians, might believe themselves obliged to
lead their lives according to the vow that they had made in Baptism, knew not
how to live a contradiction to be Christian Pagans; therefore thought it
absolutely necessary, to renounce the one, and to reject Christ and his strict
Religion was easier they thought. Our Savior also might suppose, that when he
brought light into the world, men would not receive that light, because their
deeds were evil: But our modern wickednesses that are of the true Eagle kind,
are educated, bred up to endure, and to defy the light: our deeds of night
have learned to face both Sun and Men, yea and face the Sun of Righteousness,
and the light of those flames that are to receive them. Our Savior told the
Pharisees indeed, that that they repented not, that they might believe, for
thinking it impossible they could assent to what he did affirm, except they
would consent to what he did command, He therefore thought they were not able
to believe, because they would not purpose to amend. But there is nothing
difficult in this to us, who at the same time, are so perfectly resolved that
every threat of Gospel is so divine truth, as that we assure our selves, that
we could be content to die 'Martyrs to the truth of them, rather then renounce
one tittle of them; yet even then are Martyrs to those lusts and passions which
those threats belong to: Who, at once, believe this Book of God, that says,
except ye repent ye shall all perish; Luke 13. 3.
and believe also, that notwithstanding we do not repent, yet by Believing we
shall escape, not perish, but be saved. And is not this directly to believe our
selves into damnation? the third and the great fall, which this Child is set
for.

3. This Child is for the fall of many, to wit, of all those, who on these, or
any other grounds do not believe in, or do not obey him, who shall therefore
fall into Eternal ruin.

This our Savior does affirm, St. John 3. 19. This is the condemnation that
light came into the world, etc. This does aggravate the guilt, and sentence. We
were fallen before indeed in Adam: and I dare not undertake to be so learned to
say whether; to determine with some of them, that was but a fall from Paradise
into the grave, and we were forfeit to death only: But I may adventure to
affirm, that in the second Adam, sinners finally impenitent shall fall much
farther then we did in the first Adam. Now their pit shall have no bottom, but
this Rev. 9. 1. 11
light that came to lighten them, shall be to them consuming fire, and
everlasting burnings. And all reason in the world. For, upon that fall of ours
in Adam, help was offered us: an easy way, not only to repair those ruins,
but to better infinitely that estate which we were fallen from; and a way that
cost God dear to purchase, cost him, not this Incarnation only, but the Death
and Passion of his Son, and diverse other blessed methods Salvation: Now if we
refuse the mercy of all this, and scorn these miracles of condescending
goodness, and defy those methods, that he makes use of, to raise us from our
fall, it is apparent we provoke and choose deeper ruin; this refusal has in
it such desperate malignity, as to poison this great mercy of the Incarnataion,
and all the rest. It Is but a small thing to say, that they who Stumble at this
Rock of their Salvation, spurning at it by their wilful disobedience, that
these make an infinite mass of loving kindness to be lost upon them, so as that
Salvation cannot save them; for alas Salvatio ruins them the deeper, and this
Child is for their fall. The condition they were forfeit to before by reason of
their breach of the first covenant was advantage, comfortable in comparison of
that which Christ dos put them in: This is the Condemnation, that he came into
the world: and it had been infinitely better for them that this child too, had
never been born. The unreform'd have the least reason in the world to solemnize
this festival, they do but celebrate the birth of their own ruin, bowdown, and
do reverence to their fall: had it not been for this, they had not gone to so
severe an Hell. So that they do but entertain the great occasion of their
greater condemnation. Such it proves to them, and that it might be so, He was
fore-ordain'd for it: (...), This Child is set for the fall of many, which dos
lead me to Gods Council in all this: my next part.

This Child is set for the fall of many, even by Gods direct appointment, for
says Grotius, Grot. in loc.
Accedo iis qui putant non nudum eventum sed and consilium Dei significari. I
am of their opinion, who understand not the success alone, but the design of
this Child's coming, and Gods counsel in it is intended here. And without
disputing of Gods antecedent will, and consequent, this is safely said: God
designed this Child should be such an one, that they who had no inclinations
for Virtue, would not entertain the love of it, but counted it a mean pedantick
thing, and all its Rules and Laws, unreasonable servitude, these loose men
would certainly reject Him and his Dsctrines, which were so severe and strict.
Those that did pretend friendship for Virtue, and a service for Religion, but
withal must be allowed to maintain correspondence with the world, seek the
honors and advantages of Earth, and will trespass on Religion where it
enterfers with these, break with Virtue when their interests cannot consist
with it, these false hipocritical pretenders, should be offended with the mean
condition of this Child, and of his followers in this world, and with the poor
spirited principles of his Religion. In sum, they that upon these, or any
other grounds finally disbelieve, or disobey him, God designed this Child to be
a means of bringing sorer punishments, even to everlasting ruin upon such.

A black decree this one would think. He that had so much kindness for mankind,
to give away the only Son, both of his Nature, his Affections, and his Bosom
to them; could he then design that gift to be the ruin of the greatest part
of men? This Child, Simeon said but just before my Text, is Gods Salvation,
which he had prepared before all people, and does he now say God has set him
for their fall? The Angels preached this was a Birth that brought glad tidings
of great joy that should be to all people, and is there so much comfort in
destruction, that most men should rejoice at that which is ordained to be the
great occasion of it to them?

But we have no reason to complain: it is not unkind to deny Mercy to them that
refuse the offers of it, that will not accept Salvation, when their God himself
does come to bring it to them: tenders it upon condition of accepting and
amending: which if they despise, and prefer Hell before Repentance, choose
sin rather then Gods blessed retributions, it is but reason to deny them what
they will not have, and let them take their chosen ruin; will their judgment
which they will themselves, set and ordeine Him to be that to them, which
themselves do ordeine, and make him to be to themselves. So St Peter says
expressly: He is a Stone of stumbling and a Rock of offense 1 Pet. 2. 8.
to them who being disobedient stumble at the word, whereunto they were
appointed. Disobedience where it is obdurate, alters so the temper of our God,
that it makes Him who swears he would not have the sinner die, yet set out his
son to make such sinners fall into eternal death. Makes judgment triumph over
mercy, even in the great contrivances and executions of that mercy; and while
God was plotting an Incarnation for the everlasting safety of mankind, prevails
with him to decree ruins by the means of that salvation, to decree even in the
midst of all those strivings of his mercies, that that Issue of his kindness
should be for the fall of such as they. Oh! let such consider, whether they are
likely to escape that which is set and ordein'd for them by God? Whether they
can hope for a redemption, when the only great Redeemer is appointed for the
Instrument of their destruction; and God is so bent on their ruin, that to
purchase it he gives this Child his Son. Yea, when he did look down upon this
Son in Agonies, and on the Cross, in the midst of that sad prospect, yet the
ruin of such sinners, which he there beheld in his Sons blood, was a delight
to him, that also was a sacrifice, and a sacrifice of a sweet smell to him. For
Saint Paul says, We are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that perish,
because we are the savor 2 Cor. 2. 15
of death unto death to them: As if their brimstone did ascend like Incense,
shed a perfume up to God, and their everlasting burnings were his Altar-fires,
kindled his holocausts; and He may well be pleased with it, for He ordein'd it.

It Is true indeed, this Child riding as in Triumph, in the midst of his
Hosannas, when he saw one City, whose fall he was set for on this very account;
He was so far from being pleased with it, that He wept over it in pity. But
alas, that only more declares the most deplored and desperate condition of
such sinners. Blessed Savior! Had thou no blood to shed for them? nothing
but tears? or did thou weep to think thy very bloodshed does but make their
guilt more crimson, who refuse the mercy of that bloodshed all the time that is
offered? Sad is their state that can find no pity in the tears of God, and
remediless their condition for whom all that the Son of God could do, was to
weep over them, all that he did do for them, was to be their fall; Too sad a
part indeed for Festival Solemnity, very improper for a Benedictus and
Magnificat. To celebrate the greatest act of kindness the Almighty could design
only by the miseries it did occasion, to magnify the vast descent of God,
from Heaven down to Earth, only by reason of the fall of man into the lowest
Hell of which that was the cause. My Text has better things in view: the
greatness of that fall does but add height to that Resurrection which He also
is the cause of: For, Behold this Child is set for the rising again of many: my
remaining part.

Rising again, does not particularly and only refer to the foregoing fall here
in the Text, which this Child did occasion, as I showed you, but to the state
wherein all mankind, both in its nature and its customs, lay ingulf'd, the
state of ignorance and sin: a state from which recovery is properly (...), a
resurrection and a reviving in this life, and so called in Scripture often; as
Ephesians. 5. 14. Wherefore he says, A wake thou that sleep (...) and arise
from the dead. And Romans 6. 13. Yield not your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as those that are
alive from the dead. Now to raise us from the death of sin, into the life of
Righteousness by the amendment of our own lives, to recover us into a state of
virtue, is the thing this Child is said here to be set for. This was that which
God thought worth an Incarnation: neither was there any greater thing in the
prospect of his everlasting Counsel, when He did decree his Son into the world,
then that (...), He is set for this. The Word was made flesh, to teach,
practice, and persuade to Virtue: To make men reform their lives, was valued at
the price of a person of the Trinity. Piety and his exinanttion, yea, his blood
and life, were set at the same rates, All of Him given for our recovery.

The time would fail me if I should attempt only to name the various methods
He makes use of to effect this. How this Child that was the brightness of his
Fathers glory, came to lighten us, shining in his Doctrine and Example: how he
sent more light, The fiery Heb. 1. 3.
Tongues, Illuminations of the Holy Ghost to guide us in the ways of piety: how
he suffered Agonies and Death for sin to appale and fright us from it. How He
rose again to confirm Judgment to us, to demonstrate the rewards of
immortality to them that will repent, and leave their sins, and everlasting
torments to those that refuse this Grace; Grace purchased with the blood of
God, to enable them to repent and leave. Besides all these, The Arts and
Mesnage of his Providence, in preventing and following us by Mercies and by
Judgments, importuning us, and timeing all his blessed Methods of Salvation to
our most advantage. Arts, God knows, too many, if they serve us only to
resist, and turn to wantonness and aggravation; if we make no other use of
Grace but this, to sin against, and overcome all Grace, and make it bolster
Vice, by teaching it to be an encouragement to go on in it; from some hopes we
entertain by reason of this Child, instead of doing that which he was set,
decreed to make us do.

And really I would be glad to see this everlasting Counsel of the Lord had had
some good effects, some, though never so little happy execution of this great
decree, and that which God ordein'd from all Eternity, upon such glorious and
magnificent terms, were come to pass in any kind; Now, certainly there are no
evident signs of any great recovery this Child has wrought among us in the
world that is now called Christian. After those omnipotent inforcives to a
virtuous life, which he did work out, if we take a prospect of both worlds, it
would be hard to know which were the Heathen; and there would appear scarce any
other notice of a Christ among us, but that we blaspheme Him or deride Him.
Sure I am, there are no footsteps of Him in the lives of the community of men:
and I am certain that you cannot show me any Heathen age outgoing ours, either
in loosenesses and foul effeminacies, or in sordidness and base injustice, or
in frauds and falseness, or malignity, hypocrisy or treachery, or to name no
more, even in the lowest, most ignoble, disingenious sorts of Vice. In fine,
men are now as Earthy, Sensual, yea, and Devilish, as when Sins and Devils were
their Gods.

Yea, I must needs say, that those times of dark and Heathen ignorance, were in
many times of shining virtue; and the little spark of light within them, brake
out through all obstructions into a glory of goodness, to the wonder and
confusion of most Christians: It Is true, we are prity well revenged on them for
setting us Examples so reproachful to us; calling their Heroic actions,
splendida peccata, only beauteous sins, and well faced wickednesses, and we
have a reason for it, because they never heard of Christ; whose Name and Merit,
it is most certain, is the only thing that can give value and acceptance to
men's best performances: while, on the other side, we Christians comfort and
secure our selves in our transgressions from this Child, and from his Name. But
if this Child were set to raise us up from sin, and to establish stronger
arguments for a good life then the Heathen ever heard of, more especial Divine
engagements to virtue; then if their virtues were, because they never heard of
these engagements to them, sins, what censure will be past upon their actions
that know all those engagements and despise them? unless to defy knowledge, and
provoke against all Divine obligations, all that God could lay, shall prove
more tolerable then to labor to obey without them, without knowing why. It Is
true, they had not heard it may be of that Name, then which there is no other
Name under Heaven given unto men whereby Acts 4. 12.
they may be saved. Yet they endeavored in some measure to do that, which He
that owns that Name, and wrought the Covenant of those Salvations, does
require. We know that Name, and have it called upon us, and know too, That he
that names that Name, (that calls himself a Christian, owns the being a
retainer to the Holy Jesus) must depart 2 Timothy 2. 19
from Iniquity, otherwise it is no name of Salvation to him, yet we never mind
the doing that; and then which has the better Plea? The Heathens sure were
better, though he were not virtuous.

And if so, give me leave to tell you, how not only this Child, but this
Resurrection too is for our fall.

In the first Chapter to the Romans, we shall find those Heathens, when they
did neglect to follow the direction of that light within them, by which they
were able to discover in some measure, the invisible things of God, when Verse
20.
they did no longer care to retain God in their knowledge; then they quickly
left off to be Verse 28.
men: and when they ceast to hearken to their reason, they soon fell into a
reprobate sense. Ibid.
What was it else to change God into stocks and stones, and Worship into most
abominable wickedness? to make the Vilest creatures Deities, and the foulest
actions Religion: to turn a disease into a God, and a sin into Devotion: a
stupidity, which nothing else but Gods desertion and reasons too, could have
betrayed them to, and made them guilty of.

And then, if by how much greater light and means we have resisted, we shall be
proportionably more vile in the consequents of doing so, keep at equal rates of
distance from those Heathens, that the aggravations of our guilt stand at from
theirs, Whether, alas! are we like to fall?

It Is an amazing reflection, one would tremble to consider, how the Christian
world does seem to hasten into that condition which St Paul does there
decipher: You would think that Chapter were our Character: but that we have
reason to expect we shall fall lower into much more vile affections then those
Heathens did, as having fallen down from a greater height then they.

Consider whether men do not declare they like not to retain God in their
thoughts, when they endeavor to dispute and to deride him too out of the
World! It Is true, they have not set up any sins or monsters in their Temples
yet, as they did: but if they can empty them of God and Christ, and their
Religion, and make room, we may imagine easily whose Votaries they will be,
that live as if they thought themselves unhappy that they had not lived in
those good Pagan days, when they might have sinned with devotion, been most
wickedly Religious, and most God-like in unchastities and other vilanies; I
dare say none of our fine Gentlemen, or our great Wits, would have been
Atheists or irreligious then.

Think whether those are not already in that reprobate sense St. Paul does
speak of, who have cast off all discriminating notions, of good or evil, who
say in their hearts, and affirm openly, there are none such in truth and
nature: and if we should try by those effects, verse 29, 30, 31. or by that
essential signature, 32. verse, they not only commit such things, but have
pleasure in them that do them; which because they cannot have from those
commissions, when they do not commit them, therefore their debauched minds must
be satisfied there is no evil in those doings, and must reap the pleasure only
of such satisfactions: that is, have the satisfactions and pleasures only of a
reprobate sense. In fine, (because I dare not prosecute the character) Men
sinck so fast, as if they were resolved to fall as far below humanity, as this
Child did below his Divinity.

O do not you thus break decrees, frustrate and overthrow the everlasting
counsel of Gods will for good to you. He set, ordained this Child for your
rising again: do not throw your selves down into ruin in despite of his
Predestinations. He has carried up your nature into Heaven, placed Flesh in an
union with Divinity, set it there at the right hand of God in Glory: do not you
debase and drag it down again to Earth and Hell by worldliness and carnal
sensuality. Make appear this Child has raised you up, already made a
resurrection of your souls and your affections; they converse, and trade in
Heaven: and that you do not degenerate from that nature of yours that is there.
Then this Child who is Himself the Resurrection and the Life, will raise up
Joh. 11 25
your Bodies too, and make them like his glorious body, by the working of his
mighty power, Phil. 3. 21.
by which he is able to subdue all things to himself. To whom with the Father,
and the H. Ghost be all Blessing, Power and Praise, Dominion and Glory for
Evermore.

FINIS.

