Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling Rever. in Christo Pat. Gill. Epis. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Ex Aed. Sab. 7. November. 1662.
A SERMON PREACHED before the KING AT WHITE HALL, October the 12th 1662.

BY RICHARD ALLESTREY, D. D. Chaplain then in Attendance.

Published by his MAJESTY'S Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for John Martin, and James Allestrey, at the
Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard. M DC LXIII.

JOHN XV. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.


THE words are a conditional assertion of Christ's concerning his Apostles, and
in them all Christians: and they do easily divide themselves into two parts. The

First is a positive part, wherein there is a state of great and Blessed
advantage, which they are declared to be in present possession of: in these
words, Ye are my friends.

In which there are two things that make up that advantage, 1. a relation, 2.
the person related to. Friends, and My friends. The

Second is a Conditional part, wherein there are the terms, upon which that
possession is made over, and which preserve the Right and Title to them: in
these words, If ye do whatsoever I command you: in which there are two things
required as Conditions.

I. Obedience, If ye do what I command you.

II. That Obedience Universal; If ye do whatsoever I command you.

The first thing that offers it self to our consideration, is the Relation,
Friends

It is a known commonplace truth, that a Friend is the most useful thing that
is in whatsoever state we are: it is the Soul of life, and of content. If I be
in prosperity: We know abundance not enjoyed, is but like Jewels in the
Cabinet, useless while they are there: it is indeed nothing but the opinion of
prosperity. But it is not possible to enjoy abundance otherwise then by
Communicating it: a man possesses plenty only in his friends, and has
fruition of it merely by bestowing it. If I be in adversity; to have a person
whom I may entrust a trouble to, whose bosom is as open, and as faithful to me,
as it is to his own thoughts, to which I may commit a swelling secret; this is in
a good measure to unlade, and to pour out my sorrow from me; thus I divide my
greivances, which would be insupportable, if I did not disburthen my self of
some part of them: now there is no bosom so safe as that where friendship
lodges: take Gods opinion in the case, Deuteronomy. xiii. 6. If thy brother the son of
thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy
friend that is as thine own soul. This is the highest step in the Gradation.
And there is all the reason in the world: for though Parent, and Child, are as
near one to other as any thing can be to part of it self; Husband and Wife are
but two different names of the same one, yet these may become bitter and
unkind: a Parent may grow cross, or a Child refractory, a Mother may be like
the Ostrich in the Wilderness, throw off her bowels with her burden; and an
ungracious Son is constant pangs and travail to his Mother, his whole life
gives her after-throws which are most deadly: Dislikes also may rest within the
Marriage bed, and lay their heads upon two wedded Pillow's; but none of these
unkindnesses can untie the relation; that ends not where the bitterness begins,
he is a Parent still though froward, and a Child though stubborn; but a true
friend can be nothing but kind: it does include a deerness in its essence,
which is so inseparable from it, that they begin and end together: a man may be
an Husband without loving, but cannot be a lover, that is a friend, without
loving.

And sure to have no one friend in this life, no one that is concerned in any
of my interests or me my self, none that has any cares or so much as good
wishes for me, is a state of a most uncomfortable prospect. The Plague that
keeps friends at a distance from me while I live, out of the sphere of my
infection, and after gives me death, has yet less of Malignity then this; that
leaves me the compassions, the Prayers, all the solitary comforts, all indeed
but the outward entertainments of my friends: that, though it shut the Door
against all company, yet, puts a Lord have Mercy on the Door: But this I now
described has none of that, has no good wishes, nothing else but hate, is
worse then a perpetual Pistelence.

Yet neither is this State so comfortless, in respect of this life, as not to
have a friend in the concernments of the Life to come: none that has so much
kindness for my Soul as every man has for his Enemies beast, which if he see
fallen in a Ditch he will at least give notice that it may be helped out thence:
No one, that when a Sin, like to that Falling Sickness in the Gospel (and it is
such indeed without a Parable) is casting me into the Water, quenching my
parts, my reason, and the Immortal spark within me, or throwing me into the
Fire, raising Lascivious heats within, which after will break out into Hell
Fires; none yet that will stretch out his hand to catch me, or to pull me out:
None that does care to see me Perish to eternity, or that values my Soul, which
yet did cost the blood of GOD, at a words speaking: This is to be like Dives in
the Flames, to whom they would not lend the help of the Luke xvi. 24 25.
tip of a finger, or give the kindness of a drop of Water: I am as it were on
the other side the Gulf already. Here is the use of friendship, the only
noble one, that is worthy of that blessed quality: when I have one that will be
an assistant Conscience to me, who, when that within me sleeps, or is benumbed,
will watch over my actions; will testify them to my Face, will be as faithful
to me as the Conscience should be, hold a Glass to my Soul, show me the
stains, and the proud tumors, the foul Ulcers that are there, and then will
fret, and rub, or prick, lance, and corrode, to cure those tumors, and do often
those spots, such an one is a familiar Angel-Guardian, is truly of that
blessed heavenly rank, and only less then the friend in the Text, the person
related to, and my next part.

My Friends. There are three things from which men use to take the measures of
a friend.

First, From the good things he bestows on them: He that thinks to keep
friendship alive only with air, that gives good words, but parts with nothing,
that entertains only with garbs, and civilities, is but the pageant of a
friend: They that own having but one soul, and seem to clasp as if they would
have but one body too, cannot keep such distinct and separate proprieties in
other little things, as not to have communication one from the other. And,

Secondly, The friendship of these benefits is rated by the measures of our
need of them. When Midas was ready to die for hunger, his God was kinder to him
in a little bread, then in making all that he touched turn into gold: great
things engage but little where there is but little use of them: and all these,

Thirdly, Are endeered by the Affection they are given with. Good turns done
with design, what need soever I have of them, are hire, and not friendship; it
is the kindness only that obliges, the gift without the love does but upbraid
and scorn my want.

Now to measure the friend here in the Text, by these, were an impossible
undertaking, taking, whose friendship did exceed all bounds and measures. I
shall do no more toward it, but read the words before my text, which were the
occasion of it, Greater love bath no man then this, that a man lay down his
life for his friends, and then it follows, ye are my friends. The token
therefore of his friendship, the gift he gave them was his life, rather that
was the least he gave: He gave his glory first, that so he might be qualified
to give his life: for (...) Phil. ii. 7. He lessened himself from the condition
of being Lord of all, into that of a servant, (...), Heb. ii. 9. being
diminished made lower, meaner then his creatures for the suffering of death.
Now with the price of such divine essential glory to buy only a life, rather
only a possibility of death, that after he might give that life for us, and
with his death purchase us an immortal life, is such a gift as no Romance of
friendship ever fancied or did aim at: we may have heard of two companions that
would die for one another, that never quarell'd in their lives, but for this,
who should suffer first to save the other, and strave only for Execution: But
for a person of the Trinity to leave his heaven to come down to us; to dwell
with agonies that he might be at one with us; and be tied to the cross, that he
might be united to us; this is a friendship fit for Ecstasies of apprehension.
Of all the things that court thy kindness here below, that spread snares, and
lay baits for thy friendship, if any bid so fair, so temptingly, if any will
give such a price, in God's name let it have thy love, I shall not blame him
that engages his affection there: But sure Heaven cannot give a greater gift
then this; for what can God give greater then himself? Yea I may say God could
not give so much, for he must be man too, to give his life, and this, says he,
he gave for his friends, even in our stead, who must have perished else
eternally, which intimates the second thing, the need we had of this.

A need great as the gift, necessity invincible, that could break into heaven,
rifle the Trinity, to serve its self, throw death into those regions of
immortality, and which would not be satisfied but with the blood of God.

And now is not the kindness, and the condescension of friendship in his
expressions too, when he says, greater love then this has no man? which was
the third endearement.

There never were such wounds of loves as those that tore this heart: never
such meltings of affection as dissolved this lover into sweates of blood. There
was no motive to all this, but his mere love: for all this he designed to us
before we were, and therefore sure before we were deserving, and O our God!
thou that from all eternity did lay contrivances to give thy life for us, so
to redeem, and then to glorify us, what were we then that thou should do his
for us? what were we then when we were not? and yet that thou from the abyss of
everlastingness, should think thoughts of such kindness to us, and such
blessedness for us, who then were not, and deserved nothing; and who since we
were, have deserved nothing but damnation.

And as there was no other motive to all this design but love, so neither was
there any thing but love in the fulfilling. Look on your Savior in the garden,
and upon Mount Calvary, and you shall find him there in as great agonies of
affection as torment, and hanging down his head upon the Cross with
languishments of kindness, more then weakness. His arms stretched out and
Racked, as if on purpose to the posture of receiving you to his embraces; and
his side opened not only to shed Blood for you, but to make you a passage to
his very Heart. Look on him offering up his Tears, his Prayers, and his Soul
for Sin, and in the midst of all, projecting happyness to you, as it were
praying, O my Father, here I charge my self with all the guilt of those my
friends, I thy only Son God, one with thee, am content to suffer Torments that
they all may be acquitted, Here I lay down my Life that they may have eternal
Life, let me be Crucified, so they be Glorified. Which was the purchase and the
gift of this his Passion to all his friends, even to those that do what he
commands; which is the first condition that entitles to his friendship, and my
next part.

Ye are my friends if ye do what I command you.

I shall not urge, that Great men upon earth will not take any to their
Friendship but upon these terms; nor will I plead the reasonableness of this
in Christ, there being no cause why he should be a friend to any that will
daily disoblige him and dishonor him: nor will I press the whole Economy of
Scripture, which says, all the advantages Christ ever gave or meant us, and all
the Acts of friendship that he ever did for us were with this design. He gave
his grace that brings salvation to save us into an estate of sober virtue. Tit.
ii. v. 11.12. he gave himself also to Ransom us from our own evil doings, and
to redeem us into his obedience. Tit. ii. v. 14. without which no dependence on
him will avail. Mat. vii. 21. He will own no acquaintance with, nor services
from them who have friendship with sin: though they have cast out Devils in his
name, if they retain their vices; though they do miracles, if they do wickedly,
he will bid them depart, profess he never knew them, v. 22.23. He will not let
such have a bare relation to his Name, nor have the friendship of a title. 2 Timothy ii. 19. All his rewards also that he will give are promised to none other,
but them that do what he commands, Apocal. xxii. 14. that is, do Evangelically,
heartily and faithfully endeavor it, and do this with all diligence expressed by
words, that import all strife imaginable, as running, wrestling, fighting,
warring. And persevere also by patient continuance in well doing, Romans ii. 7.
and he has nothing else but vengeance for all others. 2 These. 1.8. and we have
neither Christ, nor Gospel, nor Religion, but with these terms.

But I shall wave all this, and bound my self within the present words. Greater
love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his friend. Ye are
my friends if ye do what I command you. When Christ is boasting of his love,
making comparisons, and vying friendships with mankind, nay more, contriving
heights and depths of mercy, such as man has no comprehension, nor Fathom for;
when he was preparing to do an act of compassion on almost equal to his
Divinity, when he had resolutions of so much kindness as to give his life that
he might show kindness. Yet could he not then find in his heart to offer or
declare one jot of kindness to the men that will not do what he commands, but
in the midst of such agonies of compassion, he thought of nothing but infinite
indignation and eternal vengeance to the disobedient. I have but now given my
body and my blood even to the Traitor Luc. xxii 19.20.21.
Judas to one who is a John vi. 70.
Devil: I am going to give my life even for my Romans v. 10
enemies, for the John iii. 16, 17. and vi. 51. and 2 Cor. v. 19.
world: but I will give no love to any, have no friendship with any, but the
virtuous: no, though they be my own Disciples, ye are my friends, ye my
companions and Apostles are my friends, only on this condition, if ye do what
I command you.

And then is it not matter of Astonishment, to see men fancy they have a right
in all Christ's actions and sufferings, presume upon his favor and their own
happy condition, though they do nothing, or but very little toward this, and
the maine of their life be disobedience, as if all Christ's commands, appointed
them to do no commands, and Christianity were but a liberty from virtue. To
pass by those that do nothing but evil, that which the Devil does suggest, or
their flesh dictate, and to consider the demurer sort of Christians, that
pretend a respect to Christ, and to Religion, and see what they will do.

Why sometimes you may find them troubled at their Vices, and themselves; and
those troubles breath out in Sighs, and in warme-wishes that they could do that
which Christ prescribes: to will is sometimes strongly present with them, but
to perform they know not how. Alas Christ does not tell you that you are his
friends if you wish well to him, and his commands, but he requires that you
shall do them. These are but vapors of a troubled soul, which howsoever they
may chance rise warm, cath a strong sudden heat, breath up in flashing
thoughts. They are but meteors, little shooting flames that only do catch fire
and fall and die; show fair, but they warm nothing: and so these thoughts do
never heat the heart into devotions and holy resolutions, the fire is not
strong, nor does it live enough, to melt and work away the filthynesses of the
soul: No, though they grow to aversations: for you may find such men, when
wearied with the pursuit of their sins hating their customs, and the
engagements to the practice of them: complaining thus, I know it is ill, and
it is against my heart, that I obey the motions of my passions or lusts: The
incitations of my appetite, the usance of the world, the obligations of
civility or mistaken honor do indeed prevail upon me, but it is with great
reluctance of mind that I yield to them, but I cannot avoid it. There are not
few that satisfy themselves with this condition. Now sure Christ does not say,
Ye cannot be my friends except you sin against me and against your Knowledge,
and your Conscience too. It Is strange that men should think the Heathen
instance of a Witch that cried -- Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor --
I know, and do approve of better things, but cannot choose but follow these
that are the worser: strange, that this fury that had the Devil for familiar,
should make Christ a friend; that this should be the state of Gospel Saints,
and of God's favorites. It Is possible some therefore go yet further to good
purposes toward Obedience, and have holy intentions, but this is not
sufficient neither, if to do his commands be necessary: for to purpose and
intend to do them, is not certainly to do them. Yet where are any, that do aim
at doing any more; and there is none of these but does presume upon his
interest in Christ, and satisfies himself and is secure.

Yet is it hard to find a ground of this their confidence, unless it rise from
the unhappy use they make of God's preserving mercies, and his kindness to them
in the concernments of this life. They see without their cares, and upon very
weak entreaties indeed against all provocations both of God and danger; yet his
protections secure them all, though they neither mind the asking them, nor
mind the walking worthy of them. The man whose sins, not p^ayers, prepare him
for his bed, he sleeps well; perhaps, more soundly then he who at his bedside
throws himself on his face into God's arms, and there bequeaths himself to the
securities of the Almighty: And he, whose Sleeps only refresh him for returns
to sin, does often live as long, as safely, and as merrily, as he that daily,
most religiously does beg protections from above. And others that afford the
Lord some little homages, themselves some prayers when their pleasures or
occasions permit, God has a care of them, and their desires flow into them,
all does succeed well with them. Now they take confidence hence to conclude,
these are the tokens of Gods friendship, and all his mercies will come in at
the like easy rates; that such a short petition as committed them to the
refreshments of the night, and after which they wak't into renewed strengths
and pleasures, such another shall lay them down in safety, to the sleeps of
that long night, that afterward will break in happy resurrection: for why! God
will not sure fail his own mercies, but be as friendly to their souls as he is
to their bodies.

And thus God's preservations here, in mere defiance of our provocations, which
are the arts of his long suffering his strivings of Compassion, merely to give
us opportunities of being reconciled to him, and to invite us to be so, while
we make them occasions of carelessness and security, they are so far from being
pledges of his friendship, that they have all the aggravations of affronted
goodness, become temptations and degrees of ruin. 'Twere fine indeed if
Christ's eternal preparations for his friends, would come in to us, without
care or doing any thing, as an accession to our pleasures; if when we had lived
many years in a Garden, our days all Flowered with delight; we might expire
into Paradise, and in soft aires of Music breath into Hallelujah's. But alas!
the smooth easy way leads down the Hill, and he must strive and pant that will
get up into the Mansions and the Bosom of his Savior, and whosoever will be
his friend, must do what he commands.

But is there nothing less indeed will qualify? The Scripture says, that
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, and he was
called the friend of God, James ii. 23. and then, is Christ more inaccessible,
and harder to be made a friend?

Why, truly God and Christ both are so much friends to all true believers, that
the life of Christ was given for them; for, God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. John iii. 16. nor are there any qualities more signally
peculiar to friendship, more engaging then confidence and trust, dependence and
relying, embosoming my self in him: now these are but the exercise of Faith;
and it is most certain if we heartily endeavor to do what he commands, there is
employment then for all this work of Faith, place for its applications and
assurances. My Text does make this good. But when his friendship is made over
on conditions, as it is not only in these words, but every where in Scriptures;
(there being not one promise absolute that does concern Gods favor,
justification, and eternal life: he does not once offer remission of sins, but
to those that amend their lives; nay, does express as if he could not give it
otherwise, peradventure they will repent that I may forgive them, Jeremy xxxvi.
3) The promises therefore being conditional, Faith must be answerable to the
promises that it does rest on and apply; and at the most, can be but an
assurance, that you shall be partaker of what is promised, that is to say,
partaker of the favor and the life of Christ, if ye do his commands. But then
if I perform not this condition, to trust upon his friendship which I am not
qualified for; to think by faith to receive a pardon, which in that case I am,
was never offered me; to apply to my self promises which were never made me,
for none were ever made to them that do not do; and to assure my self, Christ
will transgress his everlasting Covenant for my Vices sake, merely to give me
leave to enjoy my sins; will do that which God may not do, forgive one that
will not repent: If I believe thus against promise, and against decree, am
confident whether Christ will or no, and will rely upon him in despite of him,
if such a faith will make us friends, affronts do reconcile. This is indeed to
lay violent hands on his favor, and to invade his friendship, and without
metaphor, take Heaven by force.

But sure I am, that this is not the faith made Abraham be called the friend of
God in that place of Saint James, but a faith that was perfected by doing, v.
22. of that Chapter, a faith that made him offer up his only Son upon the
Altar, v. 21. It Is true, he did in hope believe against all hope, Rom iv. 18.
So that his faith was stronger then a contradiction, but yet his resolutions of
obedience seem stronger then his faith; for he did that even to the cutting off
the grounds of all his Faith, and hope. He trusted God would make his promise
good to him, make all the Nations of the Earth be blessed in the seed of Isaac;
though Isaac had no seed, nor could have, if he should be slain: And he
resolved at Gods command himself to slay that Isaac, so to make him have no
seed. His Faith indeed did no dispute the great impossibility; but his
obedience caused it. He did not question, how can God perform with me when I
have offered up my son? I cannot look that a large Progeny should rise out of
the Ashes on the Altar; nor will those Flames that devour all my seed at once,
may my seed numerous, lasting, and glorious as the Stars in Heaven, which he
Genesis xv. 5.
promised me: but much less did he question, why should I obey in this? He that
does his commands, can but expect what he has promised: but if I should do
this command and slay my Son, I make his promise void, and detroy my own
expectations: and if I disobey I can but suffer what he bids me do; my own
obedience will execute all that his indignation would threaten to my
Disobedience. Though Abraham had Genesis xxii. 4.
three days time and journey to the Altar, that Nature might have leisure the
mean while to reason with the precept thus, and his affection might struggle
with his duty; yet he goes on, resolves to tear out his own bowels, and cut of
his hopes, will Sacrifice his only Son, and Sacrifice God's promise to his
commands.

And then, He that will trust to Abraham's example of believing, yet will not
follow him at all in doing, will obey no commands; that is so far from offering
up an only Son, he will not slay an only evil custom, nor part with one out
of the herd of all his vicious habits; will not give up the satisfaction to any
of his carnal, worldly, or ambitious appetites; not Sacrifice a passion, or a
lust to all the Obligations, that God and Christ can urge him with, he has,
nor faith, nor friendship, no, nor forehead. It Is true indeed, he that has
Abraham's faith, may well assure himself he is Christ's friend; but it is only
on this account, because he that believes as Abraham believed, he will not
stick to do whatever Christ commands; which is that universality of obedience,
that is the next condition that entitles to Christ's friendship, and my last
part.

Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you.

There is no quality so necessary to a friend, or so appropriate to friendship,
as sincerity. They that have but one soul, they can have no reserves from one
another: But disobedience to one precept, is inconsistent with sincerity, that
has respect unto all the commandments; and he that will not do whatever Christ
prescribes, has reserves of affection for some darling sin, and is false to
his Savior. He is an enemy indeed, so that there is no friendship on either
side. Saint Paul says so of any of one kind; the minding of the flesh, says
he, whether it be providing for the belly, or any other of the organs of
carnality, is desperate, incurable rebellion Romans viii. 7.
: Now such a rebel, is, we know, the worst of enemies. Saint James does say as
much of any of those vicious affections that are set on the world: Whosoever
will be a friend of the world, is an enemy of God. James iv. 4. and he calls
them adultereses and adulterers, who think to join great strict Religion to
some little by-love of an honor, or a profit of this world? Such men are like
a wife, that not contented with the partner of her takes in another now and
then, she must not count her self her husbands friend, though she give him the
greatest share in her affections, no, she is but a bosom enemy: and so any one
vice allowed is a paramour, sin is whoredom against Christ, and our pretended
friendship to him in all other obediences, is but the kindness and the caresses
of an adulteress, the mere hypocrisy and treachery of love. If it be necessary
to the gaining of Christ's friendship that thou do his commands, it is necessary
that thou do them all, that thou divorce thy self from thy beloved sin, as well
as any other: because, his friendship does no more require other obedience then
it does that, but is as inconsistent with thy own peculiar vice as with the
rest. Indeed it is impossible that it should bear with any, they being all his
murderers. If thou can find one sin that had no hand in putting Christ to
death, one vice that did not come into the garden, nor upon mount Calvary, that
did not help to assassin thy Savior, even take thy fill of that: but if each
had a stab at him, if no one of thy vices could have been forgiven, had not thy
Jesus died for it, can thou expect he should have kindness for his agony, or
friendship, for the man that entertaines his Crucifiers in his heart: if
worldly cares which he calls Mat. xiii. 22.
thorns, fill thy head with contrivances of Wealth and Greatness, of filling
Coffers, and of platting Coronets for thee, as the Thorns did make him a Matt.
xxvii. 29.
Crown too, would thou have him receive thee and these in his bosom, to gore
his Heart as they did pierce his Head? If thou delight in that intemperance,
which filled his deadly Cup, which Vomited Gall into it, can he delight in
thee? That Matt. xxvi. 38, 39.
Cup which made him fall upon his Face to deprecate, will he partake in as the
pledge of mutual Love? He that sunk under, could not bear this load of thine,
when it was in his Cross upon his shoulders, will he bear it and thee on his
arms, when thou fall'st under it? When thou will cast a shameful spewing on
his glory too, if he own such a friend? Thou that art so familiar with his
name, as thou were more his friend then any in the world, whose Oaths and
imprecations, Moses says Levit. xxiiii. 16. (...)
strike through that name, which they so often call upon, thou may as well
think his heart did attract the Spear that pierced it, and the wound close upon
its head with unions of Love, as that he has kindness for thee. If Christ may
make friendship with him, that does allow himself a Sin, he may have fellowship
with Belial: for him to dwell in any heart that cherishes a vice, were to
descend to Hell again. But as far as those Regions of darkness are from his
habitation of Glory, and the black spirits of that place from being any of his
guard of holy myriads; so far is He from dwelling with, or being friend to him,
that is a friend to any wickedness, to him that will not do whatever he
commands.

And now if these conditions seem hard, if any do not care to be his friend
upon these terms, they may betake themselves to others. Let such make
themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness: A friend indeed that has
not so much of the insincerities as many great ones have: for this will furnish
them with all that heart or lust can wish for, all that necessities or
wantonness proposes to it self to dress out pomp or vice: But yet when with
enjoyment the affections grow, and become so unquiet, work them so, as not to
let their thoughts or actions rest, make them, quicken themselves, and like the
motions of all things that go downwards tending to the Earth, increase by the
continuance, grow stronger, and more violent toward the end, then when they
are most passionate, it fails them: and having filled their life with most
unsatisfied tormenting cares, it leaves them nothing but the guilt of all: when
their great wealth shall shrink into a single sheet, no more of it be left, but
a thin shroud, and all their vast inheritances, but six foot of earth, be gone,
yet the iniquity of all will stick close to them: and this false friend, that
does it self forsake them, will neither go Psalm. xlix. 17.
along, nor will let its pomp follow them, raises a cry on them as high as
God's tribunal: the cry of all the blood, all the oppressed rights that bribery
till then had stifled, the groans of all those poor that greatness,
covetousness, or extortion had grown'd and crush't: the yellings of those souls
that were starved for want of the bread of life, which yet they paid for, and
the price of it made those heaps which will that day appear against their
friends and masters, and prove their adversaries to eternal death.

Let others joy in friends that wine does get them: such as have no
qualification to endear them, but this, that they will not refuse to sin and to
be sick with their companions: men that do only drink in their affections, as
full of friendship as of liquor, and probably they do unload themselves of both
at once, part with their dearness and their drink together, and alike. I know
not whether it be heats of mutual kindness that inflame these draughts, and the
desires of them, so as if they did drink thirst; but sure I am, that these hot
draughts begin the lake of fire.

Let others please themselves in an affection that carnality cements. These are
warm friendships I confess, but Solomon will tell us whence they have their
heat. Her house, says he, does open into Prove. vii. 27.
Hell, and Brimstone kindles those libidinous flames. There are strait bands,
fetters in those affections indeed; for the same wise man says, The closets of
that sinner are the chambers of death: that Prove. ii. 19.
none that go unto her return again, or take hold of the paths of life; it
seems she is a friend that takes most irreversible dead hold, she is not only
as insatiate, but as inexorable as the grave, and the eternal chains of fate
are in those her embraces. But God keep us from making such strict Covenants
with death; from being at friendship with Hell; or in a word, that I say all at
once, with any that are good companions only in sinning. Such men having no
virtue in themselves, must needs hate it in others, as being a reproach to
them, and therefore they are still besieging it, using all arts and Stratagems
to undermine it: and having nothing else to recommend them into men's
affections, but their managery of vice, no way to merit but by serving
iniquity, they not only comply with our own evil inclinations, that so they
may be grateful, and insinuate into us, but they provoke too and inflame those
tendencies that they may be more useful to us, having no other means to work
their ends. And then such friends by the same reason, must be false and
treacherous, and all that we declaime at, and abhor in enemies, when that
shall be the way to serve their ends; because they have no virtue to engage
them to be otherwise: and to be such, is to be constant to their own designs,
their dispositions and usances. These are the pests of all Societies, they
speak and live infection, and friendship with them is to couple with the
Plague. These do complete and perfect what the Devil but began in Eden: Nurse
up Original sin, chafe inclination into appetite and habit, suggest and raise
desires, and then feed them into constitution and nature: in a word, are a
brood of those serpents, one of which was enough to destroy paradise, and
innocence. It Is true, a man would think these were our friends indeed, that
venture to Gehenna for us: Alas they are but more familiar devils, work under
Satan to bring us to torments, and differ nothing from him, but that they draw
us into them, and he inflicts them. And when sinful contents come home in
ruin, and pleasures die into damnation; then men will understand these
treacherous loves, and find such friends are but projectours for the Devil;
then they will hate them as they do their own damnation, discerning these are
but the kindnesses of Hell. Nay, it is possible, I may slander that place in
speaking so ill of it. Dives will let us see there are affections of a kinder
and more blessed strain in Hell Luke xvi. from the twentyseventh verse; you
find he did make truce with torments, that he might contrive and beg only a
message of repentance for his brethren; he did not mind at all his own dire
Agonies, he minded so the reformation of his friends. Good God! when I reflect
upon these pieties of the damned together with the practices of those who have
given their names in to Religion, when I see fiends in Hell do study how to
make men virtuous, and Christians upon earth with all their art debauch them
into vice and ruin, I cannot choose but pray, Grant me such friends as are in
Hell. Rather grant us all the friendship in the Text. But then, we must have
none with any vice. Friendship with that engages into enmity with God and
Christ I showed you. And to pass over all those after-retributions of
vengeance Christ has studied for his enemies, when he, that now courts us to
be our friend, and we will make our adversary, must be our Judge: For were
there none of this, and should we look no further then this life; yet sure, we
of this Nation know, what it is to have God our enemy; who for so many years,
lay under such inflictions, as had much of the character of his last
executions; they had the blasphemies and the confusion, the dire guilts, and
the black calamities, and almost the despair and irrecoverableness of those in
Hell. And though He be at peace with us at present, at least there is a truce;
yet I beseech you in the presence and the fear of God, to think in earnest,
whether the present provocations of this Nation do not equal those that twenty
years ago engaged him into Arms against us, and made him dash us so in pieces:
whether those Actions of the Clergy be reformed, that made the people to
abhor their function and their service, the Offerings and Ministers of the
Lord, and made God himself spew them out. 'Twere endless to go on to the
profaneness, to the loose impieties and the bold Atheismes of the Laity,
especially of the better-sort; in short what one degree, or state or Sex is
better? Sure I am, if we are not better, we are worse beyond expression or
recovery: who have resisted every method, and conquered all God's arts of doing
good upon us, been too hard for his judgments and his mercies both.

It Is true, when we lay gasping under his severe revenges, we then pretended to
be humbled, begged to be reconciled and be at peace with him, and vowed to his
conditions, promising obedience, and aliened our selves from our old sins, his
foes. But then, when Christ came to confirm this amity, came dressed with all
his courtships, brought all the invitations of Love along, Our Prince and our
Religion, our Church and State, Righteousness and Peace, and the Beauty of
Holiness, every thing that might make us be an happy and a pious nation, thus
he did tempt, and labor to engage that friendship which we offered him and
vowed to him: And we no sooner seized all this, but we break resolutions as
well as duty, to get loose from him; and laden with the spoils of our defeated
Savior's goodness, we join hands with his enemies, resume our old
acquaintance-sins, enrich and serve them with his bounties, make appear that we
only drew him in, to work such miracles, but to assist our Worldlyness,
Ambitions and Lusts, to be our opportunities of vice, and provocation of him.
And being thus affronted and refused, his enemy preferred, not this God but
Barabbas, any the vilest thing for friend, rather then Christ, must he not
needs be more our enemy then heretofore? And if he be, that question will
concerns us, 1 Cor. x. 22.
Are we stronger then God? It should behove us not to fall out with him till we
are. See how he does prepare himself for the encounter. Wisdom v. Taking his
jealousy for armor, Verse 17 19.20.
putting on Justice, severe and vindicative Justice, as a breast plate; and,
his wrath sharpening as a sword; and, arming all the creatures for auxiliaries.
Alas! when omnipotence does express it self as scarcely, strong enough for
execution, but Almightyness will be armed also for vengeance, will assume
Weapons,call in aides for fury, who shall stand it? Will our friends think you
keep it off us, and secure us? did we consider how uneasy God accounts himself,
till he begin the storm, while he keeps off his plagues from overrunning such
a land, we would expect them every moment, and they must come. Isay i. 29
Ah, says he, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine
enemies; and then, in what condition are we if God can have no ease but in our
ruin, if he does hunger and thirst after it, go to his vengeance, as to a
feast. And if you read the xxv. Chapter of Isaiah, you will find there a rich
bill of fare, which his revenge upon his enemies does make, view the sixth
verse. He that enjoys his morsels, that lays out his contrivances, and studies
on his dishes so as if he meant to cramm his Soul, let him know what delight
soever he finds, when he has spoiled the elements of their inhabitants, to
furnish his own belly, and not content with natures delicacies neither, has
given them forced fatnesses, changing the very flesh into a marrow, suppling
the bones almost into that oil that they were made to keep; all this delight
the Lord by his expressions does seem to take in his dread executions on his
enemies, a sinful people.

And if the vicious friendships of the world have so much more attractive then
Christ's love and favor, and the happy consequences of it, as to counterpoise
all the danger of such enmity, you may join hands with them: but if his be the
safer and more advantageous, then hearken to his propositions and beseechings;
for He does beg it of you: as he treated this reconciliation in his blood, so
he does in Petitious too. For says Saint 2 Cor. v. 20.
Paul, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you by us, we pray
you in Christ's stead, Be you reconciled, and then be Generous toward your GOD
and Savior; and having brought him as it were upon his knees, reduced him to
entreaties, be friends, and condescend to him and your own happiness. If He be
for you, take no care then, who can be against you. His friendship will secure
you not only from your enemies but from Hostility it self; for, when a man's
ways please the Lord he will make even his enemies to be at peace with him.
Prove. xvi. 7. He will reconcile all but Vices. And afterward see what a
blessed throng of friends, we shall be all initiated into. Heb. xii. 23. To an
innumerable company of Angels, to the general assembly, and Church of the
firstborn that are written in Heaven, to God the Judge of all, and to the
spirits of Just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant. etc. And of this blessed Corona, we our selves shall be a noble and a
glorious part, inflamed all with that mutual Love, that kindles Seraphims, and
that streams out into an heavenly glory, filling that Region of immortal love
and blessedness; and being friends, that is, made one with Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, that Trinity of Love, we shall enjoy, what we do now desire to
ascribe to them, All Honor, Glory, Power, Majesty, and Dominion, for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 5. r. pestilence. p. 10. l. 8. r. love. p. 13. l. 19. r. friends.
p. 17. l. ult. r. them, although. p. 19. l. 20. r. as in a garden. p. 26. l. 6.
r. paramour-sin, p. 27. l. 21. r. in his arms. p. 29. l. 2. r. necessity. p.
30. l. 2. r. groun'd.


