Imprimatur.

Robert Grove R. P. Dno. Humfr. Episc. Land. a sac. Dom.
December. 22. 1670.
A Funeral Handkerchief.

In Two Parts.

I. Part, Containing Arguments to comfort us at death of Friends. II. Part,
Containing several Uses which we ought to make of such losses.
To which is added, Three Sermons Preached at Coventry, in December last, 1670.

By THOMAS ALLESTREE, M. A. Rector of Ashow in the County of Warwick.

While the Child was yet alive, I fasted and wept -- But now he is dead,
wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.22, 23.

Parcamus Lachrymis nihil proficientibus, facilius illi nos dolor iste
adjiciet, quam illum nobis reducet. Sen. Consolat ad Polyb. c. 23.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1671.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Leigh, Baron of Stoneleigh, his singular
good Lord and Patron. The Author wishes continuance of Health, increase of
Honor, and in the World to come Life Eternal.
Right Honorable,
SOme Aret. in Luke 1.3. Marlorat. in Luke 1. Chemnit. Harm. Evan. Stella in
Luke 1.3.
are of Opinion that St. Luke dedicated his Gospel, and the Acts of the
Apostles, those two pieces of Divine Writ, to Theophilus, a Man of Eminency in
the Church. Stella says he was Praesul Antiochenus septimus: And the Epithet
given him, shows he was some great man, for that Evangelist calls him (...),
most Excellent, As Acts 23.26. Act. 24.3. Act. 26.25
which is a Title of Honor; Nomen honoris et dignitatis. Yet some Doctor
Hammond his Annot. in Luke 1.3. Salv. in Epist. ded. before his Books ad
Eccles. Cathol.
learned Men are of another Opinion, (viz.) That Theophilus was not the proper
name of a particular Man, but a feigned Title to signify every Christian, who
is, or ought to be a lover of God, to whom St. Luke addresseth his Discourse.

Sure I am of this, that St. Paul, as he prayed for Onesiphorus, who so often
refreshed him in his Bonds, so he made honorable mention of him in his
Writings, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18.

My Lord, I think I should be guilty of that crying sin of Ingratum si dixeris,
omnia.
Ingratitude, (a sin, which amongst others makes the times so perilous, 2 Timothy
3.1, 2. (...)) if I should not, as I have often prayed for you, so upon
occasion make honorable mention of you, who have so often refreshed me in my
wants. Since I first saw your smiling Countenance, I have often thought of that
Speech of Ruth to Boaz, Ruth 2.10. Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that
thou should take knowledge of me, seeing I am a Stranger? I was a stranger
to your Lordship, yet you were pleased freely to bestow a small Parsonage upon
me. I call it a small one, (for so it is of it self) but it has happily
received amongst other Churches, for several years, an Augmentation of twenty
pounds and upwards, paid duly, without trouble; for the Lady Alicia Duddely
(that sweet Flower, whom God gathered early to himself, for she was ripe
betimes) Daughter of that Pattern of Piety and good Works, the Lady Duchess See
the Narrative of her life and death, by Dr. Boreman.
Duddely, lately deceased; This Daughter, I say (to whom I may apply that of
the Wise Man, Prove. 31.29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou
excellest them all) left by her last Will an Estate of the yearly value of an
120 pounds, to be disposed for ever to such poor Vicaridges and Parsonages as
the said Lady Mother should appoint: And accordingly it was performed by her
Grace the Lady Duchess Duddeley, whose good Works, like Mary's Ointment, cast
a sweet perfume. Mine is one of the Manceter Stoneleigh. Ashow. Leekwotton.
Kenelworth. Monkskirby.
six Churches that partaketh of this bounty. I know, my Lord, you will pardon
this digression, for you love to make honorable mention of your dear Aunt,
this incomparable Duchess, upon all occasions.

I now return to your Lordship, who have not only been my Patron, but in other
respects a constant Benefactor; for you were pleased to receive me for your
Chaplain, and accept my poor pains, for which (to your Noble Generosity, not to
my desert, be it spoken) you gave me, besides other Favors, a considerable
allowance. Meet then it is that you should have the first Fruits of my Labors
in this kind, as a token of my real love, and testimony of a grateful heart,
and I hope your Lordship will so interpret it.

Another Reason why I presume to prefix your Lordships Name to the following
Discourse is this; that it being shrouded under your Honorable Protection, may
pass the more current: We live in a carping Age; but if these Papers find
acceptance with you, (I know you to be so judicious and well-devoted) I do not
much value the exceptions of others.

This Paper-Present I call A Funeral Handkerchief, Containing Arguments to
comfort us at death of Friends; and the several Uses we ought to make of such
losses. Noble Sir, you have outlived many Friends, you have buried many dear
Children, and lately parted with a Religious Lady, who drew with you in the
Yoke of Marriage above 59 years. [I am not afraid to call her Religious, Her
daily respect to the Word and Prayer in private; Her love to the Public
Ordinances; Her strict observation of the Lord's Day, and her pious care that
others should do so: Her fastings and soul-afflictings upon occasion, together
with her constant circumspect walking, are to me undoubted signs of her
Religious Disposition.] These afflictions, and many others which God Almighty
has pleased to exercise your Lordship with, you have patiently undergone and
overcome, through the Auxiliaries of Reason, and Divine Assistance. But, my
Lord, have you learnt to make a right use of death of Friends and Relations?
This is an hard lesson which few take forth: let me entreat you to cast your
eye especially upon the second Part of this following Treatise, where you shall
find several Uses set down; Copy them out in your daily practice, that so when
the Sun of your life does set, which declines apace, you may go to your
Dormitorie in peace.

Though these Papers do not inform you of what you know not, yet they may serve
to mind you of what you know. King Philip knew that he was a mortal Man, yet he
would have his Monitor every morning to tell him that he was so, uttering these
words with a loud voice, (...). I think it meet, my Lord, as St. Peter speaks,
2 Pet. 1.13. to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance: And I hope your
Lordship will suffer me to be your Remembrancer from the Press, as I was for I
had the honor to be Chaplain seven years.
several years from the Pulpit, which was no small encouragement to me in my
Ministerial Pains.

But fearing lest I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle, craving your
Lordships Patronage and Acceptance of these my Labors, I take leave, and rest,

My Lord, Your Honors most humbly devoted Servant, Tho. Allestree.
Ashow, Jan. 27. 1670.
To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
SOme judicious Divines have looked upon these following Notes, as a Talent,
not to be buried in a Napkin, or in a few sheets of Paper in my Study; I
therefore resolved at last to press them for public service. This I can say, I
have not offered thee that which cost me nothing: I have spent much time and
labor in the composure of this following Treatise. What I have met with in
reading that might serve for my present purpose, I have digested into a method
for thy benefit, and the principal Quotations I have set down. A Posy is not
cast away because made up of several Flowers; nor Honey distasted, which the
diligent Be gathers here and there: nor I hope will thou like this Book the
worse, because there are several Quotations in it.

The former part of this Funeral Handkerchief may teach thee to take patiently
the death of Friends. We read Act. 19.12. That from the body of Paul were
brought to the sick, Handkerchiefs, or Aprons, and the Diseases departed from
them, and the evil spirits went out of them. This Handkerchief brought to thee
from mine hand, may (through Gods blessing) be a means to cure thee of
melancholy, immoderate sorrow, discontent, and such like distempers of spirit,
which may arise at death of Friends and Relations. Mine Arguments are grounded
upon Divine Writ; And as David said of the Sword of Goliath, 1 Samuel 21.9. There
is none like that, give it me: So say I of Scripture-Arguments, there are none
like them: These are right words, and so the more persuasive; Job 6.25. How
forcible are right words?

The latter part of this Treatise may teach thee several good uses which thou
ought to make of the death of Friends and Relations. The first part is far
larger than the second; what though? A large first, makes recompense for the
shorter second Course at any man's Table. And this I also say, That though the
first part be greater in bulk, yet the latter is of greater worth; both parts I
hope may in some measure answer expectation as to what they promise; but the
latter chiefly, if thou live up to it, may be a means to promote thy eternal
Salvation, which is the hearty desire of

Thy faithful Friend and Servant, T. Allestree.
Ashow, Jan. 27. 1670.
Errata in the Funeral Handkerchief.
PAge 3. line 13, read Telluris. p. 4. l. 21, r. are not. p. 5. l. 7, r.
mourning. p. 6. l. 10, r. resorbebant. p. 11. l. 27, r. as his gift: so says.
p. 20. l. 1, r. Patimur. p. 59. l. 22, r. (...). p. 60. l. 1, r. (...). l. 2,
r. a fixed. p. 61. l. 19, r. (...). p. 62. l. 3, r. cast off. p. 64. l. 20, r.
may be presently. p. 67. l. 3, after (...) insert (...). p. 77. Marg. r.
miserum. p. 84. l. 33, r. did so lively paint. p. 125. l. 13, r. whet. l. 14,
r. Mowers. p. 130. l. 9, r. my Corn. p. 159. l. 24, r. meet. p. 190. l. 14, r.
suffer patiently. p. 191. l. 26, r. secundae. p. 197. l. 12, r. manuum. p. 198.
l. 22, r. be no. p. 217. l. 30, r. (...). p. 254. l. 2, r. Genesis 47. l. 30, r.
(...). p. 266. l. 31, r. with the wicked. p. 277. l. 27, for within, r. with
him. p. 279. l. 17, r. thy enquiries. p. 282. l. 25, r. putting. p. 297. l. 27,
r. expectation. p. 299. l. 20, r. tormented in, which.

Errata in the three Sermons.
Page 7. line 7, read gratitudinem. l. 34, r. frequentiam. p. 9. l. 13, f.
them, r. him. l. 17, r. (...). Marg. r. a morte remotus. p. 12. l. 20, r.
says, he has. l. 21. r. there is sin. p. 22. l. 28, r. impenitent wretches.
p. 31. l. 14. r. Afflictorum. p. 32. l. 1, r. erexit. p. 40. l. 12. r.
strangely. p. 46. l. 24, r. devoted. p. 55. l. 9, r. his life.

These and some other small faults of the Printer, which thou may possibly
meet with in reading, may be easily mended with a little Ink: But the Personal
Faults of the Author can only be done away by the Blood of Christ; for the
effecting of which, thy prayers are desired.

Farewell.
A Funeral handkerchief. Part 1.

CHAP. I. The Porch, Entrance, or Preface to to the ensuing Discourse.
WHen a Friend is going a long Journey, it is a commendable piece of civility
to go with him some part of the way, and to weep at parting: so civil were the
people to St. Paul, Act. 20.37, 38. they accompanied him to the ship, and wept
over him. So when our Friends depart and go to their long-home, from whence
they shall never return till time shall be no more, is it not good manners to
accompany them to the Grave, and shed some tears for them, whom we shall see no
more with mortal eyes? Eccl. 12.5. Man goes to his long-home, and the Mourners
go about the streets. The Jews were wont to hire Mourners (2 Chronicles. 35.25. Jer.
9.17, 18. Amos 5.16.) and for the most part they were women called in Latin
Praeficae: They professed an Art in Mourning and composing doleful Ditties: And
for the greater solemnity, persons of worth or estate would hire them to
accompany the Hearse, and they would mourn for the Dead with such affection,
gesture, and lamentation, that they would cause others to mourn for company. We
find Eccles. 7.2, 4. the Wiseman calling the house where one dies, the house
of Mourning, which he would not do, if it were not lawful to mourn upon such an
occasion. We read in Scripture how Abraham mourned for Sarah, Genesis 23.2.
Joseph for his Father Jacob, Genesis 50.10. The Israelites wept for Moses, Deuteronomy.
34.8. so for Samuel, 1 Samuel 25.1. Elisha cries after Elijah, 2 King. 2.12.
Jeremiah weeps for Josiah, 2 Chro. 35.25. And under the New Testament we find
Act. 8.2. -- devout man carried Stephen to his Burial, and made great
Lamentation over him. And Act. 9.36, 37, 39. We find there the Widows embalming
charitable Dorcas in tears: And before this we read how Martha and Mary wept
sore for their Brother Lazarus, John 11.19, 31, 33. Nay Christ himself wept, v.
35. and the Jews interpreted it as an argument of his love to Lazarus, v. 36.
so that civility, custom, and love to deceased Friends call for weeping upon
such an occasion.

It is pronounced as a judgment upon wicked men, when relations shed not a
tear, nor pay a solemn sigh, but are rather glad to be rid of them; Job 27.15.
Psa. 78.64. so God threatened Jehoiakim that he should die unlamented, and be
buried with the burial of an Ass, Jer. 22. 18, 19. Herod looked on it so sad to
die unlamented, that he gave express command, that when he died, one of every
Noble Family in his kingdom should be slain, Dr. Abbot 6th Lect. on Jonah, p.
124.1.
that by that means his death might of necessity be lamented, if not for love
of him (as the Tyrant had no reason to expect) yet for the loss of others.
Joseph. Antiquit.

The saying of Solon, Dr. Willet on Genesis p. 251.
Mors mea non careat Lachrymis, and let not my death want tears, so it be done
temperately; is to be preferred before that of Ennius, Nemo me lachrymis
decoret, Let no man mourn for me.

He has lived (Tellius inutile pondus) a very unprofitable wretch, who being
dead, is carried forth as servants carry out the sweepings of the House, or
guts of Birds, or entrails of Beasts, without any show of sorrow: Tears then at
death of Friends, are silent expressions of the usefulness of our dead Friend,
(whilst living) and of our value and esteem of him.

And if we seriously consider losses of this nature, how can we choose but weep?
For a wife to lose her husband, the Guide of her Youth, Pro. 2.7. who was a
shield to defend her, or as the Sun to cheer her, ( Genesis 37.9, 10.) must needs
be a bitter loss: So for a Husband to lose his Wife, the Wife of his Youth,
Prove. 5.18. or the Wife of his Bosom, Mic. 7.5. the desire of his eyes, Ezekiel.
24.16, 18. must needs be a bitter loss. So for Parents to lose Children, who
have their being from them, and from whom they expect comfort in their old age,
must needs be a bitter loss. So how can Children choose but weep at death of
Parents? to lose a Father that begot them, Prove. 23.22. and took pains to
provide for them (1 Timothy 5.8.) so to lose a dear Mother that bare them nine
months in her belly, twelve months in her arms, and many years in her mind and
care, must needs be a bitter loss. Yet the Apostle in the catalogue of
offenders that should come in the last days (and surely ours are the last)
tells us of some that shall be ((...), 2 Timothy 3.3.) without natural affection,
unnatural to Relations whilst living, and when dead, as if their hearts were
hewn out of a Rock, they are unmoved, they can with dry eyes and cheeks behold
the Funeral Solemnities of Parents, Children, Husband, Wife, etc. without any
show of sorrow: Though God strikes them through their Relations, yet they have
not grieved, Jer. 5.3. let such consider that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 28.5.
because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operations of his hands,
he shall destroy them and not build them up: God there threatens such as are
affected with sad passages of his providence; the chief of which we conclude
are loss of Friends and Relations.

The Poet had observed an unnatural Son that before the time would be enquiring
into his Father's age; -- Filius ante diem Patrios inquiret in annos. He would
have his Father wrapped up in his winding sheet, (...), Mixtus fletui risus.
Sphinx Philos. p. 316.
that he might rip open his Baggs; would have him in his Coffin, that he might
enter into his Coffers: And when the time of his Fathers interment is at hand
(which to him comes never sooner than expected or desired) this unnatural Son,
it may be, goes clothed in black, having a light and merry heart under a sad
and mournful habit. So, many Wives that have lived, it may be, too loosly and
wantonly, at their husbands death, like that woman that Joab sent for (2 Samuel
14.2.) feigh themselves to be Mourners, and put on monring Apparel. Thus
Bathsheba's mourning for her husband Uriah (2 Samuel 11.26.) is thought by some
to be hypocritical; for by his death, she was freed from her husbands rage,
from shame and punishment which she justly deserved; and withal she had hopes
to become a Queen, as indeed she did. But let such hypocritical Mourners
consider, without repentance, their portion will be with Hypocrites, where (
Mat. 24.51.) there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. In Hell there is
weeping in good earnest: And every tear shed is so far from quenching
Hellfire, that like Oil it will increase the flame thereof: and here I leave
such unnatural wretches.

On the other side, some there are that at death of Friends weep immoderately,
they weep till they can weep no more, as the expression is 1 Samuel 30.4. they
are so impatient, that for ever after they lead disconsolate lives, sitting
daily inter suspiria and lachrymas, sighing, sobbing, and sorrowing: they are
so discomposed, that they cannot, as the Apostle commands, attend upon the Lord
without distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35. They cannot pray, nor meditate, nor give
thanks to God with that fixedness and composure as they ought to do, Psalm.
57.7. And it may be they forbear going to Church, because they cannot endure
the sight of their friends grave. Nay further, they are not only inwardly
pensive, but outwardly passionate, they fill Heaven and Earth with Exclamations.

Horrendis graviter Coelum pulsasse querelis. And many times passionate
unsavory Speeches (the scum of a discontented spirit) proceed from them, as
from Jonah when his Gourd withered, Jonah 4.8, 9. He wished himself dead, and
tells God, He did well to be angry, even unto death. St. Austin speaking of his
Mothers Death said, Aug. Confess. lib 9 cap. 12.
Oculi mei resorbebant fontem suum usque ad siccitatem; His eyes had drained
his very Fountains dry, so excessive he was in weeping. Indeed this has been
an infirmity in the best of men and women. See Jacob at the supposed death of
Joseph, Genesis 37.33, 34, 35. He rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his
loins, and mourned for his son many days; and all his sons, and all his
daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted; and he said,
For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning: thus his father wept
for him; His mourning like the swelling of Jordan (Jer. 12.5.) impetuously,
passed the banks of Reason. So if mischief (says he) befall Benjamin by the way
in which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave, Genesis 42.38. So David hearing news of the untimely death of Absalom, the
text tells you, ^ Sam. 18.33. The king was much moved, and went up to the
chamber over the gate, and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son,
my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee! O Absalom my son, my son! David
is too excessive in his grief, and speaks things that were not fitting (as
passionate men use to do) Would God I had died for thee! Why David, what would
have become of the Kingdom, what miseries would it have been involved in if
Absalom had survived? The violence of Passion here makes David forget himself,
Gods Church and People. So Naomi, Ruth 1.3, 5. had lost her Husband and two
Sons, and verse. 19, 20. because God had dealt thus bitterly with her, she
refuses her Name, will be called, Marah, that signifies bitterness; and not
Naomi, that signifies pleasant; she refuses this Name being so unsuitable to
her condition. So the women of Bethlehem at the untimely death of their
Infants, ( Mat. 2.16, 18) mourn, and will not be comforted And indeed the
female kind naturally is more disposed to tenderness than the male ( Isa.
49.15.) and so more apt to weep immoderately, and (as one says) of the two,
the more to be pitied, and the more capable of excuse and pardon: But yet
immoderate Sorrow in none is to be allowed.

As we approve not then of a Stoical Apathy (for the best of Gods Servants have
passions in them, See Dr. Renolds on the Passions.
Acts 14.15. James 5.17. and passions are the feet of the soul, placed in the
sensitive appetite by the finger of God and Nature) so neither do we approve of
passions when irregular, for then they are diseases of the mind, depravers of
reason, disturbers of the understanding, and cause the wisest men to speak and
act not like themselves.

We find our Savior Luke 7.12, 13. saying to the Widow who wept for her only
son, Weep not, he does not there forbid natural affection, but inordinate
passion; not tears simply, but their excess; not tears of sympathy and parental
tenderness, but despairing repining tears. To shut up this, See Dr. VValkers
Sermon on that Text.
the Apostle would have us to mortify inordinate affection (Col. 3.4.) that of
sorrow, as well as that of anger, etc. now it is inordinate when set on wrong
objects, or when it is in extremes, either defective or excessive: This
corruption or disorder in our affections must be purged out.

Now I shall lay down several Arguments to prevent inordinate mourning at death
of Friends. Take ten, which are as so many Corks to the Net, to keep the soul
under such losses from sinking too deep in sorrow.

CHAP. II. Ten Considerations to prevent immoderate Mourning at the Death of
Friends.
IN the first place, Consider, the Necessity of Dying: For, We must needs dye,
2 Samuel 14.14. So, Eccles. 12.5. Man goes to his long home; Man indefinitely,
i. e. every man, high and low, rich and poor, beautiful and deformed, male and
female, young and old, good and bad, all go to their long home, the Grave. So
Ps. 89.48. What man is he that lives and shall not see Death? See Mr. Dugards
Sermon on that Text.
Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the Grave? Selah. No, though he now
lives, yet he shall not always live, but sooner or later shall see Death.
Joshua and David call Death, The Way of all the Earth, Josh. 23.14. 1 King.
2.2. This way all Creatures of the Earth walk, and therefore Job calls the
Grave, The House appointed for all Living, Job. 30.23. No man has power over
the Spirit to retain the Spirit, Eccles. 8.8. But when his time is come, The
Spirit shall return to God who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. Death, that black Prince,
or King of Terrors (So called Job 18.14.) is an invincible Champion, who riding
on his pale Horse, for above these five thousand years, has with an impartial
stroke laid all flat before him. The long-lived Patriarchs, Adam, Seth, Enoch,
etc. like stout Oaks held out long, but were forced at last to submit to
Death's fatal stroke, as you my read, Genesis Chap. 5. Statutum est omnibus semel
mori. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all men once to dye. It is Statute Law,
enacted in the Court of Heaven, the decree is establisted, the writing signed,
and like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, (Dan. chap. 6. verse. 8.) never to
be reversed, whilst this world lasts; we only read of two exempted since
the Creation of the World, Enoch and Elijah, who though they dyed not, yet
underwent a change, and the like is not now to be expected. So then that all
must dye is an universal rule, admitting of no exception: And how soon all we
may be brought in as Examples to this general Rule, we know not. Even Kings on
Earth are but Earthen Kings, and like Nebuchadnezzars Image (Dan. 2.) stand on
feet of clay, and moulder away as well as others. Aequo pede pulsat pauperum
tabernas, regumque turres. Hor. I have said ye are gods, -- but ye shall dye
like men, Psalm. 82.6, 7. Augustus mortuus est. Nay Christ himself dyed, the
Lord of Life is put to Death; though he did not sin actually, yet because he
had our sins by imputation, Isa. 53.6. 1 Pet. 2.24. He stood guilty of our sins
(for he became our Surety) and therefore underwent a dissolution, though indeed
he saw no corruption, Acts 2.27. so Acts 13.37. Now as Phocion said to one that
was condemned to the same death with him. Art thou not glad to fare as Phocion
does? So shall we be too much cast down at death of our Friends, seeing the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, nay Christ himself has tasted death's bitter
Cup. Well then, at death of your Friend consider that, Job 21.33. Every man
shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him. Methinks this
should somewhat alleviate our sorrow. Seneca de consol. ad Polib..24.
Quis tam superbae impotentisque arrogantiae est, ut in hac naturae necessitate
(omnia in eundem finem revocantis) se unum ac suos seponi velit? An Heathen
looked upon it as a great piece of weakness and pride for any man to expect,
that either he or any of his should be exempted from the general rule of
mortality.

The friends you lose are not so much yours as God's. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. All
things come of thee (says David.) And St. James says, Jam. 1.17. Every good
gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights, etc. Children among other things are the gift of God. This Lesson our
great Grandmother Eve taught us, calling her firstborn, Cain, saying, I have
gotten a man from the Lord, Genesis 4.1. Heb. (...) Septuag. (...), which is as
much as (...), Musculus in locum. By the favor, help, and blessing of God, as
his gift. So says Jacob, Genesis 33.5. These are the Children which God has
graciously given me. And God tells us, he gave unto Isaac, Jacob and Esau,
Josh. 24.4. Psalm. 127.3. Lo Children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit
of the womb is his reward. Clavis coeli, sepulchri, cordis, and matricis in
manu Dei. It is God that opens and shuts the Womb at his pleasure. See Genesis
30.2, 22. God may say truly what Benhadad said falsely, 1 King 20.3. Thy silver
and thy gold is mine thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest are
mine. We use to bestow upon relations a term of propriety, as my Husband, my
Wife, my Father, my Mother, my Brother, my Sister, my Son, my Daughter, my
Friend, etc. Whereas the truth is, they are not ours but Gods; he is the
absolute owner of them: he made them, and has freely lent them to us, without
any certain time, or date, or promise of continuance; and what is lent freely
(we cannot deny but) may be called for most justly at the pleasure of him that
lent it. May not God most justly say, as the Owner of the Vineyard to the
murmuring Labourer, Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Well then, we hold our Friends (non jure, sed gratis) not by a
juridical right, but upon favor and courtisie; and if we enjoyed our Relations
some time, we should be thankful to God, that has lent them to us so long,
rather then murmur that he takes them so soon.

St. Jerome comforting Paula, for the death of her Daughter Bresilla, said,
Durum quidem, sed tolerabile, quia sustulit ille qui dederat; It was a heavy
loss, but to be born patiently, because he took, that gave at first. This
comforted Job, when amongst other things he had lost his Children, Job 1.21,
22. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the
Lord. Job considered, that God had taken but what he gave at first, and so does
thankfully resign up his losses to him.

God has a hand in death of Friends, Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thy hand,
says David, times of plenty and times of poverty, times of health, and times
of sickness, living times, and dying times, are in the hand i. e. of the
disposal of God. He measures time of life in what proportion he pleases; to
some he gives a large piece, to others a small remnant, Job. 7.1: Is there not
an appointed time to man upon earth? Here he puts it by way of question; but
Job 14.5. There he puts it out of question, and takes it for granted, That man's
days are determined, the number of his months are with thee (O Lord) thou
have appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass. So that when a Friend departs,
that is the time that God has appointed. So it is said of David, Acts 8.36.
After he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell asleep, etc.
Will of God, may be annexed to his falling asleep, as well as serving his
generation; he dyed then by the will of God, and was gathered to his Fathers,
and saw corruption. Job says, Job 30.23. I know that thou will bring me unto
death, and to the house appointed for all living. Naomi said, when she was
deprived of her Husband and two Sons in a strange Land, The Almighty has dealt
very bitterly with me, and the Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty
has afflicted me, Ruth 1.5, 20, 21. compared. So Moses, speaking of the
frailty and shortness of man's life, says, Thou turnest man to destruction, and
say, Return ye children of men, Psalm. 90.3. Gods dixit is his fecit; (as in
the first Creation he said, Let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1.3.)
So God here says, Return, i. e. he makes them to return (viz.) to their
Original, The Body to the earth, and the Spirit to him that gave it, Eccles.
12.7. So David, tells us, God takes away men's breath, and then they dye and
return to their dust, Psalm. 104.29. God indeed is the orderer and ordainer of
all conditions, 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down
to the grave, and brings up. So Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create
darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these things. Our
Savior tells us, not a Sparrow falls to the ground, nor a hair from our heads,
without the overruling providence of God, Mat. 10.29, 30. Here is Argumentum a
minore ad majus, If not a Sparrow, a bird of small price and account, or an
Hair, which is no essential part, but made for convenience and ornament; if
these fall not to the ground without the will of our heavenly Father, surely a
Friend cannot dye but God wills it. Let us then at loss of Friends patiently
submit to Gods will. The Heathenish Idolaters were loath to cast Jonah
overboard, but when they had cast lots, and found it to be Gods will it should
be so, they patiently submitted, 1 Jonah 13.14. Let not Heathens outstrip
Christians. Let us say with Christ, John 18.11. The Cup which my Father has
given me, shall I not drink it? See Jobs carriage Job 1.20, 21, 22. He fell
down and worshipped, not murmured; he charged not God foolishly, by railing as
though he dealt unjustly with him, but says, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken; He saw the hand of God in whatever befell him, and this was a strong
pillar of supportment to his drooping spirit. It is no striving against the
stream or current of Gods powerful will, Job 9.4. Isa. 45.9. Let Gods authority
over thee prevent impatience in thee. God who does what he will, and will do
what he pleases, Psalm. 115.3. So Psalm. 135.6. He takes away and none can
hinder him, who will say unto him, What do thou? Job 9.12. Say then when a
Friend is dead, Truly this is a grief, yet I must bear it, Jer. 10.19. And as
Seneca says, Aequum est ut patienter feras quicquid corrigere est nefas, It is
but fit to bear that patiently which we cannot remedy.

God intends it for thy good, Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good (O Lord) and do
good. So verse. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou
in faithfulness have afflicted me. So Psalm. 145.17. (...). Misericors.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy (or according to Orig.
merciful) in all his works. Plutarch in his Epistle consolatory to his Wife on
the death of a Child, amongst others has this Argument, We must always think
well of what the Gods do. Christians should consider, that God, in the saddest
passages of his providence, aims at their good: Though indeed his ways be
sometimes hidden, yet they are always just. When clouds and darkness are round
about him, then righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne,
Psalm. 97.2. Though his Providence sometimes seem to cross his Promises, yet in
the conclusion you shall see all things work together for good, as Physic
works for the good of the Patient, Romans 8.28. Every Rod, like Jonathans, 1 Samuel
14.27. has Honey at the end of it. All things, even loss of Friends, work
together for good to those that love God. We read how Sampson fetched Honey out
of the carcass of the Lion, Judge. 14.8, 9. So may we find or fetch good
instructions from the Carcass of a deceased Friend.

God (it may be) took away such or such a Relation (as the Widow of Sarepta
said when her Son was dead) to call your sins to remembrance, 1 King. 17.18.
May be your sin might be foolish Indulgence, or too much Fondness; you loved
your Relation too much, and therefore God took him (or her) away, that you
might not commit spiritual adultery, which you do when you bestow that love and
delight upon the Creature that is due to the Creator, Psalm. 73.27. God there
threatens such as go a whoring from him. He will not suffer such behavior in
those whom he has married to himself, Hos. 2.19. God is a Jealous God, Exodus
20.5. And as a discreet Wife, if she perceives her Husband to be in love with
her Maidservant, will presently put her away, that she may be chief in her
Husbands affection; So if God loves us, he will take that away which steals our
affections from him. Private bonis, aut liberis, nimium amatis, ut desiderium
bonorum praestantiorum atque coelestium magis in eis excitat. He deprives us,
(says Paraeus Paraeus, in Genesis 37. chap.
) of Children, or some such outward good things which we love too much, that he
may thereby excite us to love better things more. Or, your sin might be
worldly-mindedness, you were (it may be) over-worldly in providing portions for
such or such a Child. Salvian, ad Ecles. Cathol. lib. 2 page 380.
Quae insania est o miserrimi! ut haeredes alios quoscunque faciatis, vos ipsos
vero exhaeredetis. God saw thee well nigh lost in a crowd of worldly cares; and
therefore took away thy Child, that thou might sit loose to the world, and
mind heavenly things. God is a gracious Father (as one says) wisely tempering
the Cup for his Children, lest they should surfeit on worldly enjoyments, which
they might easily do, if they were not mixed with occasions of sorrow. Or (it
may be) thou did not think sufficiently on thy latter end, as God requires,
Deuteronomy. 32.29. We are ready to say with Peter, It is good for us to be ^ere, Mark
9.5. God therefore took away a near Relation, which speaks as Dalilah to
Sampson, The Philistines be upon thee Sampson, Judge. 16.9. So thy dead friend
speaks to thee, thou have a mortal Body, Death is at the door. By this means
God teaches thee to number thy days, and apply thy heart to wisdom, as Moses
prayed, Ps. 90.12.

Or lastly, God (it may be) took away thy Friend to humble thee, and prove
thee, to try thy Obedience, to exercise thy Faith and Patience, as in Jobs
case, James 5.11. Thus, as the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.11. No chastening
for the present seems to be joyous but grievous: nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of Righteousness unto them which are exercised
thereby. So that this crossing of us is to do us more good at our latter end.
Deuteronomy. 8.16. Moses with his Rod wrought wonders, Exodus 4.17. And God teaches us
many admirable and excellent Lessons with a Fescu made of a Rod, Job, 6.8, 9,
10. Mic. 6.9. (...), Nocumenta, documenta. Well then, as a Patient refuses not
from his Physician a bitter Potion, or from the Chyrurgeon a corrhoding
Plaster, because it makes way for healing, it is in order to a Cure. So, loss
of Friends (though of all outward losses most bitter, yet) should be taken
patiently: because it is a Medicine to heal spiritual Maladies; See Isa. 27.9.
Methinks this consideration should make us not only submit, but rejoice under
such losses.

God is still with thee, Psalm. 46.1. God is our refuge and strength, a very
present help in trouble. So Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting, thou
art God. Though Friends forsake us, through unavoidable mortality, yet an
Eternal God is still where he was, he keeps his standing: He can supply the
place of Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Son or Daughter, for he is an
All-sufficient God, (So it is in the Original, Genesis 17.1.) In him there is all
excellency, beauty, comfort and good of the creature in a most superlative and
glorious manner, sufficiently, eminently, transcendently; so that every loss is
made up in him, as Philip said, Show us the Father, and it suffices us, John
14.8. and St. Paul says, Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your need. There
is sweetness enough in God to sweeten all outward bitterness, so that though
the Conduit Pipes, through which mercies were conveyed unto us, be taken away,
yet the Fountain runs still entire in God. Hagar, we read, had a Fountain by,
but her blubbering eyes kept her from seeing it, Genesis 21.17, 18, 19. God the
fountain of happiness is still with thee, and thou may have daily recourse to
him, and therefore wipe thine eyes and ^^^t contented. God says to his People,
what the King of Israel did to the King of Syria, I am thine, and all that I
have, 1 Kings 20.4. Let us then under loss of Friends comfort our selves in the
Lord our God; and say with David, Psalm. 18.46. The Lord lives, and blessed be
my Rock, and praised be the God of my Salvation. When Creture-crutches fail, we
have the Rock of Ages to rely upon. Therefore, Rejoice in the Lord, and again,
I say, rejoice, Phil. 4.4.

Thou deservest greater losses and crosses than those thou meetest with. Thy
sins are far heavier than thy sufferings. The shower of misery and trouble that
befalls us, through loss of Friends, was raised by the ascending vapor of our
sin, Nehem. 9.33. So Psalm. 39.10. God corrects man for his iniquity; and
therefore, Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of
his sin? Lam. 3.39. Why does vain man fret as though his sins cast not one mite
into the treasury of his sufferings? Whereas indeed his sufferings are less
than his sins. As Ezra said, Thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve, Ezr. 9.13. And as Zophar told Job, Job 11.6. Know that God
exacts of thee less than thine iniquity deserves, So David, Psalm. 103.10. He
has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities. Quamvis aspera and adversa patiamur, minora patiamur quam meremur:
Quid querimur, Salv. lib. 4 de gub. Dei. page 114.
quod dure agat nobiscum Deus? multo nos cum Deo durius agimus. Exacerbamus
quippe Deum impuritatibus nostris, and ad puniendum nos trahimus invitum. The
fire of Gods wrath is not proportionable to the fuel of our sins whilst we live
in this world. Let us then bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have
sinned against him. Thus the Church resolves, Mich. 7.9. Let us not murmur that
it is so bad, but rather admire at Gods goodness, that it is not worse with us.

The many undeserved favors which God confers upon thee. He might have taken
away all thy Relations, whereas he has left several to cheer thee: And
therefore as Jonadab said to David, Let not my Lord suppose that they have
slain all the young men the Kings Sons, for Amnon only is dead: Now therefore
let not my Lord the King take the thing to his heart, 2 Samuel 13.31, 32, 33. If
God has taken away but one relation at a time, let us not lay it to heart, to
grieve excessively, seeing he continues to us several other Relations, whom he,
for our sins, might justly have deprived us of. Besides, God might have taken
away our health, wealth, yea life it self, and sent us to Hell. It is of the
Lords mercys, that we are not consumed, because his compassio is fail not: They
are new every morning, great is thy faithfulness, Lam. 3.22, 23. Look round
about thee, and thou can not choose but see many precious mercies that thou
still enjoyest. And thou should be thankful for what thou have, rather than
repine at what thou have lost. Lot had most of his goods (which he had not time
to remove) and his Sons in Law consumed in a fearful fire from Heaven, and his
Wise turned into a pillar of Salt before his eyes, (a fearful spectacle) as you
may read, Genesis 19. Yet he counted it (notwithstanding his great losses) a great
mercy that he had his life spared; Verse. 19. Behold, now thy servant has found
grace in thy sight, and thou have magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed
unto me in saving my Life. And Job (whose case as to outward losses, was far
worse than thine) thought himself bound by the good to endure the bad, Job
2.10. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
evil? It was a fearful miscarriage in Rachel, who, under the want of Children,
cried out to her Husband, Genesis 30.1. Give me children or else I die. She had no
desire to live or she would die of discontent and grief under the want of
Children. It was a great weakness in Jacob, that having so many Children left,
and living in so great honor and plenty yet took the supposed death of his Son
Joseph so impatiently, that he refuses to be comforted, Genesis 37.34, 35.
resolving to go to the grave mourning. And no less excusable was Jonah, who
having his Gourd smitten, grows wonderfully impatient, Jonah 4.8, 9. Whereas he
might have thankfully reflected upon his late deliverance out of the
Whales-belly. Shall the want of one thing that we prize, deprive us of the
comfort we should take in the rest we do enjoy? Shall great mercies sink to the
bottom, and be buried in Oblivion, and light miseries swim on the top, and be
always thought on with repining grief? God forbid. If man do us but a small
courtesy, we usually are thankful, but if God load us (as he daily does) with
his benefits, Psalm. 68.19. we make light of that load, and forget him. What ado
we make with a little misery, and how little we make of much mercy? A little
misery afflicts us much, and much mercy affects us but a little, God help us. I
have read somewhere of Alcibiades an heathen, that being told of one that had
stolen half his Plate, said cheerfully, I have cause rather to be thankful that
he has stolen no more, than be troubled that he has took so much. A shame it
is for Christians to think so much of what they have lost, as quite to forget
the mercies they do enjoy. To such we may apply that speech of Absalom to
Hushai, Is this your kindness to your friend? 2 Samuel 16.17. Or as it is Deuteronomy.
32, 5, 6. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? etc.

To end this, our condition here on earth is checker wrought, and like the
Pillar of the Cloud, Exodus 14.20. It has a light part as well as a black;
mercies we have as well as miseries. Do not then stand always poring on thy
afflictions, but likewise be pondering on thy mercies; as the one will keep
thee humble, so the other thankful.

The invalidity of Weeping. If we could shed rivers of tears, and each tear
were a Pearl, yet it would not redeem our departed Friends from the Prison of
the Grave. If you could weep (as one says) Aqua fortis, Dr. Walker Funr. Sermon.
on Luk 7 12, 13 ^ 14 ^ ^r^gia. nulla retrorsum.
your tears would not dissolve the chains of death 2 Samuel 14.14. We must neeeds
die, and (if once dead) We are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again. Death is a strict doorkeeper all that pass out that way,
the door is shut on them, they shall never return (viz) to converse more with
us in this world or to enjoy those worldly comforts they once had, and by death
have lost. See Job 7.9, 10. So Job 10.21. and 14.7, 8, etc. and 16.22. So Psalm.
39. last verse. All our groans, sighs, sobs, and pitiful outcries cannot
awaken them out of the sleep of Death: They shall never awake t^ll ^hey be
awakened by the shril noise of the (...) Tr^mp. Methinks I hear God saying to
those that weep immoderately at death of Friends, as Judas did in another case,
Ad quid perditio haec? Mat. 26.8. What needs all this waste? Tears are a
precious water, let them not be prodigally poured out, and all to no purpose,
into your friends Grave, reserve them for an ingredient into Prayer,
Repentance, etc. Let David be your Pattern in this: He prayed for his Child
while living, He fasted and wept, for said he, Who can tell whether God will be
gracious to me, that the Child may live; but now he is dead, wherefore should I
fast (and thus afflict my self) Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.22, 23. The Child being dead, he wipes
his eyes and rests contented. Sen Consol. ad Polib. c. 23.
Parcamus lachrymis nihil proficientibus. And again, says Seneca, Desinat
dolor qui perit. He would have us not weep immoderately at death of Friends,
because tears do not profit, nor can recall the dead.

The evil that comes by discontent and immoderate weeping.

1. It is extremely afflictive to a man. A discontented man is ((...)) a
self-tormentor, he erects his own cross; Luke 21.19. In patience possess your
souls. So that by impatience we are dispossessed of our souls, we are turned
our of our understanding, peace, and comfort, while Passion plays the Tyrant.
At such a time Reason and Judgment (those superior faculties of the soul) are
degraded, and Fancy and Phrenzy step up in their room making a very Bealam
within our own bosom. It is called, The yoke of affliction, Lam. 3.27. Now you
know fretting and vexing makes the yoke gaul and pinch the more. An impatient
person is an Hercules furens, or like the man in the Gospel, possessed with the
Devil, Mark 5.2, 3. He wounds and vexes himself, none can bind him: Nay, as
one observes, he is worse than the Daemoniack there, for he was among the
Tombs, but this impatient man is among the Living, and molests and grieves
those that are near him.

2. Immoderate sorrow wastes the Spirits. See Prove. 15.13. By sorrow of the
heart the spirit is broken. It weakens the Body, and hastens Death; 2 Cor.
7.10. The sorrow of the world works Death, says the Apostle: by sorrow of
the world, we may understand immoderate sorrow about worldly things, hastens
death, and eats out the very comfort of Life. You read of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.7. He
was an hundred and twenty years old when he dyed, his eye was not dim, nor his
natural force abated. What should be the reason? Why, surely under God, his own
meekness; For, Numb. 12.3. He was very meek above all the men that were upon
the face of the earth. Hippocrates says, (...). Animalia, quae fell carent,
ut Cervi, sunt longaeva. So meek persons many times live longest: but impatient
persons through fretting discontent bring their bodies into a Consumption.
Suppose, as Job says, Job. 6.12. Your strength was the strength of stones, yet
continual dropping of tears, and drooping under sorrow would bring you down,
and wear you away: for the same Job tells you, Job 14.19. The waters wear the
stones.

(...).
Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi, sed saepe cadendo.
And the wise man tells you, Prove. 12.25. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes
it stoop. Immoderate grief, like a heavy burden laid upon a man, will make him
stoop and break him. Many a man looks wrinkled with sorrow and care, long
before he is wrinkled with age.

Cura facit canos, quamvis homo non habet annos. Let us then, Seneca Cons^l. ad
Po^^^. c. 23.
as an Heathen said, spare such grief as this is (Facilius illi nos dolor iste
ad jiciet, quam illum nobis reducet.) For soon will it send thee to him whom
thou bewailest, than bring him back to thee.

3dly, and lastly, It greatly provokes God. Indeed, A meek and quiet spirit is
in the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. but a froward peevish spirit is
abomination to him; as you may read, Prove. 11.20. and 17.20. and 22.5. So Ps.
18.26. Discontent is a sin that God takes special notice of, Exodus 16.7, 8, 9,
12. So the Apostle tells us, God was not well pleased; The meaning is (for the
words are a (...)) He was highly displeased; with the murmuring Israelites, for
they were overthrown in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.5, 10, compared. This must
needs he hateful to God, for it is a decompounded sin, made up of many bitter
ingredients, as pride, passion, unthankfulness, etc. Sighings, sobbings,
sorrowful exclamations do penetrate the heavens, and enter into the ears of
the Lord of Hosts, but make no good music there. God is thereby provoked to
lengthen our miseries, and adjourn our mercies.

Paula Romana who carried it frowardly and fretfully at death of her Children,
met with many losses of that nature. We say, Impatiens aegrotus crudelem facit
medicum. And so, it is struggling and stubbornness that makes the Father
continue to beat the Child. Indeed God is an indulgent tenderhearted Father to
his Children, Psalm. 103.13. yet he will not burn the Rod, till their stout
stomachs be taken down; How did he pursue Jonah with winds and tempests, nay he
casts him overboard into the sea, and plunged him over head and ears, into the
hell of the Whales belly, never leaving him till he submitted to his will to go
to Niniveh.

Far minora volo, ne graviora feram. Let us bear lesser troubles patiently,
lest God lay greater troubles upon us.

To end this, A man in a seaver, the more he struggles, the more he increases
his pain. A wild Bull in a net, (Isa. 51.20.) instead of breaking forth by
struggling, he more entangles himself. So we gain nothing by our struggling,
impatience, and obstinacy against God, but increase of our miseries. Oh! then,
let us not by any means give passions a loose reign, for ( Phaiton-like, with
his wild Horses) they will do a world of mischief.

Death is very advantageous to the godly. Phil. 1.21. For me to die is gain.
There is a privative and positive benefit that death brings to believers. To
begin with the first; Death frees a believer,

1. From sin. Peccatum peperit mortem, and filia devoravit matrem. Sin brought
in death, ( Romans 5.12. and 6.23.) and death carries out sin; Viper-like, it
devoures that which brought it forth. He that is dead is freed from sin, Romans
6.7. Here indeed is no perfection, 1 John 1.8. Grace is like Gold in the Oar,
mingled with much dross, the most refined soul has some dregs, and is daily
contesting with homebred corruptions. Cum avarit a nobis, cum impudicitia, cum
ira, cum ambitione congressis est. Cyprian. Here the best are continually
afflicted, either for their sins, or with their sins: But death frees them from
all sin. Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, (says St.
Paul) from the body of this death? Why by the death of the body, we are
delivered from sin, which is the body of Death, 1 Cor. 15.26. The last enemy
that shall be destroyed is Death. If sin continued after death, death were not
a believers last enemy. Dictum est primo homini morieres si peccaveris, nunc
dicitur morere ne pecces: nisi peccassent illi non morerentur, peccarent autem
justi nisi moriantur. St. August. de Civitate Dei, Lib. 13. Cap. 3. Whilst we
are in the wilderness of this world, latet Anguis in herba, fiery Serpents
sting us, sins stick close to us, but at death (as St. Paul cast the Viper off
his hand, Acts 28.3, 5. so do) Believers shake off sin. Their dying day is the
funeral of all their Vices, the least of which maks them grieve here, as the
least hair makes the eye to water. After death they are like God himself, in
perfect holiness and righteousness, not having spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.

2. From Satan's temptations. The Devil, like to Joab, makes our miseries his
sport and play, 2 Samuel 2.14. He is the great Peripatetick, going up and down
the World, Job 1.7. and 2.2. This roaring lion is continually ranging for his
prey, 1 Pet. 5.8. He assaulted Christ the Head, Mat. 4.1, etc. and so he does
the members. Quid aliud in mundo quam pugna adversus Diabolum quotidie geritur?
Cypr. The righteous are the white at which the Devil most shoots the Arrows of
temptation. Chrysostom somewhere in his Homilies, has this comparison, (...),
etc. As Pirates upon the Sea set upon the richest Vessels, so Satan seeing a
Vessel fraught with Grace, uses all art, and exercises all violence to master
both the Vessel and the Prize: But in Heaven they shall no more be troubled
with Satan's fiery darts; for the Accuser of the Brethren is cast out, Rev.
12.9, 10. He is cast out, Ejectione firma, and shall never re-enter. He sets
not his ugly Paw upon the pavement of Heaven: The tempter enters not into this
Paradise, for Rev. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles.

3. From Spiritual desertions. The Church like the Moon, has her spots, and
therefore sometimes her Eclipses, so long as she wanders in this Planetary
world. See Isa. 50.10. The Prophet there intimates unto us, that A Child of God
may walk in darkness, and see no light. So it was with David, Psalm. 22.1. with
Asaph, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. with Heman, Psalm. 88. with Ethan, Ps. 89.46. So it was
with Jonah, Jon. 2.2, 4. Nay it was thus with Christ himself, Mat. 27.46. And
thus to want the sense of Gods favor must needs be troublesome, Psalm. 30.7.
Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. So Psalm. 104.29. So Cant. 5.6. My
beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone (says the Spouse, and then it
follows) my soul failed. Egressa est anima mea: She was (as it were) without
her soul, whilst without the sense of Gods favor: But Death frees Believers
from such desertions, They shall be for ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. There
shall be no more suspensions of the light of God's countenance, no more
eclipses of his savor: never cloud more shall interpose betwixt Heaven and
their souls: but the Sun of Righteousness shall shine upon them with
perpendicular rays of comfort to all eternity.

4. From evil Company. It is a sad affliction to live amongst the Wicked, Psalm.
84.10. so Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me, says David, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I
dwell in the tents of Kedar. And Isaiah sadly complains, Isa. 6.5. Woe is me for
I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips. Sad indeed it is to live amongst them, for their wicked
manner of living is an heart-break to the Righteous. Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of
tears run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law. And St. Paul could not
speak of their sins without tears in his eyes, Phil. 3.18. And before this, Lot
was vexed with the filthy conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. See Mr.
Leigh's Crit. Sac. in vocem.
(...) significat oppressus, fatigatus, graviter afflictus: We translate it
vexed: but according to Orig. He was labored against. He labored under it as
under a burden, he was even tired out under their wicked courses: Besides, the
Wicked load the Righteous amongst whom they live, with calumnies, raylings,
revilings, scoffs, jears, taunts, etc. if they run not with them to the same
excess of riot, see 1 Pet. 4.4. like the troubled Seas, they will cast forth mire
and dirt upon them, Isa. 57.20. Thus the old world dealt with Noah that
Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. So David was abused for his goodness,
Psalm. 69.12. he tells us he was spoken against, he was the Drunkards song, and
v. 19. Lord (says he) thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my
dishonor, mine adversaries are all before thee. See the complaint of the
Church, Psalm. 44.14. so 79.4. We are become a reproach to our neighbors, a
scorn and derision to them that are round about us. No wonder it is thus with
the servant, when it was so with the Lord and Master. Christ himself was set
(...), as old Simeon said, Luke 2.34. He was set for a sign that shall be
spoken against. To end this, The Righteous are the mark at which wicked men
shoot their Arrows, even bitter words: but Death takes them out of their
company, and from the reach of their malice. See Job 3.17. There the wicked
(speaking of the Grave) cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest.

5. From bodily Aches and Diseases. The body here is the receptacle of
innumerable distempers. St. Austin tells us, de ipso corpore tot exstant
morborum mala, De Civit. Dei; lib. 22. c. 22.
ut nec libris medicorum cuncta comprehensa. No Book, that ever Physicians
wrote, contains a perfect Narrative of all distempers. Many distempers daily
arise unknown to our forefathers. One (alas!) lies languishing through a
Consumption, another's tortured with the Stone, another with the Gout, another
burnt with a Fever, another complains under Headache, Toothache, etc. some lie
under one distemper, some under another: So that (as one alludes to the speech
of our Savior, Luke 17.37.) Where the body is, there sicknesses and sores as
so many Eagles are preying upon it. And some, by reason of these distempers,
lie under so great misery, that they wish for death, but it comes not; and
would be glad and rejoice exceedingly if they could find the grave, as Job
tells you, Job 3.20, 21, 22. Some with Job, chapter 7.3, 4. Possess months of
vanity, and have wearisom nights appointed for them: when they lie down, they
say, When shall we arise and the night be gone? And they are full of tossings
to and fro unto the dawning of the day. And again v. 13, 14. says Job, When I
say, my Bed shall comfort me, my Couch shall ease my complaint, (as sick people
think to change their pain with changing their place) then thou scarest me with
dreams, and terrifiest me with visions; so that what with frightful dreams when
sleeping, and evil thoughts whilst waking, the sick man takes little rest in
his resting-time, and finds little ease in an easy bed: but now Death frees
them from all pain, Rev. 21.4. There shall be no more sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain. Death frees Believers from heats and
colds, from hunger and thirst, Rev. 7.16, 17. or any thing else that is painful
to the body: It is the best Physician, curing them of all bodily distempers.

6. From troublesome works of Calling. Man at first before the fall was to
labor, Genesis 2.15. Adam was not to live an idle life, but to employ himself
like a Gardener in pruning and dressing the trees and herbs of the Garden, etc.
But this labor would not have been a toil, but a recreation to him, had he not
fallen into sin. For weariness and sweat came as a curse upon him for the
commission of sin, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread, etc. By sweat we understand all manner of labor whether of body or
brain; and this he was doomed unto; because he ate of the forbidden fruit. What
is Man's diet now but bread of carefulness got with the sweat of his brows? what
disquieting projects has sinful man to get worldly things? what riding up and
down, what digging and delving, toyling and moyling is there in the world? some
taking pains in one calling, some in another, and all to get oil to maintain
the lamp of life? but after death there is no such working. Rev. 14.13. Blessed
are the dead that die in the Lord, -- they rest from their labors. (...)
signifies both (...) and (...) Sermon. 46.
Orig. (...), as from troubles of condition, so from labors of calling: as
from pain, so from pains-taking. Mors remedium potius poenae quam vindicta
culpae: says St. Ambrose; for a punishment was it said to man, In the sweat of
thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, i. e. get thy living: but for his comfort
was it added, until thou return to the Earth: for then no more toyling and
wearying our selves about the things of the world. Our sweat as well as our tears
shall then be wiped away. Death gives a Quietus est, it brings to rest. The
body shall no longer be worn with care, when laid up in the common Wardrobe of
the Grave.

7. From Ignorance. Job 11.12. Man is born like a wild Asses Colt, he is a rude
and silly creature. The most intelligent person may complain with Agur of his
bruitishness, Prove. 30.2. David compares himself to a worm, Psalm. 22.6. which
is a poor sandblind creature: The best are ignorant of far more things than
they know: Maxima pars eorum quae scimus, est minima pars eorum quae nescimus:
Our understanding naturally is darkened, and we are alienated from the life of
God, through the ignorance that is in us, Ephesians. 4.18. The Devil, who was a
liar from the beginning, told our first Parents, Genesis 3.5. In the day ye eat
thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil: As though the Tree of Knowledge should be Eyebright to them; but, alas!
by this means they lost their spiritual eyesight. Ever since the fall the Lamp
of Reason burns dim: how busy is Man to gain a little knowledge: and after all
his industry, how staggering is he in the apprehension of Truth! Even God's
dear Children, whilst in this world, see many things darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12.
Orig. (...): many things seem to be a riddle and mystery to them which they
cannot unfold: here they meet with (Arcana Naturae, Scripturae, Providentiae,)
many knots in Nature, Scripture, and Providence, which they cannot untye: but
hereafter when the dust of mortality is wiped from their eyes, and they placed
in Heaven, then shall they see face to face, and know even as they are known:
then shall they perfectly recover their eyesight, and have the perfect use of
their reason. In tuo Lumine videbimus lumen: In thy Light we shall see light,
Psalm. 36.9. And this Light shall be clear without any mixture of Error.

8. And lastly. Death frees Believers from Death. As it was with Christ the
Head, being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion
over him, Romans 6.9. so it is with the members, being once dead, they die no
more. Indeed while they live here, they die daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. for our life
is in a dying condition: Infancy dies in childhood, childhood in youth, youth
in manhood, manhood in old age; we are never at one stay, till dust return to
dust. But when the Righteous die, then they live. Rev. 21.4. There shall be no
more death. Mr. Hill. Life-Everlasting. p. 75.
So that as the Greek Critic said of the Bow, (...), the name signifies life,
but the work was death. We may say the contrary of Death, (...), Its name is
Death, but it brings to Life everlasting: 2 Cor. 5.4. Mortality (at death) is
swallowed up of Life.

I come now to the positive benefit that a Believer receives by death. But
here I may take up that doleful Query of the captivated Jews, Psalm. 137.4. How
shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange Land? how should we who are but
strangers and pilgrims here on Earth, (1 Chronicles. 29.15.) speak of the happiness
that Believers are enstated in when this life is ended. Had I the tongue of
glorified Angels I could not fully express it; and had you the hearts of
glorified Saints, ye could not fully conceive it. David cries out, O how great
(as not able to express it) is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee! Psalm. 31.19. And Isaiah says, (Isa. 64.4.) Since the beginning
of the World men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye
seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him.
And St. John the beloved Disciple, that lay in his Master's bosom ( John 13.23.
and 21.20.) a place near his heart, and thence drank deep of the heavenly
wisdom, tells us, Nemo scit, Rev. 2.17. No man knows it but he that receives
it. St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him: Yea the same person caught up into Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.4. tells
us, he heard (...), unspeakable words, which it is not lawful (or possible) for
a man to utter. Whatever you read of Heaven or future happiness, either in
this or any other Book, whatever you hear of it, either from me or any other
person, falls infinitely short of it, and you will confess as much when you come
to Heaven. As the Queen of Sheba said, 1 King. 10.4, 5, 6, 7. when she had seen
all Solomon's Wisdom, and the House that he had built, etc. she said to the
King, It was a true report that I heard in mine own Land of thy Acts, and of
thy Wisdom: howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had
seen it; and behold, the half was not told me: thy Wisdom, and thy Prosperity
exceeds the Fame which I heard. So when a Child of God shall come to Heaven,
and behold a far greater than Solomon, Mat. 12.42. even the Lord JESUS, he will
find that not a quarter of the joy and glory of Heaven was told him. All that
we can hear, speak, or conceive of it, is but as a drop to the main ocean. Yet
we who have the Light of God's Word gloriously shining amongst us, cannot be
altogether in darkness as to the Inheritance of the Saints in light, (Col.
1.12.) God's little Children (for so Believers are called, 1 John 2.12) can
lisp forth something (though but little) concerning their Father's Kingdom; To
give you then a glimpse (for a full sight here is impossible) of the happiness
that Death invests a Believer in.

1. It brings to the beatifical vision and fruition of the blessed Trinity, so
far as a Dr. Sclaters Fun. Sermon. on 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
finite being (for our humane nature continues still, though glorified) may be
capable to apprehend of that Majesty which is infinite. See Mat. 5.8. John
17.24. 2 Cor. 5.8. We read Genesis 41.14. how Joseph was brought hastily out of
the Dungeon, and came in unto Pharaoh King of Egypt. Sure I am, the soul of a
Believer is no sooner let out of the prison of the body, but is brought to
Heaven, the Presence Chamber of God, who is the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, where we shall see him as he is; so says St. John, 1 John 3.2. And St.
Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 13.12. We shall see him face to face, and know^ him even
as we are known. (...), as Mr. Abr. Wright's Sermon. on Luke 16.9
one observes, is, Nota similitudinis, non aequalitatis: As God knows me, so
shall I know God; but I shall not know God so as God knows me: It is not
quantum but sicut, not as much but as truly; as the Fire does as truly shine as
the Sun shines, though it shine not out so far, nor to so many purposes.
Believers at death know God perfectly, though not comprehensively: for as Mr.
Frost at the end of his Sermon on Acts 17.23.
another Divine says well, God is infinitae Veritatis, Cognoscibilitatis, as
well as Entitatis, and so must either lay aside his Infinity, and cease to be
God, or elevate us above the condition of finite creatures, before we can be
capable of any comprehensive vision, which supposes an equal commensuration
between the object and the faculty: but we shall know God so fully, see Christ
so face to face, as that we shall be perfectly happy. The Wisemen rejoiced to
see the Star that directed to Christ, Mat. 2.10. What exceeding Joy will it
then be to see the Sun of Righteousness, (for so Christ is called, Mal. 4.2.)
Old Simeon upon the sight of Christ in the flesh, got him into his arms, and
desired to die, Luke 2.28, 29. We read of some, John 12.21. that came to
Philip and said, Sir, we would see Jesus. And to see Christ in the flesh, was
one of the three things St. Austin much desired. And we read, John 20.20. The
Disciples were glad when they saw the Lord. It was matter of joy to them to see
Christ after he was risen from the dead. Now if it was so joyful a sight to
see Christ in the flesh, and to see him after he was risen before his
Ascension: What a joyful sight will it be to see Christ in Glory, sitting at
his Father's righthand? If the enjoyment of God's Spirit in the Ordinances be
so sweet to a Child of God, that one days communion with God there, is better
than a thousand, Psalm. 84.10. what will it be to enjoy the immediate Presence
of God for ever? here the Soul's Beloved shows himself as it were through the
Lattice, Cant. 2.9. (for clear visions of God are too glorious for this state)
but hereafter he will show sorth himself in his full glory. To end this, Moses
prayed, Lord show me thy Glory, Exodus 33.18. To whom God answered, v. 20. Thou
can not see my face, for there shall no man see me and live. Whereupon St.
Austin meditating, cried out, Moriar Domine ut te videam, Lord let me die that
I may see thee. So that you see, Death brings a Believer to a sight of him.

2. Death brings a Believer to the society of glorified Saints and Angels. Heb.
12.22, 23.
When godly Friends depart, they go to better company; from Church-militant to
Church-triumphant. We find, Genesis 15.15. compared with Genesis 25.8. Abraham was
gathered to godly Fathers, Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noah, etc. that went before him.
So it is said, Isa. 57.1. The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to
heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. The righteous man's perishing is but a taking
away, Or, (according to the Original, (...) Collecti) a gathering to their
Fathers and godly Friends. Many shall come (says Christ) from the East and
from the West (yea, and from the North and South, from all the quarters of the
World, Luke 13.28, 29.) and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 8.11. I have read how Cato comforted himself in his
old age with this consideration, that he should depart from the rude multitude,
and go to the company of blessed Souls, O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud
animorum concilium coetumque proficiscar, and cum ex hac turba and colluvione
discedam. And Socrates dying, rejoiced to go to the place where he should see
Homer, Hesiod, and other Worthies who lived in the Age before him.

Sure it will be very comfortable to Believers to see Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, Job, David, St. Paul, St. Austin, St. Jerome, and innumerable others in
the Kingdom of Heaven, where, jointly with the blessed Angels, as so many
Quiristers, they sing continually divine Anthems of praise, Rev. 4.8, 10, 11.
and 19.4, 5. David counted the Godly, The only Excellent, in whom was all his
delight, Psalm. 16.3. If it be so delightful to be in company with them here,
where the best of their actions are mingled with many imperfections; Oh! how
delightful will it be to be in their company in Heaven, where they serve God
perfectly without sinning, day and night in his Temple, Rev. 7.15? We find,
Luke 16.2^. how that Lazarus departed, is carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom; and then, v. 25. It is said, he is comforted: And no wonder; for if to
be with glorified Saints and blessed Angels be not a comfort, I pray you tell
me what is?

3dly and lastly. Death brings a Believer to joy unspeakable. We read, Heb.
12.2. Christ for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross. And Saints
are said, Rev. 7.9, 13. To be clothed in white Robes. Now white, as it is an
Emblem of purity, so likewise of joy: And this heavenly joy is so great, Dr.
Stuarts Cathol. Divinity, page 249, 250.
that we cannot express it. St. Austine said of Jerome, Quae Hieronymus
nescivit, nullus hominum unquam scivit, that which Jerome knew not, no man ever
knew. And St. Cyril said also to St. Austin, in magnifying St. Jerome, That
when a Catholic Priest disputed with an Heretic, and cited a passage of St.
Jerome, and the Heretic said, Jerome lied, instantly he was struck dumb. Yet
of the joy of Heaven, this learned St. Jerome, would adventure to say nothing,
no not when he was divested of his mortal Body; for as soon as he dyed at
Bethleem, he came instantly to Hippo, St. Austins Bishopric, and though he
told him, Hieronymi anima sum, I am the soul of that Jerome, to whom thou art
now writing o^ the joys and glory of Heaven; Mr. Abr. Wright's Sermon. on Luke
16.9
yet he said no more then this, Quid quaeris brevi immittere vasculo totum
mare? Why go thou about to pour the whole Sea into a Thimble? this is easier
than to comprehend the joy and glory of Heaven in this Life. If all sublunary
delights were put together, yet were they but as a Candle to the Sun, or Drop
to the main Ocean, if compared with Heavenly joys. And whatever we deliver on
this point comes, as far short of the Truth it self, as the Picture of the Sun
in the Wall, does of the greatness and brightness of it in its Orb. Gaudium
erit in fine, sed gaudium erit sine fine. Bern. It shall be joy in the end, but
joy without end. Carnal joy of wicked men is brutish and sensual, Eccles. 2.2.
I said of laughter, it is mad; and of mirth, what does it? It is neither true
nor lasting. It is not true, for says the same wiseman, In the midst of
laughter, the heart is sorrowful, Prove. 14.13. Nor is it lasting, for The
pleasures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11.25. But now heavenly joy is both
true and lasting. For, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. And Psalm. 36.8, 9. They shall
be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the River of thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain of Life.
They shall lie at the fountain, and be for ever bathing themselves in Rivers of
Pleasures that flow from the everlasting Fountain. The joy that comes streaming
into the soul of a Believer, that has made his peace with God, it passes all
understanding, Phil. 4.7. It is joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Yet this is but a dark representation of heavenly joy. God indeed gives his
People here a little of the hidden Manna of joy, but hereafter he will give
into their bosoms, good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running
over, as expression is, Luke 6.38. Tanta est dulcedo coelestis gaudii (says
St. Austin) ut si una guttula diffluerit in infernum totam amaritudinem inferni
absorberet. The joys of heaven (says Mr. Strode's Anatom. of Mortality, p.
294, 295.
another) are so many, that God only can number them, so great that he only
can aestimate them, of such variety and perfection that this world has nothing
comparable unto them; they are so great that they cannot be measured, so long
that they cannot limited, so many that they cannot be numbered, so precious
that they cannot be valued; yet we shall see them without weariness, love them
without measure, and praise them without end. It is such joy as our Lord and
Master has: And because too great to enter into us, he bids us enter into it;
Mat. 25.23. Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. O joy surpassing all other joy, when shall I enjoy thee!

Thus courteous Reader, I have, like the searchers of Canaan, brought thee a
cluster of Grapes, a taste as it were of the plentiful Vintage, which thou
may expect in the heavenly Canaan.

Now considering these manifold benefits that come by death, both privative and
positive, we may conclude on better grounds than the heathen did, that the dead
are blessed.

Faelices nimium quibus est fortuna peracta
Jam sua --
Blessed they are, and that by a voice from heaven, who dye in the Lord, Rev.
14.13. In Domino, i. e. in Domini favore. Happy they are that dye in the Lords
favor: Death is so sanctified in Christ's death, that of a curse it is changed
into a blessing; Christ tasted deaths bitter Cup, and sucked out the venom of
it.

Now then (to conclude this Chapter) if death be so advantageous to Believers
upon the account of Christ; Let us not sorrow as without hope for those that
sleep in him, 1 These. 4.13, 14. If the dead in the Lord could speak, they would
say as our Savior did, to the women that lamented him: Luke 23.27, 28. Weep
not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your Children. You and yours are
in the valley of Bochim, subject to sin, sorrow, devils assaults, wicked men's
rage, suspensions of the light of Gods countenance, etc. weep then for your
selves and your children, that are thus tossed upon the waves of a troublesome
world: but weep not for us, who are at rest in the Haven of Heaven.

Methinks dear Friends, these several Considerations, as David's Harp, should
charm down all passions and distempers of spirit that arise at loss of Friends:
They may be called Eshcol, for they are a whole cluster of Grapes, Numb. 13.24.
Press them by Meditation, and squeeze out the wine that is in them to your
comfort.

CHAP. III. Several Apologies answered.
NOtwithstanding what I have said to make us patient at death of Friends, me
thinks I hear several complaining, every one thinking their burden greatest;
and they want not arguments and pleas to aggravate their sorrows. Every sin
hides it self under some Fig-leaf Excuse, and this sin of Discontent at death
of Friends has several Apologies; Let us discuss the chief of them. I know
most commonly sorrow stops its ears against the sweet charms of Reason: yet
for father satisfaction of the discontented, I shall give in Replys to several
Pleas, and according to my ability I shall faithfully debate the case.

And to begin first with complaints that Parents take up at loss of Children;
for they usually are most discontented.

One cries out, My Child was still-born, or died presently after it was born,
1. Apology answ.
and which most of all troubles me, it died unbaptized.

John 16.21. A woman when she is in travel, has sorrow, because her hour is
come; but as soon as she is delivered of her child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. The sight of a living child
is the best cordial that can be given to a fainting woman under her pain and
travel: but if the child be still-born, or suddenly expiring, the pangs of
grief conceived hereat, are greater to the tender mother than pangs of travel:
For the former pangs at most do but rend the flesh, but these inward throes do
tear the very soul, Luke 2.35.

Yet for your comfort, consider these ensuing particulars.

1. Consider, He that has taken this Child away, can give another. God gave
Eve another seed, another son instead of Abel, Genesis 4. last. God took away
Job's children, as you read Job 1. but he gave him as many more afterward,
Job 42.13. God's hand is not shortened, nor grows he infirm in the latter end of
the world: He can do the like for thee if it please him.

2. Consider, If your Child had lived, Moses-like, it had been exposed to the
water of Affliction. For, as St. Austin says, Aug. Ser. de bono pat.
Infans nondum loquitur and tamen prophetat; The poor Infant that cannot speak,
yet by crying when it comes into the world, prophesies of its future condition,
as very lamentable. It cries as soon as born, and cannot laugh (as some
observe) till it has been forty days in the world: And little cause it has
(God-wot) to laugh then, for it sleeps by fits and starts; either cold starves
it, or heat overcomes it, or hunger pines it, or wind pains it, sickness,
sores, and teeth-breeding torture it. When it begins to go (if with
Mephibosheth it be not lame on its feet, 2 Samuel 9.13.) it may meet with many a
knock: And afterward it is beset with briars and thorns of temptations and
troubles. So that in time (if thy Child had lived) it might have complained
with Job, chap. 3.11. Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the
ghost when I came out of the belly? for now should I have lain still, and been
quiet, I should have slept, then had I been at rest, v. 13. so Job 6.8, 9. and
10.18, 19. he still harps upon the doleful string, and continues his pitiful
complaint as weary of life. Put case thy Child had not been so sorely
afflicted, yet no mothers Child can escape scot-free: for, Job 5.7. Man is born
unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward; Blow the coal, and you shall see the
sparks fly upward.

(...).
Haec enim levium Lex est.
Duport (...) in loc.
It is the nature of sparks to fly upwards: so it is ordinary for man to be in
trouble. So Job 14.1. That is true of Boethius, In hoc vitae salo circundantibus
agitamur procellis: Whilst we are in this life we are tossed on a sea of
troubles. Shall we grieve that our Child is come so soon to the shore, and
freed from the winds and waves of care and trouble?

3. Consider, If your Child had lived, it would have been matter of pains and
care to you. What great care do Parents take? what great pains are they at to
provide for Children? Prove. 13.22. 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Timothy 5.8. Nulli parentibus
magis noxii, quam filii nimis amati. Salvian. ad Eccl. Cathol. lib. 3. p. 435.
The care of the Mother for the little Child is great, she has troublesome
days and wakeful nights in the nursing of it: How does the Father cark and
care for its Education and future Portion: The care of both eats out many times
the heart of their Religion. St. Jerome reports of Metania, who when she saw her
Husband dead, presently before he was cold, had two Children died also:
whereupon she said, Expeditius sum tibi servitura, Domine, quia tanto me onere
liberasti; I will now serve thee more readily, being delivered from many
encumberances.

4. Consider, If this Child had lived, it had been a great question whether you
might have had any comfort of it or not. Who knows whether it might have proved
a wiseman or a fool? Children are certain cares, but uncertain comforts. Some
Children, Viper-like, seek the death of those that were a means to give them
life. Dr. Vanes Wisdom and Innocence, p. 143.
Hecuba when with child of Paris, dreamed she was brought to bed of a
Firebrand, and so indeed he proved afterward. Our first Parents had great
hopes that their firstborn would have been a comfort to them, and therefore
gave him an honorable name, Genesis 4.1. calling him Cain, that signifies a
Possession. They looked upon him as a choice Possession, but he proved a very
wicked person; and, to the great grief of his Parents, murdered his Brother
Abel, v. 8. How was Eli crossed in his Hophni and Phineas, see 1 Samuel 2.12. and
1 Samuel 3.13. compared. David promised himself some happiness in his son
Absalom, which name signifies a Father of Peace; but the Child proved a Father
of War and Misery to him; 2 Samuel 16.11. David said to Abishai, and to all his
Servants, Behold, my Son which came forth of my bowels, seeks my life. So
Adonijah, whom his Father David had not displeased at any time, even this his
Darling usurps his Fathers Kingdom, as you may see 1 Kin. 1.5, 6. Many times
aged Parents are forced to complain, as the Tree did in the Fable, that it was
rent and torn and split asunder with the same Wedg that was cut off from its
own Body. Children many times are living Monuments of Disgrace to their
Parents. Mic. 7.6. The Son dishonors the Father the Daughter rises up
against her Mother: So that instead of finding Honey, thou might have met
with a Sting. To end this, the Wiseman says, Prove. 17.21. He that begets a
Fool, does it to his sorrow; and the Father of a Fool has no joy. And v. 25. A
foolish Son is a grief to his Father, and bitterness to her that bear him. And
who knows but thy Child might have proved such a one?

5. Lastly, consider, It had been better for the greatest part in the world
they had died as soon as they were born. St. John tells us, The whole World (i.
e. the greatest part of the World) lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Few there
be that serve God: And if we serve him not, as Christ said of Judas, Mat.
26.24. It had been good for us if we had not been born: Or, like Aristotle's
Ephemeron, or Jonah's Gourd, we had perished the same day or night that we came
into the world: For the longer we live, the more sin we commit, and the greater
will be our damnation at last. Surely an untimely birth is better than he, that
comes in with vanity, and departs in darkness, Eccl. 6.3, 4. Surely, The day of
death is better than the day of ones birth, Eccles. 7.1. And the Heathen, as
though he had lighted his Candle at this Torch, said right, Optimum non nasci,
proximum quam cito mori: It is best not to be born; or being born, to die soon:
for by this means poor mortals are freed from much sin and misery. I conclude
this with that of Lactantius, Lactant. de opificio hominis. c. 4.
Stultissimi sunt qui de morte immatura quaeruntur; They are Fools in the
Superlative degree that complain because Friends die soon.

But my chid dyed unbaptized?

Act. 2.39. The Promise is to you and to your children etc. Romans 11.16. 1 Cor.
7.14. See Mr. Attersal on Book of Numbers page 1081.
Unto Infants belongs the promise of Grace, the forgiveness of sins, the
regeneration of the Spirit, the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.13, 14. And therefore they ought by no means to be
denied the outward sign and ceremony, which is the least part of the Sacrament:
if the things signified belong to them, who shall dare to debar them of the
outward sign? It is the duty of Parents to bring their children to Baptism,
which is the Seal of the Covenant, and Sacrament of admission or entrance into
the Church. Besides, who knows not but Circumcision was a type of Baptism, Col.
2.11, 12. or that Baptism succeeded in the room of it? now we know children
were circumcised the eighth day, Genesis 17.12. so 21.4. (before that time the
child was too weak to bear the pain being in the blood of the mother) then the
flesh was consolidated. Now under the Gospel God has left Baptism to
discretion of Parents, and not tied them strictly to the observance of a day:
but let not Parents create needless delays to baptize the Child, Mr. Fuller in
his Infants Advocat.
Ne quod differatur auferatur, lest God in the interim take the Child from
them; In which case faith Mr. Fuller, as I will not be Judge to condemn the
Child, so, should I be one of the Jury, I would not aquit the Father. St.
Austin was called durus Pater Infantum; and sure he was an hard-hearted Father
to Infants, for his opinion was (as I have read) that children that dyed
unbaptized were damned. Indeed we read Genesis 17.14. The uncircumcised Man-Child,
whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from
his people: he has broken my Covenant. Certainly this place is not to be
interpreted of the infant breaking the Covenant, who can do nothing to the
keeping of it: vid. Musculum in loc. page 407, 408.
They therefore are here threatened by whose default Curcumcision was omitted;
or it may be understood of those not circumcised in childhood, if they should
after come to years of discretion, and refuse Circumcision, they were to be cut
off, and looked upon as breakers of the Covenant. But to come home to you

1. Consider, It is in the want of Baptism as in the want of Circumcision. The
want of Circumcision, except in case of contempt or wilful neglect, was not so
dangerous, Jos. 5.7. Circumcision (as may be gathered from that text) was
omitted for forty years in the wilderness, and (as some observe) not reproved
in Scripture. Indeed we say Contemptus damnat, the contempt of the Ordinance is
dangerous, without repentance and deep humiliation for it, (for God was
displeased with Moses because he neglected to circumcise his son, Exodus 4.24.)
but not the want of it when it was against your will.

2. Consider David's child, he lived not to recieve the seal of Circumcision set
upon him (for he dyed the seventh day, 2 Samuel 12.18. And it came to pass on the
seventh day the Child dyed. Some understand the 7th day from the Child's
sickness; others, in my conceit more rightly, understand it the seventh day
from the birth of it, so that the Child dyed before it was circumcised) yet v.
23. he had hopes of the Child's eternal welfare and therefore wipes his eyes
and rests contented. Indeed Baptism under the Gospel requires not adjournment
to the eighth day, as Circumcision did under the Law: But if your Child dyed
suddenly, unexpectedly, before the Minister could be procured, and your desire
was that your Child should be Baptized, surely you are herein excusable, for
God hears the very desire of the humble, Psalm. 10.17.

3. And lastly, consider, Though we be bound to observe Gods Ordinance, yet God
himself is not tied to the Sacrament. As a most learned and pious Bishop said,
That Spirit which works by means will not be tied to means. Bp. Hall, 5th
Decad. Epistle 4th.
-- Cast your eyes upon that good thief, good in his death, though in his life
abominable; he was never washed in Jordan, yet is received into Paradise: his
soul was foul with rapines and injustice, yea bloody with murders: And yet
being scoured only with the blood of his Savior, not with water of Baptism, it
is presented glorious to God. Thus, as St. Austin says, Non minus sine
Sacramentis salvatus est latro, quam cum Sacramentis condemnatus est Judas.
Thus God who usually works by the Ordinances, can also work without them.

2d Apology answered.
Another cries out, This Child that God has taken away was my Darling, the
Child I most affected, as Jacob did Joseph, Genesis 37.3. I could have wished God
had taken some other of my children, so he had but spared this.

that thou have lost a Child that thou most affectedst above all the rest of
thy children: Yea and it is to be feared more then God too. It is, I concieve,
lawful to love one child above another, (though it be not prudence to express
it too fondly for fear of exasperating the rest, Genesis 37.3, 4. Col. 3.21.) thou
may and ought to love that child most, which is most like thy Maker.
Christ loved all his Disciples, Joh. 13.1. but John eminently, transcendently
above the rest ( John 13.23. and 20.2. and 21.20.) because, according to his
name, he was most gracious. We may then love our children dearly, Salv. ad
Eccles. Cathol. l. 1. p. 347
more then any other outward possessions. (Non Solum amandos dicimus filios,
sed precipue ac super omnia amandos, nec quicquam his omnino anteponendum, nisi
Deum solum.) But we must love no Child more then God: If we do, God will (if he
bear special love to us) take away that little idol we too much dote upon, that
he may be loved and admired the more, and the creature the less. God cannot
away with Corrivals; he calls for the Heart, Prove. 23.26. and will have
intensiveness of Affection, Matthew. 22.37. and therefore removes from you that
Child which was as a skreen to keep off the heat of your love from him: Had
thou then loved thy Child less, thou might have enjoyed him longer. Parents
may kill their Children by over-loving them, as well as by over-laying them.
Blame then thy self who too fondly lovedst thy Child, but blame not God who
took away thy Child for thy good, lest thy soul should eternally miscarry.

And whereas thou say, thou could have wished he had taken some other of
thy children, so he had but spared this.

Such kind of speeches are very offensive to God. It is not for silly man to
prescribe, but to submit to God. Who art thou that replyest against God in his
providential dispensations, Romans 9.20? As God makes all in wisdom, Psa. 104.24.
So he orders all things in wisdom, Ephesians. 1.11. Who works all things after the
counsel of his own will. He knows when he means to shoot, what Arrow in his
Quiver to choose: he sits at the Helm of this World, guiding all things in
Wisdom; so that when things fall not out as we would have them, yet as God
would: And, as Salv. lib. 1. De Gub. Dei page 23.
Salvian speaks, Summa justitia est voluntas Dei, His Will is the Rule of
Rectitude, and therefore cannot do any thing unjustly, Job 34.10. Therefore we
should say under cross providence that befall us, as 2 Samuel 15.26. Behold,
here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. We read 2 Samuel 3.36.
Whatsoever the King did, pleased all the people. Surely what the Kings King,
the great Lord and Master of Heaven and Earth is pleased to do, should please
us. For can poor mortals (as we are) be better disposed of then by Wisdom and
Goodness it self?

Liberame Domine a meipso, Austin.
2. Consider, God cannot punish a people more then in giving them their wills
and desires. Israelites would have Quails, Ps. 78.29, 30, 31. They did eat and
were well filled, for he gave them their own desire, they were not estranged
from their lust, but (this But carries the arrows of Gods indignation in its
side) while the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them,
and slew the fattest of them, Psa. 10.3 Ps. 81.12.
etc. Rachel says, Give me children, or else I die, Genesis 30.1. God gives her
children, and she dies for it; for Benjamin that was her second child, and made
up her wish, hastneth her death, as you may read, Genesis 35.16, 17, 18. before
Rachel came to her journey's end she traveled and had hard labor; sore travel
indeed, for she went to her long home, she journeyed into another world. The
Apostle says, They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, etc.
1 Timothy 6.9. Our own will (if God should grant it) would soon ensnare us and
occasion our destruction. I end this with that of a learned Dr Abbot upon Jonah
4.3, 4. Lect. 26.
Doctor: God oft-times in love denies those things which we wish. Jonah in a
pet wishes for death, Jon. 4.3, 4. he would needs die, because the people of
Niniveh lived: Had God taken him at his word, how unprovided had he been (being
clothed with frowardness) to appear before so high a Judge! with what comfort
could he have stood before the dreadful Tribunal! If God should suffer us to be
our own carvers, we should soon cut our own fingers.

3dly and lastly, consider; A Christian of a right metal and stamp, one that
has the image and superscription of God upon him, and will pass current in
Heaven, he is content God should choose his cross for him, both for kind and
duration. Phil. 4.11. St. Paul had commenced Master in the Art of Divine
Contentment. I have learned (says he) (...), in whatever state I am, in
whatever things befall me, as poverty, sickness, reproach, loss of friends,
etc. to be content. Thus Christians should be content to be at God's finding,
and their heavenly Father's disposing.

Another cries out, 3d Apology answered.
I have lost a beautiful Child: Nature was very indulgent to him, endowed him
almost with all symetry imaginable; he had that by Nature, which others
counterfeit by Art; he had a real, no adulterate or painted comeliness. How
seemly was every part proportioned! what a curiously-wrought tabernacle was his
body! Psalm. 139.14, 15. He was curiously wrought in the lowest part of the
Earth; i. e. See Dr Hamona on that place.
in his Mother's belly: He had (...), a right position of colors, and
disposition of members, which two make up a complete beauty. Pulchritudo est
membrorum omnium apta figura cum quadam coloris suavitate. Pareus in Genesis 39.6.
Now to have a Jewel so resplendent and sparkling, so suddenly snatched out of
my bosom, this troubles me.

David discomposed at the news of beautiful Absoloms death, 2 Samuel 18.33. And
Jacob before him was inordinately moved at the supposed death of his beautiful
Joseph, Genesis 37.33, 34, 35. But let such consider,

1. Beautiful persons many times die soonest. It is ordinary for fair flowers
suddenly to wither, Isa. 40.6, 7. Jam. 1.10, 11. 1 Pet. 1.24. Venice-Glasses
are more brittle than Brass-Pots, or Earthen-Vessels. There is rottenness at
the core of the most delicious Fruit, that makes it suddenly fall to the Earth.

2. Consider, If thy Child had lived, its beauty might have exposed it to
manifold temptations and troubles. Beauty is a bait and provocation to
filthiness: hence that of Solomon, Prove. 6.25. Lust not after her beauty in
thine heart, neither let her take thee with her eyelids. Beautiful Sarah was
taken by Pharaoh, Genesis 12.14, etc. and Abimelech, Genesis 20. And had been much
abused by them both, had not God by a strong hand rescued her from the rage of
their lust. In what a sad condition was defloured Dinah, and how much evil
ensued upon it, you read Genesis 34. How was beautiful Joseph assaulted by his
Mistress, Genesis 39.6, 7. and had been supplanted, had he not had inward as well
as outward beauty, ( Joseph fuit pulcher forma, sed pulchrior virtutibus;
Pareus in Genesis 39.) Bathsheba's beauty occasioned David's committing folly with
her, 2 Samuel 11.1, 2, etc. and what mischief ensued, you may read there in the
murdering of Uriah. So beautiful Thamar being defiled, was in a most
disconsolate desolate condition, and bloodshed ensued upon it, 2 Samuel 13.1, 2,
etc. Outward beauty without inward grace, is but fuel to maintain the fire of
lust. This fond thing we call Beauty, is, as Pindarus terms it, (...), The
Venerial Goddesse's Ambassador. So that, as the Wiseman says, Prove. 11.22. As
a Jewel of Gold in a Swines snout, so is a fair Woman that is without
discretion. So then,

3dly, Consider, Thy fair Child might have had foul Conditions. Some have
thought Beauty to be like a Circle, whose center they made goodness: and they
were of opinion, that as a Circle cannot be without a Center, no more can a
comely body be without good conditions. And the Hebricians often call that fair,
which is good, and that good which is fair: As Austin says Consuetudo est
Scripturae speciosos corpore bonos vocare. Yet it is evident by Scripture, and
Experience, that the fairest persons have many times the foulest conditions.
Being like painted Sepulchers containing much corruption, or like some weeds in
the Corn-field, making a gaudy show, yet are very hurtful. Saul was beautiful,
so was Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.25. Goodly persons both, yet bad men. So Adonijah
that would take the Crown from his Father's head, was a goodly man. As you may
see 1 Kings 1.5, 7. compared: he was a goodly man, fair in face and proper in
body: A goodly man he was, but no good man. And for the Female sex, who were
worse then Dalilah, Jezebel, and yet who more beautiful? Outward beauty is at
best but a common gift, given as other outward blessings, to bad, as well as
good, Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3. So then

4thly. Consider, God respects not any for outside beauty. See Isa. 3.24. Amos
8.13. Indeed we say, Formosa facies muta commendatio est, An handsome face is
silent letters of commendation, it draws the eyes and affections of men: but
yet it works not upon God. For 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord sees not as man sees,
for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart.
God values not any for beauty or any other outward additament.

5thly, Consider, Beauty is a very uncertain possession; like a Rose, the cold
soon nips it, or heat withers it, or wind shakes it, the beauty of it is soon
gone, Psa. 103.15, 16.

O formose puer, nimium ne creed colori.

Virg. Eclog. 2. The wise man tells us Beauty is vain, Pro. 31.30. Anceps forma
bonum, mortalibus, exigui donum breve temporis, Senec. A fit of the Small Pox
(which the purest complexions are most subject to) may make such graves in thy
child's face, as may bury (in case it live) all its beauty. An old Jezebel,
albeit she be painted, 2 King. 9.30. is full of aged wrinkles. So that if
sickness do not waste it, a few years will.

6thly and lastly, to shut up this, we say, and that truly Gratior est pulchro
veniens de corpore virtus.

It is an exceeding great ornament to have inward Graces of the Soul, attended
with outward gracefulness of the body, to have a Veniunt ad candida tecta
Columbae. Ovid.
Dovelike soul, in a fair Tabernacle: Now if thy child, was a proper child, or
exceeding fair, as it is said of Moses Heb. 11.23. Acts 7.20. If he was (as it
is according to the Orig. (...)) fair to God, or in his sight, then the King of
Heaven took delight in thy child's beauty, Psalm. 45.11. and has taken away this
Jewel out of the mire of this world, that it might shine in Heaven; And have
thou cause to be discontented at this? Surely no.

Another cries out, 4th Apology answered.
This Child of mine that God has taken away was very hopeful, an ingenious,
witty Child, Divine Sentences dropped from his his lips like honey ((...). Hom.)
He would have been an excellent pattern of Virtue; he was of a very sweet
disposition, mild, humble, temperate, modest, chaste, affable, etc. and what
was said of Bonaventure, might be said of him, (if it be not a saying too
hyperbolical) In hoc homine non peccavit Adam, Adam's depraved nature was
scarce visible in him: Or, as Greg. Naz. said of Basil the Great, (...) (...),
he held forth Learning beyond his age, and affixed composure of Manners beyond
his Learning: Or, as was said of Titus Vespasian, he was Deliciae Humani
generis, the Darling and Delight of Mankind: he would have come in time to
great preferment; he would have been a Jewel fit to hang at a Kings ear. This
Plant, being watered by Heavens blessing, might have shot up in short time to
great perfection: but, alas! it is of a sudden cut down by the merciless sith
of Death. And this troubles me.



Consider, Many seem hopeful and virtuous, Dum aetas, metus, Magister
prohibeant; Ter. being young under Tutors and Governors; but when once the
reigns are laid on their necks, like Phaeton's wild Horses, Ovid. Metam.
Sponte sua properant, labor est inhibere volantes. They are too apt to fly out
into licentious courses; They many times meet with evil company, which corrupts
good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. Blazing Comets may shine for a while more bright
than fixed Stars. Both Sacred and Profane Story abounds with instances of this
nature. Joash was seemingly good during the life of his Uncle Jehoiada, 2 Chro.
24.2, etc. but he being dead, his devotion died with him, for he became an
Idolater, v. 16, 17, etc. So Uzziah sought the Lord in the days of Zechariah,
2 Chronicles. 26.5. who steered him in the right way to happiness: but afterward
his hypocrisy appeared, v. 16. So Judas carried it fairly for a time, as may
be gathered from Mat. 26.21, 22. The Disciples there had good thoughts of him,
better than of themselves; and yet he was a damnable hypocrite, Mat. 27.3. etc.
I might tell you of Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. of Phygellus and
Hermogenes, 2 Timothy 1.15. of Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. and many others, who at first
were seemingly religious, yet have departed from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1.

Nero was hopeful in his youth, Quinquennium Neronis.
and his first five years of reigning fairly promising, but afterward he
became a most detestable Tyrant. It was said of Antiochus Epiphanes, that he
was a good child, an ill youth, and a wicked old man, called in derision (...),
which signifies a mad man. Julian the great Professor, became an Apostate, and
a great Persecutor of God's Church, and at last died blaspheming, Vicisti o
Galilaee. Pelagius who (as some think) was fostered and brought up in Cheshire,
was at first very hopeful, but afterward became an Arch-Haeretick. Prosper
Aquitanus in this Verse of his calls him the British Adder, Pestifero vomuit
coluber sermon Britannus. Mr. Leigh's Observations on Cheshire

A British Snake with venomous tongue,
Has vomited his Poison strong.
He died an enemy to the free grace of God. We have many sad instances of this
point in our days; God may complain of many in England, as once of Israel,
Hos. 8.3. They have cast off the thing that is good. And as of Ephraim and
Judah, Hos. 6.4. Their goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it
goes away. Many that were seemingly religious, and forward for praying,
reading, hearing, receiving the Sacrament, etc. now have left off the thing
that is good. But there are many sad Texts for such Apostates to champ upon.
See Psalm. 125.5. Ezekiel. 18.24. Hos. 7.13. Luke 11.24, 25, 26. 1 Timothy 5.12. Heb.
6.4, 5, 6. Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 37. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Their case must needs
be sad: for, Corruption optimi pessima, The purest flesh putrified is most
loathsome: And the most generous Wine, degenerated, makes the sharpest Vinegar:
Buxtorf. floril. Hebraicum.
(...) Acetum filius Vini. These bring an ill report on Religion, as the Spies
did on Canaan, Numb. 13.32. as though there was no sweetness and comeliness in
the ways of God. Hi sunt Christiani ad contumeliam Christi, Salv. lib. 8. de
Guber. page 290.
as Salvian speaks. These cause the enemies of God to blaspheme, as David's
partial backsliding did, 2 Samuel 12.14. Romans 2.24. 1 Pet. 2.15. The fall of such
causes others to fall with them; as the fall of Sampson was the fall of many
Philistines. In a word, these are the greatest Factors for the Devil, and his
Angels, who were the first Apostates, Jude v. 6. Well then, this Child of
thine, like some buds fairly promising, might have been blasted, and not come
to greater perfection. He might have fallen into gross sins, or grievous errors,
wounding conscience, and staining reputation, and this would have been just
matter of grief to thee.

But if thy Child was really gracious, which is more than thou can be assured
of (for, as the Apostle says of Sylvanus, 1 Pet. 5.12. a faithful Brother, as
I suppose: so our knowledge of others sincerity is but opiniative, no certain
knowledge) But suppose, I say, he was really gracious, and so might have
persevered unto the end, as these Scriptures show, ( Psalm. 125.1. Isa. 40.31.
and 41.10. Jer. 32.39, 40. Mat. 16.18. and 24.24. John 10.28, 29. and 13. 1.
Romans 8.33, 34. and Romans 11.29. Col. 3.3. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Pet. 1.5. 1 John 2.19,
27 compared. Jude 1.) yet he is not the less mortal for being the more
gracious; Nay, God usually takes them away the sooner from this miserable
sinful world, which is not worthy of them, Heb. 11.38. Dr Abbot Lect. 28. on
Jonah p. 594.
Sudden glories (says a learned Doctor) decay suddenly: fruit soonest ripe is
soonest rotten: when the greenness, freshness and shade is extraordinary, fear
some worm which may gnaw, as it did Jonah's refreshing Gourd. We know, sweetest
fruit is soonest gathered. Thus the Child Abijah dies young, because in him was
found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam,
1 King. 4.12, 13. Those that are good betimes, are apt Scholars, (...).
which having quickly learnt the lessons of Christianity, God their Master has
set them, have leave to go home the sooner. God gathered thy Child betimes,
because it was ripe betimes. We read Mark 4.29. how the husbandman, when the
fruit is ripe, immediately puts in the sickle, because the harvest is come: so
God puts in the sickle of death when Children are ripe, and fit to be taken
away. We judge him to blame, who when his fruit is ripe, does not gather it:
And shall we blame God for taking away relations when they are fit for him?

And whereas you say, He might have come to great preferment.

1. Consider, this is very uncertain. Many times men of great worth, pass their
days in obscure privacy; Salvian lib. 4. de Gubern. Dei. pa. 114.
and men of least desert, are highly promoted. Si bonus est quispiam quasi
malus spernitur: si malus est quasi bonus honoratur. Haman the Agagite, one
base by birth, and base in life; like a dunghill vapor, was extracted to an
high place of dignity by the influential Sunshine of his Princes favor; and in
the mean time godly, honest, loyal-hearted Mordecai, notwithstanding his good
service, is forgotten, Esth. 6.1, 2, 3. till almost too late to remember him.

2. Consider, Those that are in favor may he present lie under a cloud. Favor
is deceitful, Prove. 30.31. The Court is like Glass or Ice, cum maxim splendet,
frangitur; when it shines brightest, then it is the brittlest. It is called
(...), Phil. 2.3. vainglory: It carries vanity in its name. Joab who was once
the greatest about David, is by David's appointment designed to execution, 1
King. 2.5. And Haman even now mentioned, that was so great a Favorite with
Ahasuerus the King, is by the King appointed to be hanged on an high Gallows,
Est. 7.9, 10. a just punishment for his ambitious climbing.

3dly and lastly, consider, Your Child is highly preferred by Death. He is
possessed of Heavenly preferment which as far exceeds earthly, as the shining
of the Sun in its Meridian Luster, does the shining of a Candle. Our Savior
tells us there was not a greater then John the Baptist, yet he that is least in
the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater then he, Luke 7.28. The least in the Kingdom
of Heaven is greater then the greatest on Earth, for he is above a state of
Ignorance, Misery and Mortality. Joseph was highly preferred by Pharaoh, who
committed to him Despotical Government over all Egypt, Genesis 41.40, etc. David,
Esther, and several others of Gods dear Servants come to great preferment here
on Earth; but what is this to the preferment of thy dear Child, who shines as
the Sun in the Kingdom of his Father, Mat. 13.43. He is in the Presence Chamber
of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Surely thou have no cause to weep,
except it be for joy, that thou wast the Parent of such a Child, Who (as one
says) whilst he lived was the joy of Glorified Angels, Luke 15.10. and being
dead, increases the number of Glorified Saints.

But says another, This was an only Child, 5th Apology answered.
I had but one only Son or Daughter to delight in, to leave mine Estate unto,
and to bear my Name. And God has taken him (or her) away from me. Surely the
Lord has dealt bitterly with me.

Judge. 11.34. 1 King. 17.12, 17, etc. 2 King. 4.20, 27. compared. Jer. 6.26.
Amos 8.10. Zach 12.10. Luke 7.12, 13. Luke 8.42. I have read of one Mr.
Hausteds Sermon. on Luke 19.41, 42.
who being found weeping, and the cause of his grief being demanded, answered,
Filius unicus, habilis, and pollens ingenio Adolescens; An only Son, a pretty,
witty young man -- and being able to go no further, had his faltring halting
speech made up by a stander-by, Obijt diem, is dead, which he, for the
greatness of his grief, was not able to pronounce himself. An only Child is our
Darling, as we translate (...), Psalm. 22.20. Unicam meam. And the loss of an
only Child must needs be sadly resented, because it is our Darling, or most
dearly beloved: the stream of parental affection (like a River not parted into
Channels) is not divided amongst other children, but runs whole and entire
toward one object. But consider under this sad trial a few things.

1. Consider, The greater the Trial is, the greater is the commendation to bear
it cheerfully. It is a sign thou art a great Christian, when thou can bear
patiently great Trials. A Wasp if not crossed, puts not forth its sting: the
most waspish and peevish person can carry it calmely and gently, while
Providence of God please him: but to carry it patiently and evenly under great
trials is admirable. When Alexander met with great troubles he would say, here
is a trial for the mind of Alexander: he is truly Magnanimous that holds up his
Spirit under great afflictions, Magnus est animus qui se Deo tradidit. Sen. Job
met with great trials.

-- ' (...)
(...)
(...). Mr. Duport in his (...). Job 1.18. p. 6, 7.

-- Semper enim malum malo fulciebatur,
Sicut quando crebri sibi invicem superfusi sunt;
Ponti fluctus longi, ante quidem alius, alius vero post.
One affliction followed on the back of another, as wave after wave: the
Sabeans took away Jobs Oxen and Asses, Lightning killed his Sheep, the Caldaeans
carried away his Camels, and (which was the fluctus decumanus, the last, worst,
and greatest wave of all the rest) the wind blows down the house upon the head
of his Children; yet for all this see his submissive behavior, Job. 1.20, 21,
22. he fell down upon the ground and worshipped, and said, Naked came I out of
my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return thither: The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord; In all this Job sinned not,
nor charged God foolishly. How even and composed was he amidst the swelling
waves! yea, he was like a Rock, Immotus in Undis. Ye have heard (says St.
James) of the Patience of Job. We had not heard so much of it, had it not been
for great trials, which God was pleased to exercise him with.

2. Consider, This trial of thine is not a tenth part so great as Abraham's was.
Compare Genesis 22.2. with Heb. 11.17, 18. his trial was clothed with very sad
circumstances. God commands him, (1) to take his Son, not his Sheep, or Oxen,
Friend, or Servant, but his Son, his own flesh and blood: (2) his Son Isaac,
not Ishmael which he had by Hagar his bond servant, but Isaac whom he had by
his Wife Sarah. It was matter of joy to them that they had gotten a Son, and
therefore called him Isaac, which signifies laughter, Genesis 21.3, 6. compared.
He was the joy of his aged Parents, he must take his Son Isaac, his laughter,
joy and delight; (3) his begotten Son, not an adopted one, his own Son, not
another man's; (4) his only begotten Son, not one amongst many Sons, but his
only Son by Sarah the freewoman, by whom he had no more; (5) a Son whom he
loved, not one that he hated, and no wonder that he loved him dearly, who was
filius senectutis, the Son of his old age, Genesis 21.2, 5. Thus Jacob loved
Joseph and Benjamin, because Sons of his old age (Genesis 37.3. so Genesis 44.20.)
more then the rest of his children: (6) the Son of promise, in whom it was said
his seed shall be called, and all the Nations of the Earth blessed, Genesis 12.3.
and 21.12. Christ the Messiah, the desire of all Nations, Hag. 2.7. was
promised to come of his Line, so that if he offered up Isaac, the world, for
ought he could see, must want a Messiah: He by this blow will kill as many
thousands as there are Stars in the Firmament, Genesis 15.5. Furthermore (7) It
was an Obedient Son, not a rebellious Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.11. nor a runagate
Prodigal, Luke 15. but a Son that served him, Mal. 3.17. and yet must not be
spared; (8.) It was no Infant, but a Son that could prattle to his Father, yea
and talk wisely too, Genesis 22.7. conceived to be about fifteen years of age. ^5
(9.) This Son must be sacrificed as a burnt-offering. Jephthah was much
troubled, when according to his vow he did consecrate his only Daughter (for he
had no Child besides her, Judge. 11.34.) unto the Lord. See Dr. Brown's vulg.
Errors, lib. 5. p. 309. etc.
I suppose he did not sacrifice her, but devote her as a Virgin to serve God in
a single life, Judge. 11.38, 39. Yet he was much troubled because utterly
hopeless of any posterity, v. 35. But Abraham's Son here must be sacrificed,
his Throat must be cut, his Bowels ripped up, and his Quarters be burnt to ashes
on the Altar, so it was in burnt-offerings, Levit. 1.6, 8, 9. (10) This must be
done in the Land of Moriah, old Abraham full of days and past traveling, must
get him to the Land of Moriah. (11) All this must be done by a Father; It is
not enough that he see it done by another, but he himself must be the Priest,
Actor, and Executioner, his own hand must be upon his own only Child: he that
was an instrument of giving, must be an instrument of taking away life. 12 and
lastly, All this he must do without delay: God allows him not a days time to
confer with any, that his poor distracted heart might receive comfort. Sarah
must not be consulted with. Abraham must not take time to do it when he will:
but he must do it now, without dispute or consultation. Take him now, says
God, Isaac and he must no longer sport together. Here was a whole cluster of
sour Grapes for Abraham to chew upon: what a sad Trial was here? Yet Abraham
without delay addresseth himself to the sacrifice of his only Son. Thy trial
falls infinitely short of this.

3ly Consider, Did not God himself part with a Son an only begotten Son, the
Son of his bosom, John 1.18. a beloved Son, in whom alone he was well pleased,
Mat. 3.17. One that was his Isaac, his daily delight, Pro. 8.30. (and indeed
Isaac, even now named, was a type of him); Did not God part with this Son for
thy sake? and, dismissing him from a place of happiness, sent him into a world
of misery? see John 3.16. This Son sent, was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief, Isa. 53.3. And wilt not thou be contented to part with thy son when
God calls for him; and takes him from a world of misery to himself, in whose
presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Everlasting pleasures, without intermission or omission?

4. And lastly; Tell me if an Earthly King should have sent for thy Child, and
promised that he should be one of his Favorites, would you not willingly have
parted with him upon these terms, (yea, though you should never have seen him
more) and rested contented, in as much as your Child should be well provided
for? I think there are but few amongst us but would willingly yield to such a
motion. How much rather satisfied should we be when the King of Kings, the
great God of Heaven and Earth (who is undoubtedly unchangeable in his
affection, John 13.1.) takes a Child from us unto himself, where there shall be
pure joy, without any dose of grief, riches without poverty, honor without
infamy; and this not by fits and starts, but ((...)) continually; not after
some long time to end, but ((...)) for ever.

Thou say, Thou have no Child to leave thine Estate unto.

Abraham once complained upon this very account, Genesis 15.2, 3. but Consider,

1. Thy Child (if he died a Child of God) has taken possession of a better
inheritance then thine is; he is an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke
12.32. A partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. he is
an Heir of God, Joynt-heir with Christ, Romans 8.17. This inheritance that thy
Child has taken possession of, excells all other inheritances, as being
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. Thy Child then
has no need of thy Estate.

2. Consider, Poor hungry people, indigent persons, they are thine own flesh,
so God tells thee, Isa. 58.7. Yea they are thy Brethren, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. so 1 John 3.17. Thou may see many that are blind and lame, many Lazarus's, poor
Widows, and Fatherless Children, poor Ministers that have a great charge of
children, and small means to maintain them with, these are thine own flesh, thy
Brethren, and Kinsfolk; bestow thine estate on these, that they may bless thee
and pray for thee! and let thine own hands in thy lifetime be thine Executors,
or else others may take possession of thine Estate, who (may be) will not thank
thee, or may prodigally consume it. See Eccles. 2.18, 19. and Eccles. 4.8. And
Salvian tells thee the naked truth, Salvian ad Eccles Cath. l. 3. p. 459.
Vides extortas lachrymas, simulata suspiria, fictam anxietatem, non optantem
ut convalescas, sed expectantem quando moriaris. Vide defixos in te, et quasi
accusantes tui obitus tarditatem omnium vultus. O infaelicem te ac miserrimum,
cujus supremum exitum tantus desiderat ac precatur numerus propinquonu^! Such
may be heirs to thine estate, that will feign grief at thy sickness, and think
it long till thou be dead. Salv. ad Eccles Cath. lib. 4. p. 474.
Therefore, as the same Author says, Cum Christum egere videas, cur tu
facultates tuas in quibuscunque non indigentibus derelinquis? Why do you not
relieve Christ in his members who are in real want? I end this with that of
Solomon, Eccles. 3.12. Let a man rejoice and do good in his life. For as a
worthy Divine says, It is the life of a Gift to be given in the life of the
Giver, Mr. Fuller in his Hist. of Cambr.
far better than Funeral Legacies, which (like Benjamin) are born by the loss
of a Parent; for it is not so kindly Charity for men to give when they can keep
no longer.

Thou say, Thou have none to bear thy Name.

Numb. 27.3.4. So the Widow of Tekoah in a parable complains, they would slay
her only son that was left, and so not leave to her husband neither name nor
remainder upon the earth, 2 Samuel 14.6, 7. And we find Absalom having no son to
continue his memory, erected a Pillar in the King's Dale, and called it after
his own name, 2 Samuel 18.18. but it was Columna calumniae, a Pillar of disgrace,
to mind the world there was once such a wicked man as Absalom was, as Lot's
wife's Pillar of Salt was a Monument of her shame. But to answer the Plea:

1. Consider, To live in our Children, is but a poor kind of survival; for they
may soon die, and our memorial be buried in their graves. But if they live long
and be deboist, they are monuments of shame to Parents. The best way for men to
immortalize their names, and consecrate their memories to posterity, is to
erect a Pillar of virtuous deeds: for Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall he had
in everlasting remembrance, and v. 9. he has dispersed, he has given to the
poor, his righteousness endures for ever, and then it follows, his horn shall
be exalted with honor. So Isa. 58.10. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry,
and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
darkness be as the noonday. Oh then if thy estate be great, Exegi monumentum
aere pereunius. Hor.
build an Hospital, or repair Gods material Temple, or relieve the living
Temples of the holy Ghost; by this means thou shall get a good name, and be
remembered in future ages: Thy worth shall be engraven in lasting characters,
(...) Eurip.
not to be razed out by the hand of time. Good men will commend thee whilst
living, and when dead a good report like a sweet perfume ( Eccles. 7.1.) will
accompany thee to the grave; so that thou shall be buried in the odor of a
good name. How will people be talking of thy good works, as the Widows showed
Peter the Coats and Garments which Dorcas made whilst she was with them, Act.
9.39. They Will say such a man was a good Landlord, a good housekeeper, a very
charitable person, etc. As Cornelius had a good report among all the nation of
the Jews, for he was a devout man, and one that feared God, and gave much alms
to the people, Act. 10.2, 22. compared. And as man, so God himself will
remember such, as Cornelius his prayers and alms, are said to come up for a
memorial before God, Act. 10.4. With such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb.
13.18. see Mat. 25.34, 35, etc. Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. Thus you see virtuous men are embalmed with
Renown, they need not Children to eternize them, nor need they any Monument and
Epitaph to enoble them, who live in the remembrance both of God and man.

2 Consider, If you belong to God, your names are written in the Book of Life,
you are registered by God and matriculated in Heaven. Phil. 4.3. Rev. 3.5. There
is often mention made of such a book: And it is Mr. Attersal on Number. 1.5. p. 20.
a borrowed speech from such records as are kept in a City, wherein the names
of Freemen are written. Now it is exceeding matter of joy to have our names
written there, Luke 10.20. Rejoice, because your names are written in Heaven.
This new name in the Book of Life, is a name better then of Sons and Daughters,
an everlasting Name that shall not be cut off, as you may see, Isa. 56.5.

6th Apology answered.
Another cries out, I have had several Children but lost them all, I have not
one left to comfort me.

Thy case is not singular, thy betters by far have been in as bad a condition
or worse. Naomi was left of her Husband and two Sons in a strange land, Ruth
1.5. Job (who counted it no small part of his outward happiness to have his
Children round about him, Job 29.5.) was sore troubled at the news of their
sudden death, Job 1.18, 19, 20. yet he did not repine and murmur, v. 21, 22.
his Wife was left indeed, but to be a cross to him: the Devil made use of this
rib as a Bow to shoot the Arrows of temptation at Jobs heart, Job 2.9, 10. But
it is otherwise with thee under loss of Children, thou have possibly a good
Husband, or a good Wife, or some other good Friend at hand, who may say to thee
as Elkanah to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Am not I better to thee then ten Sons?

2 Consider, Children are no special evidences of Gods distinguishing love and
favor. Remember me O Lord, says David, Psalm. 106.4. with the favor that thou
bear unto thy people. God has special favors for his peculiar people. Now
if Children were distinguishing evidences of his signal favor, thou have great
cause to be troubled at the loss of them, but indeed they are not, as you may
see Eccles. 9.1, 2. Nay, wicked men often have them in abundance. Haman that
boasted of the multitude of his Children, Esth. 5.11. had ten Sons hanged up
together, Est. 9.13. so Job 21.11. prosperous wicked men are said to send forth
their little ones like a flock, and their Children dance. So Psalm. 17.14.
wicked men that have their portion in this life, are said to be full of
Children. Thou have not then in losing thy Children lost choice favors, which
God bestows on his chosen ones. Thou may be in special favor with God,
notwithstanding he has taken away thy Children.

3. Consider, Thy Children might have been a discomfort to thee. They might
have been as so many Coals, 2 Samuel 14.7. not to warm, but to sully thee in
thine old age. See Mr. Leigh's Observations on Octavius Augustus
Octavius Augustus said of some of his children, that they were not his Seed,
but vomica and carcinomata, some Ulcers and Imposthumes broken from him; and he
used to cry out, O utinam aut caelibs mansissem, aut prole carerem!

I would either I had remained unmarried, or wanted children. And Tiberius
Caesar counted Priamus happy, Quod superstes omnium suorum extitisset, That he
outlived his Children. Indeed the Psalmist compares Children to Arrows, Psalm.
127.4, 5. and says, Happy is the Man that has his Quiver full of them. It is
worth observing how the Prophet compares them to Arrows: An Arrow, you know, is
not so naturally, it is Art that makes it an Arrow: So if you do not through
education artificially polish and shave off the knots of these youthful
sprouts: I mean, if you keep not down the exorbitances of them, and streighten
their crooked dispositions by careful correction, instead of Arrows they will
prove Thorns or Spears in your side to torment you, and bring down your gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave. And it is observed that the miscarriage of one
Child robs Parents of the comfort they should take in all the rest.

4. And lastly, Consider the answer of the Man of God to King Amaziah,
complaining for the hundred Talents, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. The Lord is able to give
thee much more than this. He is, (...), the abridgment of all
creature-excellencies. All creature comforts are sum'd up in him; and he can
abundantly supply the want of Children.

Another cries out, I have lost a Child that was a Joseph to me; the hope, joy,
and honor of my gray hairs, the staff of mine old age: 7th Apology answered.
my outward means came in this way: Or, this Husband, this Wife, this Father or
Mother that God has deprived me of, brought me in yearly a comfortable
subsistence: All which is now buried in my Friends Grave; so that I now being
very poor, must leave my former habitation, I must fare hardly, and go clothed
in mean Apparel; I shall be slighted and disrespected, and (that which yet
troubles me most of all, is) I have a great charge of Children, and so many
Children, so many mouths calling for help, and bemoaning their sad condition:
what course to take for maintenance I know not: If God had spared him (or her)
longer, it had been better for me, I am now utterly undone. Miserum est fuisse.
This is many times the lamentable case of a Ministers Widow, who in her
Husbands lifetime lived comfortably, but now being deprived of him, has lost
her Living and Livelihood together, and it may be has a great charge of
Children left to the wide world. She may say, as Lam. 1.12. Is any sorrow like
to my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in
the day of his fierce anger! Her condition indeed is so sad, that I must beg
and borrow of the courteous Reader the help of his imagination to piece out the
shortness of my expression, for we may better conceive than express her
disconsolate condition.

Luke 8.43. and 21.4. Mark 12.44. That person must needs live miserably that
wants a competency of outward maintenance. Luthers See Abel Red. in Life of
Luther.
Widow felt the smart of it. But yet, poor soul, it is better to hope the best
than the worst: Do not antedate thy sorrows. I will for thy comfort take this
Apology in pieces, and answer the chief particulars distinctly, briefly, and
withal very plainly, without Rhetorical flourishes, Non est conveniens luctibus
ille color.

Are you very poor, your outward maintenance being buried in your friends
grave?

1. Consider, You have more then you had when you came into the world, and more
then you can carry out when you leave the world. Job was the greatest and
richest of all the men of the East, Job 1.3. and when he had all taken from
him, he was content upon this very account, that he came naked out of his
Mothers womb, and naked should return thither, Job 1.21. And the Apostle uses
a like argument to work in us contentment in the like case, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8. We
brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out;
and having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

2. Consider, You have more of worldly comforts, then many that have been your
betters by far in Grace. How poor was our Savior Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9. Though he
was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor. His Mother was a poor Virgin, the
Manger was his Cradle, and the cobwebs his Canopy: he had no sums of money. He
had not tribute money, Mat. 17.24. (...) was about fifteen pence of our money,
as Dr. Hammond observes. Now our Savior Christ was fain to work a Miracle for
it, v. 27. he recieved collection or contribution whilst he lived, Luke 8.2, 3.
And being dead he was buried at others charges, Luke 23.53. Job, a non such for
Religion, Job 1.8. lost a great estate suddenly, and it become a proverb, As
poor as Job. Peter the Apostle Although Papists talk so much of his keys)
had neither Silver nor Gold, Acts 3.6. And St. Paul tells you of his great
wants and sufferings, 2 Cor. 6.4, 10. and 2 Cor. 11.23, to 28. and yet withal
you find he was content, Phil. 4.11.

3 Consider, You have more by far then you deserve. Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy
of the least of all thy Mercies, which thou have showed unto thy Servant. This
was Jacob's motto. Art thou greater then our Father Jacob? says the woman of
Samaria unto Christ, John 4.12. Though Christ was infinitely greater then that
great Patriarch: yet we fall much short of him; And we are not worthy of the
least of Gods mercies: we deserve not the thousandth part of what we have. Now
methinks they that deserve nothing should be content with any thing; and they
that deserve not any thing, should not be discontented though they have nothing.

4 Consider, It might have been far worse with you then it is. Have you lost
some of your goods? Be of good cheer that you have not lost your lives; with
this argument St. Paul cheared the shipwrackt persons, Act. 27.22. who to
lighten the Ship, cast the Wheat into the Sea, v. 38. Job having lost his
goods, he lost his health too, Job 2.7, 8. he was from the crown of the head to
the soal of the foot, all of an angry burning boil; and he is so loathsome a
creature, that none would come nigh him, insomuch that he is fain to be his own
Surgeon, and his dressing instrument is a piece of a broken pot. You might
then have lost your health as well as your goods, but God continues this to
you. It Is mercy that you are on this side Hell, Lam. 3.22, 23. The damned there
have a bitter cup to drink of, and have nothing to sweeten it: but thou still
enjoyest many precious mercies to allay the bitterness of thy poor condition.
Sure I am, great cause thou have to give thanks, but none to murmur.

5. Consider, A little will suffice nature. Natura paucis contenta. We say, and
that truly, it is better to fill a gluttons belly then his eye, his hunger then
his humor.

Discite quam parvo liceat producere vitam,
Et quantum natura petat. -- Lucan. lib. 4. Pharsal.
A man may live of a little. May be thou have enough to satisfy necessity,
though not prodigal curiosity. Having then food and raiment, i. e. necessaries
for the preservation of your bodies, be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.8.

6. Consider, Your life is short, you are but Strangers and Pilgrims here.
Psalm. 39.12. Heb. 11.13. 1 Pet. 2.11. Parum viae quid multum viatici? you have
but a little way to go, what need have you of much provision? A traveller
burdens not himself with bag and baggage; a stranger is content with mean
accommodations, and if he have but as much money as will defray his charges
till he comes home, he cares for no more, he knows then he shall have enough.
Oh Christian, be content, Heaven is thy home, and when thou come thither (as
thou shall very shortly if thou belongest to God) thou shall inherit all
things, Rev. 21.7. Well then, be content ((...)) with things present, as it is
in the Orig. Heb. 13.5. though you have but from hand to mouth, as Israel in
the Wilderness; thou art nearer thy journeys end then thou art aware of; and if
thy breath was but once stopped, thou would have no need of these worldly
things.

7. Consider, It is Gods doing to bring you into this condition. 1 Samuel 2.7.
The Lord makes poor, and makes rich. So Prove. 22.2. The rich and poor meet
together; the Lord is the maker of them all. He makes them not only as they are
men, but as poor and rich men. God is the orderer of outward conditions. And
therefore says Agur. Prove. 30.8. Give me neither poverty nor riches. And Naomi
says, I went out full, and the Lord has brought me home again empty, Ruth
1.21. Cum sint omnia ditionis sacrae et nutis Dei, cuncta moderentur, quicquid
malorum quotidie paenarumque perferimus, Lib. 8. p. 287, 288.
censura est divinae manus. Salv. de Gub. Dei. God has placed us in this
world, as servants are in a great man's family, all are not placed in the same
office, nor have all the same diet and wages, yet all are (or at least should
be) contented: So should we be content with the condition wherein God has set
us. Let us, like reeds, bend every way with the wind of providence: or, let us
(as one says) patiently steer our course as this wind blows. What if thou have
not so much as thou would have, yet thou have as much as God is pleased thou
should have. And therefore be content.

8. Consider, Thou have as much as God sees good for thee. Your Heavenly Father
knows what you have need of, Mat. 6.32. he sees what is best for you, Mat.
7.11. If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how
much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that
ask him? An earthly Father that loves his Child, will not give it poison or
edg-tools, because he knows them to be prejudicial and hurtful to him. God
knows what is better for us then we our selves; he sees that Riches, though
good in themselves; are not good for you, but (through your own corruption)
will prove snares and temptations to you, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10, 11. God sees if you
had more of the world, you would be more worldly minded, proud, unthankful,
intemperate, remiss in holy duties, etc. he sees this Wilderness-condition best
for you who are traveling to the Heavenly Canaan. Well then, poor soul, be
content upon this consideration, that God in his infinite wisdom and goodness
has allotted that to thee, which he sees to be good for thee.

9. Consider, God can bless and sanctify a little, that it shall be better
then the abundance of the wicked. See Psalm. 37.16. A little that a righteous
man has, is better than the riches of many wicked. So Prove. 15.16. Better is
little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure, and trouble therewith.
It is Gods blessing that makes rich, Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord it
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. So Mat. 4.4. Man lives not by
Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. It is
Gods blessing that makes food to nourish us, clothes to warm us, etc. Oh how
comfortably might men live of a little (through Gods blessing) if they had but
thankful and contented Spirits! Therefore

10. Consider, If thou can but be content with thy condition, thou art rich
enough, Vera inopia cupiditatum copia; content is the poor man's riches, and
discontent the rich man's poverty; So that a man may be rich with a little and
poor with much, St. Paul who had learned the lesson of contentment, Phil. 4.11.
though his necessities were supplied by the Philippians charity, Phil. 2.25.
yet he triumphs as though he had all things, Phil. 4.18. I have all, and
abound; I am full, having recieved from Epaphroditus the things which were sent
from you, etc. so 2 Cor. 6.10. As having nothing, yet possessing all things,
because they had bridled their concupiscence. Omnia habit qui nihil
concupiscit. Sen. It may be said of such, what the Spirit says to the Angel of
the Church of Smyrna, Rev. 2.9. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty,
but thou art rich. Sphinae. Philos. p. 430.
Faelix est non qui habit quae cupit, sed qui non cupit quae non habit. And as
Quintilian says, Satis est divitiarum nihil amplius velle; That man has
riches enough that desires no more. Contentment indeed is a sovereign remedy
for every malady.

11. Consider, Riches are troublesome unsatisfying things, Eccles. 1.14. Behold
all is vanity and vexation of spirit. Solomon had extracted the quintessence of
all, yet could not get one drop of true contentment, Eccles. 5.10. He that
loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves
abundance, with increase. So v. 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet,
whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer
him to sleep; And indeed how should he sleep? for riches are compared to
thorns, Mat. 13.22. how should a man sleep among thorns? As the body cannot be
satisfied with Air, so neither can the soul be satisfied with worldly things.
Jesus said, John 4.13. Whosoever drinks of this water (which the world
affords) shall thirst again: So that like a man in a Fever, Quo plus sunt
polae, plus sitiuntur aquae.

The more he drinks the more he thirsts. Prove. 27.20. Hell and destruction are
never full, so the eyes of man are never satisfied. There is no satisfaction to
be drawn from the breast of the creature. It is said of the Prodigal, Luke
15.16. That he would fain have filled his belly, with the husks that the Swine
did eat; (...), he gladly would, that shows he could not; he would but could
not fill his belly with these husks. Now these husks do rightly set forth these
worldy things, that can afford poor man no real satisfaction. I have read how
Zeuxes did paint some certain Grapes, that the Birds did fly to them, but could
not feed and satisfy themselves with them. No more can we satisfy our selves
with worldly enjoyments, which are indeed but pictures and mere delusions. We
may as soon expect Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles, as content and
satisfaction from worldly possessions; which whilst some have coveted after,
they have not only erred from the Faith, but pierced themselves through with
many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. Art thou then discontented that thou have no more of
worldly riches, which if thou had, possibly thou would be less contented
then now thou art?

12. Consider, Rich men have great accounts to make. God will ere long say to
every rich man, Read rationem, Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Stewardship,
for thou may be no longer Steward. They must give an account how they have
managed their abundance, Luke 12.48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required. It will be a sad day to them that have misspent this
worlds goods: So much spent on whores, so much on pride, so much on belly, so
much at such a merry meeting, so much lost in gaming, etc. this, like the hand
writing on the wall to Belshazzer, Dan. 5.5, 6. will cause the rich man's
Countenance to be changed, and his thoughts will trouble him, etc. he will then
wish he had not been entrusted with so great an estate. We find Dives that
feasted it every day, and would not relieve poor Lazarus, Luke 16.24. is in the
place of torment, and wants a drop of water to cool his tongue. See 1 Timothy 6.9.
They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish
and hurtful lusts. Which drown men in destruction and perdition. Orig. (...),
sink them to the bottom of Hell. And therefore St. Paul charge Timothy, to
charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, v. 17. but that they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, v. 18. q. d. if they
do not improve their riches to God's glory and the good of others, like so many
clogs or weights at their heels, they will sink them into the bottom of Hell fire.
I have read of one who being asked whether he had rather be Croesus, who was a
rich King, or Socrates who was a poor honest Philosopher? he (knowing that
great men have a great account to give) answered, Vivens Croesus, moriens
Socrates: he would be Croesus whilst he lived, but Socrates when he died. Well
then, poor Christian, be content, the less thou have, the less will be thine
account at the great Audit-day.

13. Consider, If thou belongest to God, thou have better things then the world
affords. Thou art blessed with Spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. To name a few.

1. Thou have the Favor of God, and this is better then Corn and Wine, Psalm.
4.6, 7. yea it is better then life it self, Psalm. 63.3. Artabazus a Courtier
recieved from King Cyrus a cup of Gold, and Chrysantas the beloved Favorite, a
kiss; which the other observing, said, (as Xenophon reports) The Cup you gave
me was not so good Gold, as the kiss you gave Chrysantas. Sure I am, all Gold
and Silver is not worth one kiss of Gods Mouth, nor one smile of his
Countenance: And truly many never enjoy more kisses and embraces from God, then
when they enjoy least of the creatures. Esau said he had much, so it is in the
Original, Genesis 33.9. (...), but Jacob said he had enough, or according to the
Original, (...), I have all; God's favor is all in all to Believers; he that
has this, has enough, how little soever he has. Deuteronomy. 2.7. These forty years
the Lord thy God has been with thee, (viz. in the dry and barren Wilderness)
yet thou have lacked nothing. So Neh. 9.21. And when Christ sent forth his
Disciples without purse, scrip, and shoos, Lacked ye any thing, said he? and
they said, Nothing, Luke 22.35. Gods gracious presence with you, is sufficient
to make any condition comfortable unto you. This a good man prizeth above any
thing else, Psa. 73.25. He that can say, the Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, Psalm. 16.5. may well add. v. 6. The lines are falen unto me in
pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage. See Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the
Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines; the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet (says the
Prophet in the midst of this penury) I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in
the God of my Salvation. The Apostle thought the consideration of Gods
favorable presence with you, a good foundation to build contentment upon, Heb.
13.5. Be content with such things as you have, because God has said, I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee. In the Fountain it runs (...). Here are five
negatives that imply an unparalled vehemence. It may be thus rendered in
English; No, I will not leave thee, nor no, I will not forsake thee. Therefore
Christian be content.

2. Consider, Thou have thy Christ still. This made Job lift up his head amidst
all the waves of affliction that he met with. Job 19.25. I know that my
Redeemer lives. Though he had lost his Children, and his Goods, yet it was a
comfort to him, that he had not lost his Savior. He is still with thee, in
whom dwells all fullness, Col. 1.19. Inexhaustible treasures are to be found in
Christ. If we were Christless, then hopeless would our condition be, Ephesians.
2.12. But so long as we have Christ we are well enough. It is enough (said
Jacob in a time of want and misery,) Genesis 45.28. Joseph my Son is yet alive. So
may a Christian say, It is enough, my Christ (Joseph was a type of him) is yet
alive. Christ who is still with thee, he has the sweetness and desirableness
of all creature comforts, he is able and willing to help in the greatest
straits, Heb. 4.15, 16. and therefore Christian be content.

3. Consider, Thou have the Comforter still, the holy Ghost abiding in thee for
ever, John 14.16, 26. So John 15.26. This Comforter comforts us in all our
tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. So 2 Cor. 7.4. Hos. 2.14. Peace of Conscience,
which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. Is the earnest and first fruits of
the Spirit, Romans 8.23. These Spiritual joys that come streaming into thy soul,
they are a cluster of Grapes, Numb. 13.24. A fore-taste of the exceeding great
joy that thou shall have in the Heavenly Canaan. Now as Eliphaz said to Job, Do
the consolations of God seem small to thee? or as Gideon said, Is not the
gleaning of the Grapes of Ephraim better then the Vintage of Abiezer? Judge.
8.2. Is not this gleaning of Spiritual joy, better then the whole vintage of
carnal joy that the world affords? Therefore Christian be content.

4. Consider, Thou have interest in many precious promises, as 1. of
Justification or pardoning Grace; see Isa. 43.25. so Jer. 31.34. and Mic. 7.19.
[2.] Of Sanctification or Healing; see Isa. 1.18. Psalm. 65.3. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26,
27. Zech. 13.1. Hos. 14 4. Romans 6.14. [3.] Of Corroboration or Spiritual
assistance, 1 Samuel 2.9. Psalm. 37.17. Isa. 41.10. [4.] Of outward provision,
Psalm. 34.10. Psa. 132.15. Isa. 41.17. Mat. 6.33. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. Phil. 4.19. 1 Timothy 4.8. [5.] Of outward protection, Psalm. 31.20. Psalm. 91.3, 4, etc. Romans
8.31. 1 Pet. 3.13. [6.] Of direction in reference to soul and body, Neh. 9.20,
21. Prove. 3.5, 6. Psalm. 25.12. Psalm. 32.8. Psalm. 48.14. Psalm. 73.24. Isa.
58.11. They have the Spirit leading them into all truth, Joh. 14.26. and this
is a great privilege calling for thankfulness, v. 22. Luther preferred the
understanding one of David's Psalms above all the riches in the world. [7.] And
lastly, Of Eternal Salvation, Psalm. 73.24. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. 2 Timothy 4, 8. Tit.
1.2. Heb. 4.9. 1 John 2.25. What if livelihood be short, so long as Eternal
Life will be thine shortly. Though thou have little in hand, yet thou have much
in hope, and therefore rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2. We count
not him poor that has a great estate very shortly to fall into his hand. There
is but one life betwixt thee and a great inheritance, and it is thine own life,
when that is expired, thou shall take possession of it. St. James tells us,
James. 2.5. God has chosen the poor of this world rich in Faith, and Heirs of
the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him. What, discontent,
and Heir to a Kingdom! methinks you should take joyfully the spoiling (or loss)
of your goods, knowing in your selves, that you have in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

Now Christian Reader, these are exceeding great and precious Promises, 2 Pet.
1.4. and the Righteous are Heirs to such Promises as these, Heb. 6.17. The
Saints are there called (...). There is never a Promise in the whole Bible, but
a godly man may lay claim to it, and say, This is mine, I have an interest
there. And far better it is to be Heirs to these Promises, than to a whole
Kingdom; therefore Christian be content. These Promises are certain things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.17, 18. God's Word is more certain than any
mortal man's Bond. I have not wrote down the words of these Promises, because I
would have you to turn to them in your Bibles, and dwell upon them in your
private thoughts. It Is Meditation that sucks sweetness out of the honeycomb of
a Promise.

5. And lastly, consider, Thou have many precious Graces, which are far better
than all the Riches which the World affords; as Faith, which is more precious
than Gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1.7. It is called Precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1.
So Hope and Charity, Humility, Meekness, Chastity, Temperance, etc. are
precious things. So Spiritual Wisdom is better than Rubies, Pro. 3.13, etc. and
8.11. These are the true Riches, Luke 16.11. These are the durable Riches, that
cannot be taken away from us, Luke 10.42. These are such things as accompany
Salvation, Heb. 6 9. Now what says Solomon, Prove. 14.14. The good man shall be
satisfied from himself; that is, (as some expound it) from the Grace of God
that is in him. Piety is a good foundation to build Contentment upon. Well
then, poor Christian (if I may call thee poor who indeed art so rich) having
the Graces of the Spirit, which are better than this world's goods, be content.

Thus you see, if you belong to God, you have better things than the World
affords.

But some may say, I fear I belong not to God, I have not made my peace with
him.

Calling and Election sure, as thou art commanded, 2 Pet. 1.10. and for the
future should give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids,
(Prove. 4.4.) till by Faith, Prayer, and Repentance thou have got a propriety in
him.

14. Consider, God can, if it please him, raise thee to a great estate. 1 Samuel
2.7, 8. He brings low and lifts up; he raises up the poor out of the dust,
and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill. So Psalm. 107.41. He sets the
poor on high from affliction; So Psalm. 113.7, 8. Jacob became a great man from
small beginnings, Genesis 32.10. God raised up Job again and made him greater then
he was before, as you may see Job 42.10, 11, 12. Well then, remember this, that
God that gave these things at first, may give them a second time, therefore be
content.

15. Lastly, Consider Gods former loving kindness, let this support thee. It
was God that did form us in the womb, through the midwifery of his providence
we were brought forth into the world, and ever since we came into the world we
have depended upon the breasts of divine providence; for Act. 17.28. In him we
live, move, and have our being. We may say with Jacob, Genesis 48.15. God has fed
us all our life long unto this day; Why then should we distrust him now? former
Experience of God's Mercies, should strengthen future confidence in the God of
Mercies. 1 Samuel 17.37. The Lord that delivered me (says David) out of the paw
of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistine. And elsewhere, having experience of Gods goodness toward
him, since he was taken out of his Mothers Belly, he is encouraged to hope in
God in all straights that may befall him, See Psalm. 22.9, 10, 11, and Psalm.
63.7. Because thou have been mine help, therefore in the shadow of thy Wings
will I rejoice. So the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.10. God delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us: So do
you conclude, God has maintained me and mine, he does still maintain us, and
we trust he will yet provide for us. You then that have found God so loving and
faithful, cast your care on him, 1 Pet. 5.7. and be content, how mean so-ever
your condition be.

And Whereas you say, You must leave your former habitation.

I answer, It is indeed very sad when we are turned out of our houses, the
places of our birth and constant abode. Great wailing there was in Sion, when
the Inhabitants thereof were cast out of their dwellings, as you may read Jer.
9.19. Yet for your comfort,

1. Consider, Your betters have been sore put to it for a dewlling place. Moses
was forced to leave the place of his habitation, Exodus 2.15. and after called
one of his sons Gershom, For he said, I have been a stranger in a strange Land,
v. 22. So the Israelites wandered in the Wilderness in a solitary way, they
found no City to dwell in; hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them;
Psalm. 107.4, 5. David was often in an unsettled wandering condition; Psalm. 56.8.
Thou tellest my wanderings. He was an Exile, as you may read 2 Samuel 15.13, 14,
etc. So the Jews lived in Babylon, being taken captives, as you may read Psalm.
137. So the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.11. Even unto this present hour, (says the
Apostle) we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffetted, and have
no certain dwelling place. So those Worthies, Heb. 11.38. Wandered in Deserts,
and in Mountains, and in Dens, and in Caves of the Earth. Nay Christ himself
the Lord of all did so far humble himself for our sakes, that he complains,
Mat. 8.20. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds have nests, but the Son of Man
has not where to lay his head. Thou deservest far worse then these did, and
yet thy condition is not a quarter so bad as theirs was.

2. Consider, Your betters have been content with a very mean dwelling place.
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, and Heir of the world (for so he is called,
Romans 4.11, 13.) yet sojourned in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles,
Heb. 11.9. so did Isaac his son, and thus did Jacob the son of Isaac. This
Jacob as well as the rest, was a rich man, and a good man too, (for the
Sunshine of prosperity did not put out the Fire of his devotion) yet dwelt in a
tent, a poor moveable habitation, Genesis 25.27. Jacob was a plain man dwelling in
Tents. Jonah the Prophet made him a booth and set under it in the shadow, Jon.
4.5. Dr Abbot on Jona 4.5. Lect. 27. p. 570
It was (as a worthy Bishop observes) but a silly house, a cottage, or a
cabben, or such a place as beggars do sit in by the way, to ask alms of the
passengers. There was not any Harbinger to take up his lodging before him, no
carriages to convey his tents and bedding for him, no train to make all decent,
but poor Prophet he is glad to get a shroud for his head, although a sheep-coat
thatched or covered with reed, had been better.

3. Consider, God's gracious presence makes the meanest habitation a Paradise.
Jacob as he went to his Uncle Laban, being benighted (for the Sun was set)
tarried in a certain place (probably some Field) and the ground was his bed,
and certain stones his pillows, and the Heavens his canopy, oh how sweet were
his dreams, God graciously appearing to him! as you may read, Genesis 28.11. etc.
Paul and Silas sing in prison like two Birds in a Cage, Acts 16.25. Moses
wisely chose rather to abide in the Wilderness with Gods gracious presence,
then to go to Canaan without it, Exodus 33.15. God's gracious presence can make
thy sleep sweet unto thee, Jer. 31.26. and make thee dwell in safty, Psalm. 4.8.
in a mean, as well as in a better habitation.

4. Consider, God sets to all men the bounds of their habitation, as you may
see, Acts 17.26. God is the great Landlord, for Psalm. 24.1. The Earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, the World, and they that dwell therein. He
turns out his Tenants when he pleases, out of one house into another. Other
Landlords do but act under God. Be content then to be at Gods finding, say with
David, when forced to flee and leave his former habitation, 2 Samuel 15.26.
Behold, here am I, let God do to me as seems good unto him.

5. Consider, God aims at thy good. Because they have no changes (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 55.19.) therefore they fear not God. God changes thine
habitation, that his fear might dwell in thine heart. See what is said of Moab,
Jer. 48.11. Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his
lees, and has not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither has he gone
into captivity: Therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not
changed. God then by unsetling thee, would keep thee from settling on thy lees.
It had been better with Moab had he been disturbed and hurried from place to
place, as Israel was, he had been freer from filthy setlings.

6. Consid. If you belong to God, he dwells in you by his blessed Spirit, as
these places show, 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.22. Psalm. 132.13, 14. If we
love God and our neighbor, Joh. 14.23. 1 John 4.16. If we believe in Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. 1 John 4.15. If we have respect to God's Commands, 1 John
3.24. God dwells in us, and we in him. And this is a greater privilege than to
dwell in the most glorious Palace without the inhabitation of his blessed
Spirit.

7. Consid. If you belong to God, he is a dewlling place to you. Psalm. 9.9. The
Lord also will be a refuge to the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble; see
Psalm. 46. per totum. God was David's shelter in the time of his Exile, see
Psalm. 61.2, 3, 4. And Moses cries out, Lord, thou have been our dewlling place
in all generations, Psalm. 90.1. Dr. Hammond in Psa 90.1
This Psalm was penned by Moses, or by some other in his person, when the
Children of Israel were sorely afflicted in the Wilderness, in a wandering
unsettled condition. So Isa. 25.4. God is there said to be a strength to the
poor, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat. And Isa. 32.2. Christ is
there prophesied of to be, as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from
the tempest.

8. Consid. If you fear God, he will provide a dewlling place for you. Exodus
1.21. And it came to pass, because the Midwives feared God, that he made them
houses, i. e. he provided (amongst other blessings) places of habitation for
them. This God promised David and Solomon, 2 Samuel 7.11. 1 King. 11.38. and was
as good as his promise, and so he will be to thee, if he see it good for thee.
Plead then that Promise, Isa. 65.21. They shall build houses, and inhabit them;
and again, v. 22. they shall not build and another inhabit. He promises they
should long enjoy them, and not be turned out till death. However,

9. And lastly, consider, If you belong to God, ye have an house in heaven,
which Christ has prepared for you, Joh. 14.1, 2. Christ himself is the (...) (
Heb. 6.20.) the Harbinger, and is gone before to provide Lodgings for you; And
this is an eternal house: it will never be out of repair, nor you ever be
turned out of it, when once you have taken possession thereof, which will be
shortly: for, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

And whereas you say, you must fare hardly.

I answer; Christians should not make provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof, Romans 13.13. We Dr. Reynold's Treatise of the passions, p. 192.
read indeed, how Nero had an Officer which was called Elegantiae Arbiter, the
Inventer of new Lusts for him. And we read in the same Author of Philoxenus,
who wished he had the throat of a Crane or Vulture, that the pleasure of his
taste might last the longer: but this (as my worthy Author says) was a most
sorded and brutish wish; Ibid. p. 168.
for it was the wisdom of Nature, intending the chief perfection of Man to his
Soul, to make his bodily pleasures the shorter. To complain of faring hardly,
is an unworthy carriage in a Christian; now to prevent this, consider for thy
comfort,

1. Consid. Thy betters have fared more hardly, and yet murmured not. We read,
1 King. 17.8, etc. how Elijah and the Widow of Sarepta with her Family, did
live many days upon an handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little Oil in a
Cruse. So 1 King. 18.13. we read of an hundred men of the Lord's Prophets, hid
by fifty in a Cave, and fed with bread and water. So Micaiah, that faithful
Prophet of the Lord, was put in prison, and fed with the bread and water of
affliction, 1 King. 22.27. So the sons of the Prophets fared hardly, 2 King.
4.38, etc. David was sometimes sore put to it for-diet, 1 Samuel 25.8. And the
Israelites in the Wilderness were hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in
them, Psalm. 107.5. So we read of Jeremy, Jer. 38.9. cast into the Dungeon,
ready to die for hunger. John Baptist was a worthy person, Mat. 11.11. yet his
diet mean; Mat. 3.4. his meat was Locusts and wild-Honey. So Luke 1.15. He
shall neither drink Wine nor strong-drink. So we read Luke 16.21. how Lazarus
(that was afterward translated into Abraham's bosom, v. 23.) lay at the
rich-mans gate full of sores, and begged the crumbs that fell from the
rich-man's table. Christ's Disciples for hunger did rub the ears of corn in
their hands, and ate it when they had done, Mat. 12.1. The Apostles fared
hardly, 1 Cor. 4.11. Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst. St.
Paul himself was in hunger and thirst, in fasting often, 2 Cor. 11.27. So those
of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.37, 38. They were destitute, (viz.)
of food and raiment. Jesus Christ himself fared hardly, he was often an hungry
and thirsty, John 4.6, 7, 8, 9. John 19.28, 29. See Mark 11.11, 12. Christ was
hungry, and seeing a fig tree afar off, having leaves, he came if happily he
might find any thing (he would have been glad of any thing that he could eat)
thereon; and when he came to it he found nothing but leaves. Many of thy
betters have been acquainted with greater wants than thine are, and yet have
been thankful.

2 Consider. The mean Diet of our Forefathers; Musculus, Muscul. in Genesis 1.29
p. 48.
a learned Expositer, observes from Genesis 1.29. compared with Genesis 9.3. that God
appointed Herbs and the fruit of Trees to be man's food, and not Flesh, till
after the Flood. Herbas and arborum fructus dedit in cibum, non carnem nisi
post Diluvium.

And a learned Mr Fuller in Comment. on Ruth.
Divine of our own, says, That for a thousand five hundred and sixty years the
World fed upon Herbs. And the Scripture makes mention since of mean fare of
many godly men. Abraham, a great man, prepared for his great guests no curious
diet, but only plain and wholesome country-fare, Genesis 18.5, etc. So Lot bakes
unleavened bread for the same guests, Genesis 19.3. Luther speaking of excess in
meats and drinks in his time, has this speech. Si nunc Adam resurgeret, and
videret hanc insaniam omnium ordinum, profecto credo quod prae stupore tanquam
lapis staret, Luth. in Genesis 3. If our great Grandfather Adam should revive, and
see the madness of people now a-dayes in making provision, I believe he would
stand amazed at it. Oh how do we degenerate from the simplicity and plainness
of former ages!

3 Consider; It is a mercy thou have any thing to feed upon. Bread to eat, and
Raiment to put oh, is God's free gift, Genesis 28.20. So Mat. 6.11. What thou have
of mercy is more by far than thou deservest. Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy,
(says godly Jacob) of the least of all the mercies which thou have showed unto
thy servant. You live on free Grace, indebted to God for every crust and crumb
of Bread. A cup of cold water, a dinner of green herbs, a bit of dry bread is a
mercy; It comes out of the alms-basket of Providence, and therefore be content.

4 Consider; God can make course diet as healthful. Learned Musculus, Muscul.
in Genesis 1.29. p. 48.
speaking of God's prescribing to man at first herbs and fruit of trees for his
food, says, Hoc cibi genus and parabile and innoxium, dubio procul erat and
naturae commodum and salubre; Without doubt this mean food was wholesome, as well
as ready at hand, for the supply of man's necessity. Gods blessing with a little
suffices; Hence we have that precious Promise, that in case we serve the Lord,
he will bless our bread and water, Exodus 23.25. so Deuteronomy. 8.3. Man lives not by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord
does man live, Mat. 4.4. Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah did eat pulse
and water, and their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh (through
God's blessing) then they that did eat on the Kings portion, as you may read,
Dan. 1.12. etc. Old Par in Shropshire by faring hardly had attained to above an
hundred and forty years. Tenuis mensa sanitatis matter. Delicate feeding renders
the Body dull and diseased, whereas slender meals make it active and healthful.

5. Consid. God can make course diet as pleasant to the taste. See Prove. 15.16,
17. Even a dinner of herbs is sweet, Prove. 27.7. The full soul loatheth an
honey-combe: but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. To the hungry
soul how pleasant is a piece of bread and cheese!

6. Consid. God can make course diet as satisfying, if you belong to him. Prove.
13.25. The righteous eats to the satisfying of ^his soul, but the belly of
the wicked shall want. Indeed we read how they who have their portion in this
life, God fills their bellys with his hid treasure, Psalm. 17.14. But many
Epicures, though their Bellies are filled, yet their appetites are not
satisfied, but they are still hankering after variety of dainties, Ecles. 6.7.
But God has promised to his People that he will satisfy the poorest of them
with bread. Psalm. 132.15. I end this with that of Musculus, Muscul. in Genesis 1
29. p. 48.
Sic esse naturam humanam comparatam, ut quod cibum attinet, modico ac facili
demitti posset, nisi ingluvies obtinuisset, cui nullo edulij genere satisfieri
potest.

7. Consid. God can make a little go far. As he multiplied the Sareptan Widows
handful of Meal and little Oil in a cruse, to the feeding of many, many days,
1 King. 17.15. and Christ in the days of his flesh, with five loves and two
fishes, fed five thousand men, besides women and children, Mat. 14.17, etc. And
though Miracles are now ceased, yet we see daily God feeds many poor people
with a little, so that we wonder how they live, yet (through God's blessing)
they live and look well. There is an expression, Psalm. 107.41. of God's making
the poor man's families like a flock of sheep: which may imply thus much, that
the poor godly man's children being divided into families, as so many flocks of
sheep, shall live and look well with a little: as sheep you know gather fleece
and flesh though they fare hardly.

8. Consid. God sees coarse diet to be most convenient for thee. Pro. 30.8.
wise Agur prayed that God would give him food convenient for him. God sees that
high feeding is not convenient: For, 1. It unfits for good Duties, as Praying,
Reading, Hearing, Meditating, Receiving the Sacrament, etc. St. Chrysostom in
the first Homily on Genesis has this pretty conceit; That Moses when he came
from the Mount, and brought the two Tables of the Commandments with him, when
he perceived the Israelites to whom he came, that they had filled themselves
full, and were dancing and sporting, he threw down the Tables, because (says
that golden-mouthed Father) he thought it an absurd thing to give Commandments
for them to observe upon a full stomach. See Mr. Ramsden's Sermon. on Luke 21.34.
For, 2. It besots men, and makes them careless and senseless; It is the nurse
of security, as you may see Luke 17.27, etc. so Luke 21.34.

Intrarunt Urbem somno Vimque sepultam.
Virg. -- Corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat --
Horat. Full meals, as they make dull bodies, so they make foggy minds. 3. It
is accompanied usually with many sins. As great and delicate Persons have
usually a great Retinue waiting upon them, so high and delicate feeding is
generally accompanied with many sins, as Pride and Idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49.
Unthankfulness and Forgetfulness of God, Deuteronomy. 32.15. and 8.10, 11. Prove. 30.8.
Vomiting and Filthiness, Isa. 28.8. Lust and Uncleanness, Prove. 23.31, etc.
Jer. 5.7, 8. Romans 13.13. Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambring and Wantonness go
together. Saturitas ventris, seminarium libidinis: A full belly and a foul
heart seldom go uncoupled. 4. And lastly. It brings down God's Judgments. It
brought the Flood upon the old World, Mat. 24.38. Fire on Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49,
50. The Sword on Israel, Amos 6.4, 7. compared. See what befell the murmuring
Israelites that desired delicious fare, Psalm. 78.30, 31. They were not
estranged from their lusts, but whilst the meat was in their mouths, the wrath
of God fell upon them and slew the fattest of them, etc. We read likewise of
the rich-man that fared deliciously every day, was after his death in Hell, and
lift up his eyes, being in torment, Luke 16.19, 23 compared. The Apostle tells
you, Phil. 3.19. Whose god is their belly, their end is destruction. To shut up
this, The Psalmist speaks of some, how God gave them their request, but sent
leanness into their soul, Psalm. 106.15. If God should give thee thy request,
and bestow more delicious fare upon thee, (however thy body might come on, yet)
thy soul would be but poor in grace, lean, and ill-favored. It is well for
God's Servants that their Master keeps them in good working case: for as an
Heathen said, (...). Menand. It is better to fare meanly and live well, then to
fare deliciously and live disorderly. A barren ground does well for Gods sheep,
fat pastures may rot them; And a full table may be a snare to Christians, and
that which should have been for their welfare (through an ill disposition in
them) may become a trap unto them, Psalm. 69.22. God then in giving thee course
Diet sees it most fit for thee.

9. Consid. If you serve God you are not without your feasts: you have several
Spiritual feasts which are far better then bodily. To name a few, 1. you have
the feast of a good Conscience, Prove. 15.15. He that is of a merry heart has a
continual feast. The Scripture often puts Heart for Conscience, 2 Samuel 24.10.
Acts 15.9. 1 John 3.20. The Hebrews have no other word but (...) to express
Conscience by. And because a good Conscience causes joy, or mirth, therefore
it is rendered a merry Heart, but it may be rendered according to the Original, A
good Conscience is a feast always, or at a feast continually. 2. You have the
Word of God which is a feast. This is (...), as Clemens calls it, Vitae
aeternae viaticum. David looked upon it as such, Psalm. 119.19. I am a stranger
here on Earth, hide not thy Commandments from me. He looked upon Gods Commands,
backed with Promises, as his Spiritual food, whilst traveling toward Heaven
his own Country. He esteemed it sweeter then honey, or the honeycomb, Psalm.
19.10. and Job esteemed it more then his ordinary food, Job 23.12. [3.] You
have the feast of the Lords Supper. This is Heavenly Manna, our viaticum to the
Heavenly Canaan. This is Spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3. It is Angelical food,
indeed an excellent banquet, for says Christ, Joh. 6.55. My Flesh is meat
indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. Meat and drink indeed, by way of
reallity, and by way of excellency, see Psalm. 22.26, 29. and 36.8. so Isa.
25.6. and 55.1, 2. These and such like places signify celestial viands,
wherewith God feeds his people by the ministry of his blessed Word and
Sacraments. Hungry and thirsty souls get much refreshing by these, Luke 1.53.
[4.] and lastly, You have the rich graces of the Spirit of God which are a
spiritual feast: of this Christ speaks Mat. 5.6. Such as hunger and thirst
after the righteousness of Christ, after the gifts and graces of his blessed
Spirit, they are blessed, and they shall be filled, as at a feast. So Rev.
3.20. If any man open the door of his heart, and recieve Christ with his
graces, he has promised to come in and sup with him; They shall be merry and
fully satisfied as at a feast. Thus the righteous have meat to eat, that the
world knows not of.

10. And lastly, consider, If you belong to God, you shall ere long have better
fare. You may be to morrow for ought you know at the Supper of the Lamb, Rev.
19.9. God (as one says) is the founder of this feast, and none are admitted
but Friends. Christ the Lamb of God, will gird himself, and make them to sit
down to meat, and will come forth and serve them, Luke 12.37. What a strange
expression is this! Christ himself their Lord and Master will serve at the
Table; he who is sweetness it self will afford them his presence to serve them,
and to solace them. Future happiness is often in Scripture set forth under the
similitude of a feast; as Mat. 26.29. Mark 14.25. Luke 22.16, 18, 30. Mat.
8.11. so Luke 13.29. the Greek word (...), signifies to sit down as at a feast
or banquet: but let us not dream as possibly that Pharisee did, Luke 14.15.
that there is eating and drinking in Heaven. For glorified bodies are freed
from these and the like necessities, Rev. 7.16. They shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more -- and then, v. 17. The Lamb which is in the midst of
the Throne shall feed them, etc. The Lamb of God shall be instead of meat,
drink, apparel, sleep, and the like. Muscul. in Genesis 1.29. p. 47.
In coelesti vita corpus futurum est sine cibo perdurare. Glorified bodies
shall stand in no need of any outward refreshments, no more then Spirits do:
And therefore the Apostle tells you, It is sown a natural body, it is raised a
Spritual body, 1 Cor. 15.44. The holy Ghost then by comparing the joys of
Heaven to a Feast, shows that there is fullness of joy, as at a Feast. For as it
is Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there
are pleasures for ever more. Well then, poor Christian, that fares so hardly,
though it be bad with thee now, it will be better with thee shortly. Poor
Lazaras that fared hardly here, being dead is comforted, Luke 16.25. and
abundantly refreshed as at a feast.

And whereas you say, you must wear mean apparel.

Consider for your comfort,

1. Consider, Thy betters have gone in worse habit then thou wearest. John the
Baptist had his Raiment of Camels hair, and a leathern girdle about his Loins,
Mat. 3.4. so the Apostles 1 Cor. 4.11. We hunger and thirst, and are naked; so
2 Cor. 11.27. so those Worthies, Heb. 11.37. They wandered about in Sheepskins,
and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented. Our first Parents after
the fall were no better clothed then with Leather, Genesis 3.21.

2. Consider, Thy Garments how mean soever, are gifts from God. Genesis 28.20.
Jacob acknowledged raiment to put on, as well as bread to eat, to be Gods gift.
God ows thee nothing, thou deservest nothing. It is a mercy that thou have any
thing to put on to cover thy nakedness. For thy unthankfulness God might justly
strip thee of all. Hos. 2.8, 9.

3. Consider, God knows mean apparel is fittest for thee. Costly apparel is
many times a provocation to lust, 1 Timothy 2.9. It is a consumer of a great
estate, and so hinders works of charity. It brings down Gods judgments, Isa.
3.16. etc. Zeph. 1.8. It makes them proud usually that wear it: who more proud
then your great Gallants? though there is little reason for it. For many
inferior pitiful creatures excel man in his gallantry. Solomon in all his glory
was not arrayed like a Lilly, Mat. 6.28, 29. And a poor Butter-fly (as Refined
Courtier. p. 47.
one says) outvies all the artificial colors of the Court. Besides, our
clothes are ensigns of our sin and shame, compare Genesis 2.25. with Genesis 3.21.
The same Hebrew word (...) that signifies a garment, Buxtorf. Heb. lex.
signifies likewise sin; Had it not been for sin that caused shame, we had not
needed apparel: And therefore to be proud of it, is as if a wounded man should
be proud of his plasters. Well then, God clothes thee in mean apparel to
prevent sin in thee.

4. Consider, To be desirous of rich apparel argues much vanity. St. Bernard
says, Vestium curiositas deformitatis mentium, et morum indicium est. It shows
the deformed nakedness of the soul, and that virtue hangs but loosly on it.
Attire was at first given (as I told you) to cover shame and sin, he therefore
that is desirous of apparel, surely has more sin to hide, more shame to cover
then other men.

5. Consider, God respects no man a jot the more, for the richness af his
outward apparel, see Jam. 2.5. God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in
Faith. Poor Lazarus was dear to him, and received into Abraham's bosom: but rich
Dives, notwithstanding his gorgeous apparel, was cast into Hell, the place of
torment, as you read Luke 16.19. etc.

6. Consider, Course garments may be as useful, Hos. 2.9.
as costly apparel. Garments were given for these ends,

1. To cover our nakedness. Genesis 3.7. Our first Parents after the fall sewed
fig leaves together (poor shifts) to cover their shame.

2. To defend and guard the body, from the injuries of the weather. Garments
are munimenta corporis, the bodies defense and safeguard: see Genesis 3.21. Our
first Parents first covering was of fig leaves, which would do them little
service: but God afterward provided them such clothing as would defend them
against the offense of heat, cold, wind, rain, etc.

3. To give warmth to the body, Joh 31.20. and Job 37.17.

4. and lastly, To distinguish persons, [1.] In respect of sex, that men may be
known from women, and women from men, Deuteronomy. 22.5. The woman shall not wear that
which pertains to the man, nor shall a man put on a woman's garment. Habits of
men and women have been ever diverse. [2.] In respect of quality and condition.
Conditions should thereby be distinguished as well as Sexes. Clergy should by
their garments, be distinguished from Laity, Exodus 28.2. etc. Rich from Poor,
Prince from Peasent, Master from Servant, Mat. 11.8. Luke 7.25. Well then, are
not thy course garments as useful as more costly apparel? do they not cover thy
nakedness, defend thy body, keep thee warm, and distinguish thee in respect of
sex and condition? Therefore be content.

7. And lastly, Consider, If you be clothed with Christ's Righteousness, and
have upon your souls the graces of his blessed Spirit, you are better clothed
then he that goes in Scarlet, wanting this spiritual apparel. Christ with his
Righteousness, and the graces of his Spirit in Scripture, is compared to a
garment, Psalm. 45.13, 14, Isa. 61.10. Mat. 22.11, 12. Romans 13.14. Gal. 3.27.
Ephesians. 4.24. The white Raiment so often mentioned in the Revelations (as Rev. 3
18. and 4.4. and 6.11. and 7.9, 13.) what is it but Jesus Christ imputed and
applied to the soul, Christ with his graces, in which the soul of a Beleiver is
invested, Rev. 19.8. Believers are candidati invested with the white Robes of
Christ's Righteousness. This spiritual Garment does most beautify a Christian,
as the Apostle shows, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. Whose adorning let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of
apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price. And again, 1 Pet. 5.5. be clothed with humility.
Humility is a garment becoming any Christian soul. The Greek word (...);
Illigare et innodare significat. Mr. Leigh's Crit. Sacra in vocem
It signifies to ^ye or bind together: or to tie knots, as delicate and curious
women use to do of Ribands, to adorn their heads or bodies; as if Humility was
the knot of every Virtue, and ornament of every Grace. And St. Paul advises, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. That women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefastness, and sobriety, not with broidred Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or
costly Array, but (which becomes women professing Godliness) with good works.
St. Cyprian writing to the Virgins of his time, said of them, Quaerentes
ornamenta monilium, perdiderunt morum; That they looked so much after Jewels,
they lost the Ornament of Virtue and good Manners. No such Jewels as Meekness,
Humility, Chastity, Sobriety, etc. See a chain of Graces becoming any
Christians neck, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. Salvian says, Salv. l. 7. de gub. Dei. pe
235.
Quid Deus a nobis exigit, quid praestari sibi a nobis jubet, nisi solum
tantummodo fidem castitatem, humilitatem, sobrietatem, misericordiam,
sanctitatem, quae utique omnia non onerant nos sed ornant. These graces will
adorn, not burden us. Put on therefore (as the elect of God holy and beloved)
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering,
forbearing one another, etc. Col. 3.12, 13. If these graces be in you and
abound, you have no cause to complain, though your outward apparel be but mean.

But you say, You shall be slighted and disrespected.

Prove. 14.20. The poor is hated even of his neighbor, but the rich has many
friends.

Donec eris faelix, multos numerabis amicos:
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes. Ovid.
It is with us usually, as with a Sun-dyal: you know in a cloudy day the
Sun-dyal is not looked upon; nor are we respected if a cloud of adversity
overshadow us.

Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris. But let such consider for their comfort:

1. Consid. It has been the common Lot of God's dear servants to be
disrespected. Job's friends (like leaves from trees) dropped off from him when
the winter of adversity drew on. See Job 12.4. I am as one mocked of his
neighbor. -- The just upright man is laughed to scorn. And Job 16.20. My
friends scorn me. So Job 19.13, to 20. So David, Psalm. 109.25. I became a
reproach (says he) unto them; when they looked upon me, they shaked their
heads; (by way of derision, Psalm. 22.7.) So Psalm. 119.141. I am small and
despised. So it was with the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.10, 13. They were defamed, and
made as the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things. So those
Worthies, Heb. 11.36. Had trial of cruel mockings. Nay Christ himself, our Lord
and Master, was despised: See Psalm. 22.6. I am a worm and no man, a reproach of
men, and despised of the people. (It is spoken Prophetically of Christ) So Isa.
53.3. He is despised and rejected of men. And Phil. 2.7. He made himself of no
reputation. Nay God himself is despised, Exodus 5.2. Pharaoh said; Who is the
Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go. So Job 21.14, 15. They say unto God, Depart from
us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: What is the Almighty that we
should serve him? And what profit shall we have if we pray unto him? So Psalm.
73.9. Wicked men set their mouth against the Heavens. Melancton said right,
Nullum hominem tantum sustinere malorum quantum contumeliarum Deus. Our betters
then by far, are far more despised than we are or can be.

2. Consid. God has an hand in all reproach and disrespect that we meet with.
David under curses and great disrespect from Shimei, saw God's Providence in
it, and was patient; 2 Samuel 16.10. Let him curse (said he) because the Lord
has said unto him, Curse David. And again, verse. 11. Let him alone, let him
curse: for the Lord has bidden him, etc. But where did God bid him?

David was, Exodus 22.28. Eccles. 10.20.) but (as some observe) by a secret act
of Providence, disposing of Shimei's malice to chastise David for his sins, and
hasten forward his own destruction, as it did afterward in Solomon's days, 1
King. 2.44.

That God has a hand in the disrespect we meet with, will farther appear,
Psalm. 44.9. Thou have cast us off (says the Church) and put us to shame. So
verse. 13. Thou make us a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn and derision to
them that are round about us. And again, verse. 14. Thou make us a byword
among the heathen, a shaking of the head among the people. God himself tells
us, Isa. 43.28. I have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.
Submit therefore your selves to God, as St. James speaks, Jam. 4.7.

3. Consid. God lays upon you scorn and disrespect for your good. David was
patient under disrespect, not only because he saw the hand of God in it, but
likewise because he thought God would do him good by it: as you may see, 2 Samuel
16.12. It may be (says he) that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and
that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day. God has several good
ends in suffering thee to lie under disrespect: As,

1. For the Trial and Exercise of Christian Graces, as Faith, Patience,
Constancy, Courage, Sincerity, Zeal, Humility etc. 1 Pet. 4.12.

2. To wean thee from the world. We love to stay where we are much made of. God
suffers thee to meet with disrespect, that as Aloes laid to the Breast of the
World, it might wean thee from it.

See Dr. Hamond on that place.
3. To drive thee to prayer. Psalm. 69.12. They that sit in the Gate speak
against me, and I was the song of the drunkards. Grave men that sit in the seat
of Judicature (and as one would have thought should have had more wit) and vain
men that spend their time in drinking excessively, both sorts despised him: but
how does David behave himself under this disrespect? see v. 13. But as for me,
my prayer is to thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time. See the like carriage in
the same person, under the like disrespect, Psalm. 109.2, 3, 4.

4. And lastly, God suffers thee to lie under disrespect, to make thee walk
circumspectly: David walked so, because he had many enemies watched for his
halting, as you may see, Psalm. 27.11. Teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a
plain path, because of mine enemies. So Psalm. 56.5, 6, 13. compared. Thus you
see God in his providence orders it for good. So that we may say with Luther,
Mihi maxim prosunt, qui mei pessime meminerunt, Lutherus pascitur convitijs.
Scornful enemies (if we have hearts rightly to improve the affliction) are our
best friends, though not intentionally yet eventually.

4. Consider, To complain of disrespect from the world, is unsuitable to a
Christian, and that in three respects.

1. It is unsuitable to a Christian's Spirit. It is below the magnanimous spirit
of a Christian to take notice of worldly disrespect. Noah met with much
disrespect from the Old World, yet he binds their jeers, taunts, and reproaches
as a Crown to his head, and advances courageously forward in the race of
Christianity. When the Senate had informed Augustus of some reproachful words
and bad usage toward him, he replied; non tantum habemus otij, I am not at
leisure to mind such trivial things. He thought it not worth while to take
notice of worldly disrespect. Let not Christians for shame come short of
Heathens.

2. It is unsuitable to a Christians Profession, They profess themselves not to
be of this World, Phil. 3.19, 20. and therefore no wonder that they are
disrespected by the world, John 15.19. so 1 John 3.13. Marvel not my Brethren
if the World hate you. Believers confess they are Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth, Genesis 47.9, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. Heb. 11.13, 14, 15. Strangers look for no
great respect, being from home in a far country. Strangers are content with
mean usage, they know they shall be much made of when they are in their own
country.

3. It is unsuitable to a Christians practice. Wicked men are desirous of
vainglory, witness Phaeroh, Haman, Herod, etc. but for the Righteous the more
holy; the more humble; and the less they care for worldly respect. A vessel
upon the water the more it fills the more it sinks; the weightiest ears of corn
bow down their heads the lowest. Ezra cries out, Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am
ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God; for our iniquities are
increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the Heavens. So wise
Agur confesses he is more brutish then any man, Prove. 30.2. So Isaiah
confesses he is a man of unclean lips, Isa. 6.5. And Daniel cries out, Dan.
9.8. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face -- because we have sinned
against thee. So Paul, that eminent Apostle, counts himself less then the least
of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. and of sinners the chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. True
Godliness dryes up all ambitious humors. The righteous have their eyes open to
see their wretched vileness, sinfulness, nakedness, worthlesness, they are
conscious to themselves of many sins committed before conversion, and many
frailties since conversion, and they are so far from wondering at that
disrespect they meet with, that they wonder they are no more disrespected.

5. Consid. If you serve the Lord, you are not without respect. Sin puts
vileness upon the person that is great in the worlds esteem. Dan. 11.21. Nah.
1.14. A wicked person is called a vile person, Psalm. 15.4. Sin renders a man
vile and contemptible, and makes him (as Jacob said to Ruben, Genesis 49.4.) that
he cannot excel. But Holiness renders a man honorable: The Righteous are the
only excellent, Psalm. 16.3. so Prove. 12.26. The Righteous is more excellent
then his Neighbor. They are called Vessels of Honor, 2 Timothy 2.21. They are
Vessels brim-full of honor. But more particularly, if you serve God,

1. God himself respects you. Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight,
thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee. He calls them his Jewels,
Mal. 3.17. They are Hephzibah, the Lord's delight, Isa. 62.4. God respects
their Persons, though never so poor: Psalm. 40.17. I am poor and needy, yet the
Lord thinks on me. So Psalm. 138.6. Though the Lord be high, yet has he
respect unto the lowly. And as their Persons, so their Prayers are precious.
Cant. 2.14. Let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice (says Christ to
the Church) for sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is comely. So Psalm.
34.15, 17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
prayer. So Psalm. 106.43, 44. and Mic. 7.7. My God will hear me says the
afflicted Church. And as their persons and prayers, so their tears are
precious. God bottles them up, Psalm. 56.8. so Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in
Tears, shall reap in Joy. Yea their very death is precious, Psalm. 116.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Thus you see,
they that honor God, are honored by God, according to his promise, 1 Samuel
2.30. so Psa. 5.12. Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou
compass him as with ashield. Tantus quisque est quantus est apud Deum. Being
then Gods favourit, value not the worlds frowns

2. Good Angels respect you, as they rejoiced at your conversion, Luke 15.10.
so they now flock about you to do you good, Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. So Psalm. 91.11.
so Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, (speaking of the Angels)
sent forth to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation. The Righteous
have Angels for their Lifeguard.

3. And lastly, Good men respect you: they speak well of you, pray to God for
you, and are ready to relieve you according to their ability, Psalm. 15.4. a
good man honors them that fear the Lord. So Psalm. 16.2, 3. My goodness
(says David) extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the Earth, and
to the Excellent, in whom is all my delight. So Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion
(says he) of all them that fear thee and keep thy Precepts. The Apostle makes
mention of Love to all the Saints, Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 1.4. Phil. 5. A true
Believer loves a Saint in Rags as well as a Saint in Robes; He loves God's
Image (as one says) though hung up in never so poor a frame. To be partial in
affection, and to have the Faith of God in respect of persons, is at large
forbidden, James 2.2, 3, 4. etc. Well then, consider, though wicked men slight
thee, yet God, the blessed Angels and Saints, have thee in great esteem.

6. And lastly Consider, If you belong to God, you shall shortly be invested
with Heavenly glory. Sometimes God's dear Children, after great disrespect,
meet with much honor in this world; as Joseph, David, Daniel and others did:
but if they miss of it here, they shall be sure to have a Crown of Glory
hereafter. Romans 2.6, 7. God will render to every man according to his deeds: to
them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, Eternal life. So v. 10. Glory, Honor, and Peace, to every one
that works good. They shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven, Mat. 22.30.
they shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43.
What made St. Paul so patient under all indignities he met with, but the
thoughts of his future Glory! for says he, Romans 8.18. I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us; therefore, as it is, Romans 5.2. Rejoice in hope of
the glory of God.

You say, You have many Children to provide for.

David could ban the enemies of God withal, Psalm. 109.9, 10. Let his Children
be Eatherless, and his Wife a Widow; let his Children be continually vagabonds,
and beg: Let them seek their bread also out of their desolate places. But
consider for your comfort.

1. Consider, God feeds other creatures and their young. God provides for all
creatures, they live upon his bounty, Psalm. 104.27, 28. All wait upon thee that
thou may give them their meat in due season: that thou give them, they
gather: thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good. So Psalm. 145.15, 16.
and Psalm. 147.9. he gives to the beast his food, and to the young Ravens which
cry. Job also takes notice of God's providing for the Ravens young ones, Job.
38.41. Some say that the Raven, Mr Gore in his Sermon. on Ps. 37.25
when the young ones are new hatched, flies away and leaves them destitute of
Food, and there they lie in the nest croaking and crying, ready to starve for
want of sustenance; but God takes pity upon them, and creates a Worm out of
their excrements, which crawleth into their mouths, and so feeds them, and
keeps them alive. How true this is I know not; I rather think otherwise, that
the old Ravens go abroad to seek food for their young, who in the mean time cry
for hunger in their nests, and God gives food to the old ones to carry it to
their young: And when the old ones will no longer feed them, being able to fly
themselves, they wander for lack of meat, and God gives it to them. It is one
of our Savior's Arguments to beat down distracting care for worldly things,
Mat. 6.26. Behold the Fowls of the Air (he says not those about the house that
are fed by the hand, at or about the barn-door, but those of the Air, which fly
about and no man provides for) they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into barns, yet your Heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not much better then
they? God feeds the Sparrows, then fear not, ye are of more value then many
Sparrows, Luke 12.7. Nay ye are better then Sheep, Mat. 12.12. better then
Oxen, whom God takes care for, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10. Now if God take care of more
contemptible creatures and their young, surely he will provide for rational
creatures and their Children, whom he has made but little lower then the
Angels, and put all other creatures under their feet, Psalm. 8.5, 6, 7, 8. We
have an usual saying, he that sends mouths will send meat. Lect 30. on Jonah p.
629.
Surely as Dr. Abbot says, God never made a belly, but he made meat for that
belly; he never framed a back, but he made clothes to cover it.

2. Consider, God is said in Scripture to be an helper of the Fatherless, poor,
and friendless. God indeed is called the preserver of men, Job 7.20. and he
preserves all men; but for the comfort of the poor, he is said to be their
helper. Psalm. 10.14. The poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper
of the fatherless. So Psalm. 107.9. he satisfies the longing soul, and fills
the hungry soul with goodness. So Luke 1.53. he fills the hungry with good
things. So Psalm. 146.9. The Lord preserves the Stranger, he relieveth the
Fatherless and Widow. So Hos. 14.3. In thee the Fatherless finds mercy.

3. Consider, God has promised to help such. Psalm. 132.15. I will satisfy her
poor with bread, says God. So Isa. 41.17, 18. When the poor and needy seek
water and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will
hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them: I will open Rivers in
high places, and Fountains in the midst of the Valleys, I will make the
Wilderness a Pool of water, and the dry-land Springs of water. So Isa. 49.15.
and 66.13. so Jer. 49.11. Leave thy Fatherless Children, I will preserve them
alive, and let thy Widows trust in me. God in these and the like places
engages (as it were) under hand and seal, for their necessary provision: God
has (as it were) entered into bond, for the better security of the poor. And
therefore the poor that belong to God should conclude with David, Psalm. 27.10.
When my Father and my Mother forsake me (either through unnatural cruelty, or
unavoidable mortality) then the Lord will take me up. He Will be my Guardian, and
take care of me, for ( Tit. 1.2.) he that cannot lie has promised so to do.

4. Consider, God often times raises up for his Children unexpected help. God
put it into the mind of Pharaohs Daughter to pity poor drowning Moses and
nurse him at her own charges, as you read Exodus 2.5, 6. etc. Distressed Naomi
met with a friendly Daughter-in-law, whose name was Ruth, Ruth 1.16, 17. She
loved her, and was better to her then seven Sons, Ruth 4.15. And Ruth met with
Boaz whose kindness was great toward her. When Esters Father and Mother were
dead, Mordecai bred her up as his own Daughter, Ester 2.7. And in process of
time she became a Queen. God has in his hand the hearts of all, even the
greatest, and can turn them whithersoever he will, Psalm. 106.46.
Prove. 21.1. he can raise thee up friends to relieve thee, whom thou think
not of: fresh supplies are coming, though thou see not from whence.

5 Consider, When outward expectations fail, then God usually helps. God does
not help his People presently out of their straits, because he would humble
them, wean them from the world, make them prize his mercy the more, when it
comes; and give him the sole praise of all to whom it is due. Therefore do not
think that God has forgotten thee, and utterly forsaken thee, because things
go cross to thine expectation, and thou growest poorer and poorer. Man's
extremity is many times Gods opportunity. God came to Isaac's relief in his
greatest necessities, Genesis 22.14. When the Israelites were much oppressed and
cried to the Lord, Cum duplicantur Lateres, venit Moses. Exodus 5.9
by reason of their hard usage, God raises up Moses to be their deliverer,
Exodus 3. When Sampson was ready to die for thirst, God brings water out of a
jaw bone for him, Judge. 5.18, 19. When Elijah was in great want, God made the
Ravens (creatures likely to devour him, Prove. 30.17.) his caterers to provide
food for him, 1. ^in. 17.6. When the Israelites were in great straits in the
Wilderness, he brought Manna out of the Clouds, and Water out of the Rock, Neh.
9.15. Psalm. 114.8. And David tells us when he was brought low, God helped him,
Psalm. 116.6. and 130.1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord. The
Lord saw him sinking all the while, and when at the bottom, he helps him.
Sinking Peter cried out, Lord save me, Mat. 14.30, 31. And Christ gave him his
helping hand. Ubi humanum defuit, ibi incipit Divinum auxilium. When outward
helps fail, then God begins to work. When the water was spent in the bottle,
God leads Hagar to a Well, Genesis 21.15, 19. compared. And when Wine was spent at
a Marriage Feast, Christ turned Water into Wine, as you may see, John 2.
beginning. When all is spent, God can relieve thee some way or other. Though we
see no way to get out of our straights, yet God can break a bar of brass or bow
of steel, and give an happy issue, as he caused Peter's Chains to fall from his
hands, and the Iron-gate to open of its own accord, Acts 12.7, 10. Therefore be
not discouraged under your greatest wants, but rely upon God, who can do more
abundantly for us above what we can either ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Christ in
the days of his flesh, had compassion on the multitude which had nothing to
eat, and would not send them away fasting, lest they should faint by the way,
and therefore wrought a Miracle in their behalf, Mark 8.1, 2, 3. etc. Surely
now he is ascended into the Heavens, he is as compassionate as ever, Heb. 4.15,
16. and if you seek unto him, you shall find mercy and grace to help in time of
need.

You say, What course to take for maintenance you know not?

Mat. 6.25. to the end of that chapter. So St. Paul advises to be careful for
nothing, Phil. 4.6. he there forbids a distracting, distrustful care. Yet the
same Apostle to Timothy says, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any man provide not for his own,
and specially for those of his own house, he has denied the Faith, and is
worse then an Infidel. q. d. such an one has neither Religion nor Humanity in
him. I shall therefore, with what brevity and plainness I can, show you what to
do, that you may have maintenance for your selves, and such as belong to you.
Take these following Directions, and put them into speedy practice.

1. Direct. Be much in prayer. Pray to God that he would direct thee what
course to take, Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths. Pray to God for his blessing upon thine endeavors. It is God
that gives thee power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. so Psalm. 127.1, 2. Except the
Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. -- It is vain for you
to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows. You may toil
and moil and fare hardly, but except God bless your endeavors, you shall not
thrive in your estates, Been orasse est been laborasse. They that pray well,
are most likely to work well, and to have greatest success in their business
they go about. A chet is no let, says the proverb. Movers lose not any time,
which they spend in whetting or grinding of their sythes. Our prayer in the
morning (says Mr. Fuller's Com. on Ruth 2.7
a worthy Divine) sets an edg on our dull souls, and makes our minds to
undertake our labors with the greater alacrity, and (I may add) with better
success. We read how Ruth going to glean in Boaz's field, tarried a little in
the house, Ruth 2.7. Probably (says the former-quoted Divine) to say her
Mattins, to do her Devotions, commend her self with fervent prayer unto the
Lord, to bless her, and her endeavors the day following, as indeed God did. So
Abraham's Servant prayed for good speed in a weighty undertaking, and how
successively things fell out, you read Genesis 24.12. etc. Our Savior has taught
us to pray daily for our daily Bread, i. e. outward maintenance, Mat. 6.11.
Moses in the behalf of himself and God's people, prayed for a blessing upon
their labors, Psalm. 90.17. Establish thou the work of our hands upon us, -- it
is in the old translation, Prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, yea
prosper thou our handiwork. They that pray most are likely to prosper best.
See Ps. 34.6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of
all his troubles. So v. 10. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they
that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. So verse. 17. The righteous
cry, and the Lord hears and delivers them out of all their troubles. So
Psalm. 107.4, 5, 6, 9 compared. Thus the Lord is good unto them that wait for
him, to the soul that seeks him, Lam. 3.25.

2. Direct. Labor diligently in some honest calling. God would have men to get
their livings this way. Genesis 3.19. Prove. 6.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 4.28. 1 These. 4.11. 2
These. 3.10, 11. These places show God expects we should labor in some honest
calling, and those that do so may expect to thrive in their estate. Prove. 10.4.
The hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. 13.11. Wealth gotten by vanity (i.
e. by vain courses, as by gaming, cheating, lying, wantonness, etc.) shall be
diminished; but he that gathers by labor shall increase. So Prove. 22.29.
See thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings, he
shall not stand before mean men. This shows that such many times come to great
preferment.

3. Direct. Trust and rely upon the Lord. God wonderfully provides for such, as
these places show. Psalm. 33.18, 19. Psalm. 34.22. Psalm. 36.7, 8. and 37.3. So
Prove. 28.25. So Jer. 17.7, 8. Ruth did rely upon the Lord, Ruth 2.12. and God
did wonderfully provide for her, as you may read in that Book, which bears her
name, because she is the chief subject thereof. Learned and godly Musculus was
very poor, and when his Wife and Children begged bread of him, to divert his
cares, he fell to making of Verses.

Est Deus in coelis qui providus omnia curat, Mr. Fuller's Sermon. on Mat. 4 4.

Credentes nunquam destituisse potest.
A God in heaven for all things care does take,
And such as trust in him, he will never forsake.
Therefore, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he shall sustain thee. And as the Apostle says, Cast all your care upon
him, for he cares for you, 1 Pet 5.7. The ready way to want maintenance, is to
distrust Providence; as you may see Jer. 17. and 6. Rely then on the
never-failing Providence of your heavenly Father.

4. Direct. Give something to the poor. This may seem a riddle to some, how
giving away should be a means to increase our estate: Yet so it is; Prove.
11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be
watered also himself. Alms to the poor (as one faith) is like pouring a pail of
water into a dry pump, that fetches up a great deal more. See for farther
proof, Prove. 19.17. and 22.9. and 28.27. So Luke 6.38. Give (says our blessed
Savior) and it shall be given you, good measure, pr^ssed down, and shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. I have See Mr Clark
in his Sermon on Heb. 10.24.
read, how there was a certain charitabe Bishop of Millain, who journying with
his servant, was met by some poor people that begged an alms of him. The Bishop
commanded his man to give them all that little money which he had, which was
three Crowns: But his servant thinking to be a better husband for his Master,
gave them but two Crowns, reserving the third for their expenses at night. Soon
after certain Noblemen meeting the Bishop, and knowing him to be a liberal man,
commanded two hundred Crowns to be given to the Bishops servant, for his
Masters use. The man having received the money, ran with joy and told his
Master of it. Ah! said the Bishop, What wrong have thou done both to me and thy
self? Si enim trees dedisses, trecentas accepisses. If thou had given those
three Crowns, as I appointed thee, thou should have received three hundred,
as Melancton relates it. Never any were poorer for discreetly relieving objects
of charity. St. Basil says, (...). Wells that have their water drawn, spring
ever more freely. And Salvian Salvian ad Eccl. Cath. lib 3. p. 413.
tells us, Pecunia quae pauperibus dispensatur, augetur: cum usuris absque
dubio Deo redditur, quicquid egentibus erogatur. Money given to the poor is put
out to use (as it were) into the hands of God, and it shall bring in a great
increase. Giving to the poor is called a dispersing, Psalm. 112.9. 2 Cor. 9.9.
It is a Metaphor taken from an husbandman, that scattering his seed in the
ground, has a plentiful increase.



Mark 12.41, etc. The poor widows two mites were accepted. And we read, how the
Apostle by the example of the Macedonians, would stir up the Corinthians to a
liberal contribution for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, etc. The
Macedonians in the depth of poverty abounded in liberality, Yea beyond their
power they were willing of themselves: However if you be not able to hold out
your hand to them, yet draw out your soul to the hungry, as the expression is,
Isa. 58.11. If with Peter you have neither silver nor gold to give, Act. 3.6.
give such as you have. Have pity on them, Prove. 19.17. pray for them, give
them good counsel, stir up others to relieve them; If there be first a willing
mind it is accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12. by doing thus you may give them that which at
least is as good as silver, for Prove. 10.20. The tongue of the just is as
choice silver: Thus the Apostles, though very poor, yet made many rich, 2 Cor.
6.10. I end this with that of the wise man, Prove. 11.24. There is that
scatters and yet increases, and there is that withholds more than is
meet, and it tends to poverty.

5. Direct. Take heed of impoverishing sins. Sin lived in, brings a curse upon
us, and all that belongs unto us, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, etc. It is
said of those Psalm. 106.43. They were brought low for their iniquity. Any sin
wittingly and constantly lived in, may cause God to blow upon our labors and
blast all. But there are some sins have poverty more especially entailed upon
them, and what these sins are you shall hear out of Gods Word, I pray you
observe them to avoid them. Impoverishing sins Impoverishing sins.
are such as these.

1. Unthankfulness for what we have. See Hos. 2.8, 9. She did not know (i. e.
thankfully acknowledge) that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied
her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal: therefore will I return, and
take away their corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof;
and will recover my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness.

2. Rashness Prove. 21.5. The thoughts of the diligent tend only to
plenteousness, but of every one that is hasty, only to want. q. d. The
diligent man that does his business discreetly, shall prosper, but he that does
it rashly, and unadvisedly, shall come to want. We have two Proverbs agreeable
to this of Solomon's, Haste makes waste. (...) pauper.
And, The more haste, the worse speed. (...) ash in Hebrew signifies poor, I
think rash men seldom die rich men.

3. Making too much have to be rich. Prove. 28.22. He that hastes to be rich
has an evil eye, (that is, a covetous eye) and considers not that poverty
shall come upon him. Covetousness brings little home at last; as we say
Proverbially, All covet, all lose.

4. Refusing reproof and instruction. Prove. 13.18. Poverty and shame shall be
to him that refuses instruction, but he that regards reproof shall be
honored.

5. Oppressing the poor, and giving of bribes. Prove. 22.16. He that oppresses
the poor to increase his riches, and he that gives to the rich, shall surely
come to want. Most Interpreters that I have met with, understand the words as
spoken of one man, and then the sense is this: He that oppresses the poor, and
bribes the rich, that he may do it more securely (a thing often practiced by men
of no conscience) such a person shall not long thrive by it. See Job 15.20, 21,
29, compared. And Job 20.15, to the end of that Chapter. An heathen observed;
De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.

6. Idleness. Prove. 6.9, 10, 11. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? When
will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber (says
the sluggard) a little folding of the hands to sleep: so shall thy poverty
(says the wise man) come, as one that travelleth (i. e. It shall come
suddenly, certainly, and painfully) and thy want as an armed man, so as it
cannot be resisted. See likewise Prove. 13.4. and 18.9. and 20.4. and 24.30, 31,
32, 33, 34.

7. Keeping wicked company. Prove. 28.19. He that tilleth his land shall have
plenty of bread, but he that follows after vain persons (and so neglects his
business, which he must needs do) shall have poverty enough.

8. Talkativeness, as lying, slandering, railing, talking of other folks
business, which concerns us not, etc. Prove. 14.23. The talk of the lips tend
only to penury.

9. Pride. Prove. 29.23. A man's pride shall bring him low. Pride is a costly
sin, a consumer of a considerable estate in a short time. See 1 Timothy 2.9. and 1
Pet. 3.3. Besides, God resists the proud person, Jam. 4.6. how then should he
prosper?

10. And lastly. Sensuality and love of pleasures, as Hawking, Hunting, Gaming,
Gluttony, Drunkenness, Whoring, etc. Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure,
shall be a poor man: He that loves Wine and Oil shall not be rich. Prove.
23.20, 21. Be not amongst Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh; for
the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to poverty, and drousiness shall cloth
a man with rags. Prove. 6.26. By means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a
piece of bread. So Prove. 29.3. He that keeps company with Harlots, spends his
substance. So did the Prodigal, Luke 15.30, 13v. compared. Well then, take heed
of all sin, especially avoid these which I have mentioned, that are, as so many
Rocks, to split an Estate. If you be rich, these sins lived in, will bring you
low; and if you be low in estate, they will keep you from thriving in the
world. Eliphaz tells Job, he must return to the Almighty, and put iniquity far
from his tabernacles, if he would have plenty of Gold and Silver, as you may
see Job 22.23, 24, 25.

6. And last Direction is this, Follow holiness. As you must avoid what God
forbids, so you must observe to do what he commands. God provides for such, as
these places show, 2 Chronicles. 17.4, 5. Job. 8.6, 7. Psalm. 23.1, 5. Psalm. 34.9.
and 37.25. and 111.5. Prove. 10.3. God has promised plenty upon condition of
obedience, as these places show, Exodus 23.25, 26. Levit. 26.3, 4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy.
7.12, 13, 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 28. from v. 1, to 14. Job. 36.11. Psalm. 37.3, 4. and
81. 13, 15, 16. and 115.13, 14. so Isa. 1.19. and 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Now if
we look God should perform his promise, we must look to perform the condition.
When we obey him, we are in a fair way to have a supply from him. Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first (says Christ) the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you, the Greek word (...) signifies, shall be
cast in as overplus. A good Master provides for his Servants, though never so
many, Luke 15.17. Surely then God will provide for his Servants. Romans 8.32. He
that spared not his Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with
him (says the Apostle) freely give us all things? He that has given his
Servants Christ, the Pearl of price, surely will not deny them pebbles (for
worldly things are no better in comparison) if he see them good for them. Thus
the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory: no good
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. No good
thing (says the Psalmist) will he withhold. Therefore if they want any thing,
this very want they may conclude to be for their good. God is so careful a
Father, that he will not give his Children a knife to cut their own Fingers
with, and this is for the better still. Well then, if we serve the Lord, he
will either supply, or (which is better) sanctify our wants.

Lastly whereas you say, If God had spared him (or her) longer, it had been
better for you, now you are utterly undone.

condition whatever it be, to be best for you. Dr. Hammond Dr. Fell in Life of
Doctor Hamond.
that eminent Divine, was wont to give this mandate to himself and his friends.
Quod sis esse velis, nihilque malis, in his English to Rather nothing, not only
to be content or acquiesce, but be resolved the present state to be the very
best that could be wished, or phansied. And in the midst of most dismal
appearance of event he made this constant motto, (...), even this for good. God
knows what is best for thee, and if thou belongest to him, he is more tender
over thee, then a Mother over her sucking Child, Isa. 49.15. and what thou
think a means of thy undoing, saves thee. God by taking away such a friend,
if he bring you into poverty, does it for the purging out of sin, and for the
exercise of Grace.

1. Consider, God does it for the purging out of some sins, which prosperity
breeds. God casts this rub in thy way, to keep thee from going on in a full
career after-sin. It can be said of few, as of good Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.5,
6. He had Riches and Honor in abundance, and his heart was lift up in the
ways of God. Usually it is with us, as it was with Uzziah, 2 Chr. 26.16. who
when he was strong (and prospered) his heart was lifted up to his destruction.
Riches, though good things in themselves, yet through the corruption of our
natures, we oft-times make an ill use of them. Salv. ad Eccles. Cath l. 2. p
406.
Salvian speaking of riches, says, Impedimenta sunt, non adjumenta; onera, non
subsidia: possessione enim and usu opum, non suffulcitur Religio, sed
evertitur. And a little after, says he, Bona and putantur and appellantur, ac
per hoc fallunt homines nomine praesentium bonorum, cum sint causae malorum
aeternorum. Riches are called thick clay, by the Prophet, Hab. 2.6. They are,
as St. Austine calls them, Viscus pennarum Spiritualium, As Bird-lime to the
wings of the Soul, hindering it from soaring above. Our Savior compares them to
Thorns, Mat. 13.22. they hinder us in our spiritual race. How hardly shall a
rich man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.23, 24. so 2 Timothy 6.9. They
that will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. Crescit cum
prosperitate vitiositas, Salv. de Gub Dei. l. 7. p. 273.
prosperity makes few men better, it makes many men worse. But more
particularly, I shall mention several sins that plenty and prosperity expose
men to: As

1. To Pride. Psalm. 73.2, 6. compared. It is there said of prosperous wicked
men, Pride compasses them about as a Chain. They glory in their pride, as
proud men do in a chain of gold: so 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high-minded.

2. To creature confidence: So 1 Timothy 6.17. we must charge rich men, that they
be not high minded, so that they trust not in uncertain riches, which they are
apt to do; thus did Doeg, Psalm. 52.7. and the rich Farmer, Luke 12.18, 19.

3. To oppression: see Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. So Amos in his herds-mans
dialect, calls the rich and great ones of Samaria, Kine of Bashan, they were
fat and frolic, and did gore their inferiors, Amos 4.1. Hear this word, ye
Kine of Bashan, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy. So Jam. 2.6. Do
not rich men oppress you?

4. To uncharitableness, cruelty, contention. (I put them together, for they
are nigh of kin.) Rich Nabal was churlish, and uncharitable to fainting David
and his company, 1 Samuel 25.10, 11. so the rich man denied Lazarus relief, Luke
16.19, 20, 21. Pity it is (yet usually so it is) that the more men have, the
more they would have, and the less they will part with. Yea they are not only
uncharitable, but cruel too, Psalm. 73.6. Violence (or cruelty) covers them as a
garment. So Prove. 18.23. The rich answers roughly. They are rough in their
speeches and carriage to the poor. So Jam. 5.6. Yea have condemned, and killed
the just, speaking of the rich men, v. 1. Who so given to Lawsuits, Quarrels,
and Contentions as the rich? Whilst the Families of Abraham and Lot were not so
great, there was peace and quiet, but so soon as they and their possessions
were increased, they grew contentious, Genesis 13.7, 8.9. Wealth parted those,
whom neither Adversity, nor Famine, nor Exile could part asunder. So Jam. 2.6.
Do not rich men draw you before the Judgment-seats?

5. To Luxury and Intemperance. Luke 12.19. The rich Farmer sung a Requiem to
his soul; Soul, take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years; Eat,
drink, and be merry. So Luke 16.19. Dives fared sumptuously every day. So Isa.
56.12. and Amos 6.4, 5, 6.

6. To Lust and Uncleanness. This sin the rich Sodomites were much addicted to,
Genesis 19.4, 5. They burnt in lust, and followed strange flesh, Jude 7. Where
there is no want, usually there is much wantonness, Jam. 5.1, 5 compared, Ye
have lived in pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton, ye have nourished your
hearts as in a day of slaughter.

7. To Security. Psalm. 30.6. In my prosperity I said I shall never be moved. So
Jer. 22.21. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou said, I will not
hear. So Prove. 1.24, 31 compared.

8. And lastly. To contempt of God, his Word and Judgments. As Exodus 5.2. Job
21.14, 15. Psalm. 55.19. Prove. 30.8, 9. Amos 6.3. You see what abundance of sins
rich men are exposed to. These sins (and more that might be mentioned) are
waiters in ordinary attending greatness. God therefore, by taking away such a
Friend, and bringing you into a poor condition, would prevent, or cure in you
such sins, as prosperity and plenty exposes us unto. God, like a skilful
Goldsmith, casts his Children into fiery trials, to purge away their dross of
sin, as you may see Isa. 27.9. and 48.10. Prove. 25.4. Sphinx, Philos. p. 311.
Fiery trials make pure Christians, Job 23.10. Magna est miseria a peccatis non
retrahi: To go on in sin without control is miserable. O blessed poverty that
starves our sins!

2. Consid. As God brings you into poverty for the purging out of sin, so for
the exercise of grace. Poverty, like a File, brightens the Graces of Gods
Spirit in his Children, and makes them shine forth to the World. I shall name
several Graces that Poverty is a means to set a work: As,

1. Faith. In Poverty God says, Let the Widows trust in me, Jer. 49.11. so
Zeph. 3.12. I will leave (says God) in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor
People, and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord. 1 Timothy 5.5. She that is a
Widow indeed, and desolate, trusts in God. So Jam. 2.5. God has chosen the
Poor of this World rich in Faith. God by pulling away the pillow of
creature comforts, teaches you to rest on him alone. As the Israelites in the
Wilderness lived by Faith for their daily bread, Exodus 16.19, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
When we have little, and know not how to get more, then to depend on invisible
bounty, is a true and noble act of Faith.

2. Prayer. 1 Timothy 5.5. She that is a Widow indeed, and desolate, not only
trusts in God, but continues in supplications and prayers night and day.
David being brought low, and refuge failing him, he prayed earnestly to the
Lord, Psa. 142.4, 5, 6. Affliction sets Prayer at work, as Psalm. 107.6, 13, 19,
28. so Jer. 31.18. Hos. 5.15. so Isa. 26.16. They poured out a prayer (says
the Prophet) when thy chastening was upon them. Before, they dropped out a
prayer, now and then a prayer, as water drops through the Limbeck: but in
affliction they poured them out, as water is poured out plentifully in rainy
weather through the spout. In Poverty people pray more earnestly and frequently
for their daily bread.

3. Thankfulness. Man usually is unthankful: Generale firm est omni homini,
Salv. de Gub. Dei, l. 1 p. 35.
ut Deo semper ingratus sit. But rich men most of all unthankful; like Hogs
eating up the Maste, but never looking to the place from whence it comes: But
when God brings them into Poverty, then they prize his creatures, and him that
sends them. Qui non agrotat, nescit quantum valet sanitas, says Jerome. As a
sick man prizeth health, so an hungry man prizeth plenty. Those that have the
shortest Meals, usually have the longest Graces. Poor people, like birds, sip a
little and look upwards.

4. Heavenly-mindedness. Rich-men, whose God usually is their Belly, mind
earthly things, Phil. 3.19. but poor Christians, as the Apostles were, have
their conversation in Heaven, v. 20. The Prodigal when he ate husks with swine,
and was in great want, he thinks seriously of returning to his Father's house,
Luke 15.14, etc. St. Paul in Poverty is willing to be gone, Phil. 1.23. Waters
of Affliction, as the Waters to the Ark, mount us nearer Heaven. Some never
look Heaven-wards but when God casts them on their backs, (I mean) reduces
them to poverty and misery. God then dams up outward comforts, that the stream
of our affections may run faster another way.

5. Humility. God led the Israelites through the Wilderness to humble them,
Deuteronomy. 8.16. God sees a Wilderness, a desolate condition may be a means to
humble thee. Drinking Wormwood (say some) will take down a full body. Sure I am
the Wormwood of Poverty is a proper remedy for an high and lofty spirit, Lam.
3.19, 20. Poverty clips the wings of Pride, and keeps the heart humble.

6. Patience. Romans 5.3. We glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation
works patience. St. John the Divine, speaking of the Saints sufferings,
says, Here is the Patience, and Faith of the Saints, (...).
Rev. 13.10. The meaning is, here is matter for their Patience and Faith to be
exercised about. Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job. Job's Poverty
amongst other afflictions, set Patience at work.

7. Frugality. Rich men many times are addicted to prodigal spending. They are
excessive many times in their expenses upon back and belly: And they give that
to their Dogs and Hogs which is fit for poor Christians to feed upon; God
therefore by sending Poverty, teaches a Lesson of Frugality, to gather up the
fragments that remain, that nothing be lost, Joh. 6.12.

8. And lastly, Constancy and sincerity of your love to God. It is ordinary to
see many follow Christ for loaves, and express their love toward him so long
as they reap outward gain by him; but to see a man cleave to him, and follow
him through a wilderness of temptations and trials, when he sees nothing but
signs of his displeasure, this argues the strength and sincerity of his
affection toward him. Job's love was seen and set at work in the midst of
poverty, and other trials that he met with. Job 27.5, 6. Till I die (says he)
I will not remove mine integrity from me; my righteousness I hold fast, and
will not let it go. -- Now if God take away outward possessions, and by this
means work in us these and the like graces, we have no cause to complain as if
we were undone, or losers by such an exchange. If a man go backward in estate,
yet if he thrive in grace, this is uberrimus quaestus, and what he loses one
way, he gains another.

2. Cor. 11.32. When we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the world. The Captain of our Salvation was made perfect
by suffering, Heb. 2.10. Though the cup be bitter, yet Gods wisdom tempers, and
love sweetens all the bitter ingredients. God says, he will do us no hurt,
Jer. 25.6. He sees it needful for you to be thus afflicted, 1 Pet. 1.6. For a
season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. God, who
afflicts not willingly, Lam. 3.33. sends no more affliction then you need. God,
who is a dieting of thee, sees it best for thy souls health to be kept fasting,
or to be stinted in thy allowance: It is good for the Patient to be at the
finding and disposing of so wise a Physician, and withal so careful. It is
good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. Volo mihi
irascare Pater misericordiarum, sed illa ira qua corrigis devium, non qua
excludis, curia. Bern. Per diversam medicaminum opem ad unam nos vult Deus
perducere salutem. Salvian. de Gub. Dei, lib. 6. p. 224. Alas! poor silly man
knows not what is good for him, like a Child, led by sense, he prefers
sweetmeats before bitter pills that are more wholesome. Assure thy self, dear
friend, Non caeco impetu volvuntur rota: The motions of Providence are all
juditious, these wheels are full of eyes. God knows these worldly things have
ruined thousands of souls; God knows a great estate has hindered many from
entering in at the narrowgate, and therefore he cuts you short, as a man cuts
off a gangrened Leg to preserve Life. It is thy ignorance of Gods design that
makes thee quarrel with him.

Moreover, the greatest Mercies have oft-times issued from the womb of greatest
Disappointments. How ill does Jacob resent Joseph's absence, Genesis 37. latter
end. and 42.36. He concludes all against him, when indeed all made for him, for
preservation of himself, and the life of his whole family in Egypt, Genesis 45.5.
Nay we read that Joseph himself was sold, Genesis 37. and after that cast into
Prison, Genesis 39. What could Joseph expect but utter ruin, Retro omnia, all
things went so cross and ill-favored with him! yet Divine Providence so
ordered the matter, that Joseph is advanced, Religion propagated in Egypt, and
the Relics of the Church preserved in a time of great Famine, Genesis 50.20.
Patitur eum in Carcere aliquantulum sudare, laborare, clamare, precari,
lachrymari, ut eum in pietate probe exerceat, tandem vero Carcerem in salutem
ejus convertit, nisi enim in Carcerem and quidem Regium fuisset conjectus, non
innotuisset Regi, nec fuisset hoc modo exaltatus, says Pareus, in Genesis cap.
39. It was a great mercy for Israel to be in the Wilderness, for that was the
right way to Canaan: And though God suffered them there to meet with much
hardship, yet it was to humble them, to prove them, and do do them good at
their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. yet they thought and concluded, they were
brought to be slain, Exodus 16.2, 3. Number. 14.2, 3. and 20.4. One attempting to
kill Prometheus the Thessalian, [Tully reports the like of Phereus Jason; Cic.
l. 3. de Not. Deorum.
Sic casu fortuito Phereo Jasoni profuit hostis, qui gladio vomicam ejus
aperuit, quam sanare medici non poterant.] run him so deep with his sword into
an. Imposthume, that he let out corruption and saved his life. So this bitter
stroke of God, which thou think God intends for thy undoing, is a means to
purge out corruption, and save thy soul. Therefore say with Themistocles,
Periissem, nisi periissem; I had been lost if God had not prevented me with
this happy loss: It is well with me it is so ill with me, for if God had not
thus crossed me, I had been in a cursed condition. Job calls Gods afflicting of
us, his magnifying of us, Job. 7.17. And verse. 18. he calls afflictions Gods
visitations: They are God's friendly visits, he corrects out of love. As
Joseph's Cup was put in Benjamins Sack, whom he most loved, so the Cup of
Affliction is the Lot of God's most affected Children, Prove. 3.12. and 27.6.
Heb. 12.9, 10. Rev. 3.19. Et cum blandiris Pater es, and Pater es cum caedis;
Augustine says well, he is a Father when he strikes us, as well as when he
strokes us. The Cross is the way to the Crown; Via, non Causa. 2 Cor. 4.17. For
our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. That God that brought light out of
darkness, and erected the glorious Fabric of the World out of a confused
Chaos, and made Clay and Spittle (likely to put out sight) a means to recover
it; this God, I say, can bring it to pass, that what thou think will undo
thee, shall be a means to promote thy eternal good. Oh the admirable harmony of
Divine Dispensations in reference to man's Salvation!

To shut up this, you know, several herbs have several qualities, some of them
very bitter; yet if a skilful simpler have the mixing of them, he will make you
a pleasing and wholesome sallade: so there are many interchangable passages of
Providence, and some of them very bitter to flesh and blood; yet divine Wisdom
and Goodness will so order the matter, that they shall in the end be both
pleasing and profitable. Jam. 1.2. My brethren count it all joy, when ye fall
into diverse temptations: For, verse. 12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him.

Indeed we read, Psalm. 36.6. Gods judgments are a great deep. And again, Psalm.
77.19. Gods way is in the Sea, and his path in the great waters, and his
footsteps are not known. Which words some apply to the bringing of his People
through the Sea, and the waters returning to their course; of which you read,
Exodus, 14.28, 29. Others apply the words to the interchangable passages of
Providence, in reference to his Church, the administration of the World, and of
every man's Salvation. And so Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out! Gods ways are many times, cryptical, full of
Meanders, we cannot trace them, they are a compendious heap of intricacies, often
going contrary to man's judgment and expectation, and to our apprehended rules
of common right. Yet all his ways are judgment (that is justice and equity)
for he is a God of truth, and without iniquity; just and right is he, Deuteronomy.
32.4. Much may be above us, because our ignorance is such that we cannot see a
reason of his ways; but nothing is unreasonable or evil, that proceeds from an
holy, wise, loving, and just God.

I end this with that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord
(how rugged and severe soever to flesh and blood) are mercy and truth to such
as keep his Covenant and his testimonies. They may seem cruelty, but indeed
they are mercy; though thou can not see it for the present, yet thou may
hereafter.

Another cries out, 7th Apology answered.
This relation of mine dyed in the best of his age, in the prime of his
strength, in the acuteness of his parts, his Sun set at noonday; he fixed a
Period where we made account of a Comma; hoping at least half the Sentence of
his Life was behind, but it was broken off in haste, and this troubles me.

Every man's Life (as one says) is a Lease, and an old man's Life is an old worn
Lease ready to drop into the Landlords hand. We expect a Taper should go out
when the Wax is spent: but to see the Lamp of a friends Life extinguished in
its brightest and strongest luster; This troubles us. But,

1. Consid. It Is ordinary for man to dye in his full strength, Job 21.23, 24.
One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet; his breasts are
full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow, etc. King Edward the 6th
that hopeful Prince fell asleep before noon, and was laid untainted in the Bed
of Honor. So that good King Josiah died before he was 40 years of age, as may
be gathered from 2 Chronicles. 34.1. Nay Christ himself was cut off before he
attained one half of the age of man, described by Moses Psalm. 90.10. Nay David
tells us, Psalm. 39.5. Every man at his best state (whether of age or honor) is
altogether vanity. It being so ordinary for man to dye at, or about the vigor
of his age, it should be the less troublesome.

2. Consid. If thy Friend had lived to old age, what is that but an age of
misery, a stage of vanity, an hospital of Diseases. The days of Old Age are
called, Evil days, by the Wise man, Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in
the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh,
when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them, q. d. The days of old age
bring so many aches and troubles along with them, that if they be lengthened
into years, yet a man can find no pleasure or content: but whole years together
shall be full of weariness and sorrow. Nay the very strength of the years of an
Old man is labor and sorrow, says Moses, Psalm. 90.10. Old people are
oft-times a trouble to themselves and others.

3. And lastly, consid. Thy Friend must at last have died. Man's Life is by
some fitly compared to a Lamp, which may be soon extinguished by some fall or
violent blast; but if it escape these, there is but a set proportion of oil,
which will soon be consumed, and then it goes forth of its own accord. The
Clock, though it goes slowly, strikes surely at last: And the Sun in the
longest day of its perambulation at last goes out of sight. He that walks
longest over the graves of others, comes at last to his own. So that if thy
Friend had not died now, he must have dyed some other time. And if another
time, why not now?

Another cries out, 8th Apology answered.
This Relation of mine was loath to die, he died comfortless; desperate words,
idle vain talk, unseemly gestures and speeches proceeded from him; and this
troubles me.



1. Consid. Many of Gods dear Children have at some time or other been loath to
depart. So was David, Psalm. 55.4, 5. and Psalm. 102.24. And Hezekiah, Isa. 38.1.
And Peter, out of a sudden apprehension of death and fear of it, denied his
Lord and Master. The Godly cease not to be Men by becoming Christians: as men
they are sometimes afraid of Death, which is, (...), Malum corruptivum,
destructive to nature. God has imprinted (says a Dr. Abbot Lect. 6. on Jonah
p. 126, 127.
judicious Divine) a passionate love betwixt the soul and the body, that they
grieve to leave one another: So that the spirit may be willing, yet the flesh
is weak. What man is he, whom God's Spirit has not in a great measure
mortified, that feels not in himself oft-times, an horror and a quaking to
think of his dissolution?

2. Consid. Thy Friend though he might fear the pain of death, yet he might
rejoice at the gain of death; as many a man desires the Haven, yet trembles at
the voyage. The pangs of death might a little affright him, yet being dead (if
a good man) let us not question his happiness: Christ went to the Cross with
much care and many agonies; nay the Apostle tells you, that he feared, Heb. 5.7.

Did he die comfortless?

It is one thing to have true comfort, another thing to have the sense of it.
The sense of it (as Divines say) may be taken away for a while through the
violence of the distemper, or through Satan's malice, who is most busy at such
a time to disturb a good man's peace. The Devil, that roaring Lion (who at all
times goes about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.) at such a time plays
the Devil indeed, and exercises what cruelty he may, because his time is
short, Rev. 12.12. But though the sense of comfort for a while may be taken
away, yet their comfort is not quite gone; See Isa. 54.7, 8. The holy Ghost,
the comforter, where he once takes possession, abides for ever, John 14.16.

2. Consid. Our Savior Christ, He who was the only begotten Son, in whom alone
God was well pleased, Mat. 3. last. As he had not always a sense and feeling
of Gods love, Mat. 27.46. so, nor of spiritual and heavenly joy, Mat. 26.38,
39. His soul was exceeding sorrowful. (...), declarat animum undique moerore
obsessum and circumvallatum; His soul was besieged with grief, and sorrow
compassed it about; So Luke 22.44. He was in an agony.

3. And lastly, Consid. Though a good man seem to dye comfortless, yet his end
is comfortable, Ps. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for
the end of that man is peace. If peace did not enter into him whilst living,
yet being dead, he enters into peace. Isa. 57.2. He shall enter into peace,
that walks in his uprightness. The Godly, through tedious conflicts (as the
Israelites through a crooked and tedious wilderness) come to the promised Land
at last.

Did desperate words, idle vain talk, unseemly gestures and speeches proceed
from him?

Jacob blessed his Sons, Genesis 49. so Heb. 11.21. See the sweet carriage and
pious discourses of Moses a little before his departure, Deuteronomy. 31, 32, 33,
Chapt. So Joshua dying, exhorts the people to obedience, Jos. 23.14. and Chap.
24. So David, when he was dying professes his faith in Gods promises, and
declares the different state of the wicked, 2 Samuel 23. beginning; and instructs
his son Solomon, 1 Kin. 2.2. Blessed Stephen made a sweet end, praying for his
enemies, Act. 7. latter end. So blessed Peter, about to put off his tabernacle,
cease not to give good instructions and exhortations, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15.
Such serious discourses of dying Christians, as they instruct by standers, and
make deepest impressions upon their spirits, so they afford abundance of
comfort to living Friends to see so blessed a departure.

But if it fell out otherwise with thy Godly-Friend, Consider for thy comfort,
That these frenzies, and raving unseemly speeches and carriage (if they
proceeded only from the person while sick) did not proceed ex animo, but ex
animi morbo; they proceeded not so much from the person, as from his distemper,
fuming up into the brain, or from want of sleep, etc. So it was with Job, that
God boasts of for his Servant as a Nonsuch, Job 1.8. and 2.3. when he was sadly
diseased in body, he was sadly distempered in mind; for in chap. 3. he curses
the day of his birth: and chap. 6. so chap. 9. wishes God would destroy him,
and cut him off. And Job 13.14. like a madman, he takes his flesh in his
teeth. And chap. 16.9. he said God hated him. What unseemly speeches and
carriage were in this good man in the time of his sickness! So David under
bodily distemper, said, he was cut off, Psalm. 31.10, 22 compared. Asaph behaves
himself as strangely, see Psalm 77.7, etc. but these desperate words proceeded
from him in his sickness, v. 2. Such speeches as these proceed not from the
disposition of the heart, but from the distemper of the head, and lightness of
the fancy, caused by the distemper of the body. Mr. Smith's Essex-Dove. T. 3.
p. 143.
A Christian may dye (says a Godly Divine) of so strange a disease, of the
Flux, Burning-Ague, Stone, Convulsion, when either the Choler shooting up into
the head, or the disease working furiously upon the tender vital parts, the
party may dye strangely, talk idely, etc. nay, he may have his face and mouth
drawn awry, and yet for all this be a dear Child of God. Some may dye of an
Apoplexy, or dead Palsy, in which case a man shall have his senses benumbed so,
as he may dye like a block without show of judgment or reason, yet may be in a
blessed state: For though the state of his body be changed, yet the state of
his mind and soul remains untouched. August. Tom. 9. de Discipline. c. 2.
We may conclude for our comfort, as St. Austine says, Non potest male mori
qui been vixerit: Audeo dicere non potest-male mori qui been vixerit. I dare
say it, and say it again, that he cannot die ill that has lived well.

Another cries out, 9th Apology answered.
This Friend of mine was much tortured with his disease; Oh the sad casts of
his countenance! how did he tumble and toss upon the bed of languishment
without any intervals of rest? nothing could tempt his eyes to let their
curtains down: Groans, and sighs, and sobs were his soul's passing bell. There
was a sad parting betwixt soul and body. And this troubles me.

reflect upon the groans and pains of deceased Friends: But, Consider,

1. God is absolute Lord over all his creatures, and his dispensations toward
them are various. God deals with some as with Enoch, he takes them away and
they hardly see or feel death, whereas many others as dear to him, are with
Elijah carr^ed to Heaven as it were in a fiery-Chariot, and by a Whirlwind.
Luther Abel Redivivus in Life of Luther
without any bodily pain that could be discerned, departed this life; whereas
Calvin was miserably wracked before he dyed, having the Gout, Fever and
Cholick all at one time. Nah. 1.3. The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind. We
cannot give a reason of all God's dealings toward the sons of men: but
considering he is absolute Lord over all his creatures, this is reason
sufficient we should submit unto him.

2. Consid. Thy Friend dyed not so cruel a death as many of God's dear Servants
have done. Christ himself dyed the death of the Cross, which was a painful as
well as a shameful death, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Heb. 12.2. Naboth was stoned, 1 Kin.
21.13. so was Zacharias, 2 Chronicles. 24.22. and the Protomartyr St. Stephen, Act.
7.59. You may read, Heb. 11. (that Chapter is a little Martyrology) ver. 35,
36, 37. how some were tortured, scourged, stoned, sawn asunder, slain with the
sword, etc. Mr. Fox, or Mr. Clark in his Martyrology will tell you, that many
Martyrs had their skins pulled off, joints racked, bodies torn in pieces, etc.
willing to endure for Christ's sake what the wit of man could invent, or
cruelty impose. Now God might have called thy Friend to such a death, which
would have been far more sad, cruel, and painful as to outward appearance. Well
then, consider, God might have delivered thy Friend into the hands of cruel man
(which would have been very sad, as appears by David's speech 2 Samuel 24.14.)
but God cast him on a soft Bed amongst Friends, who did carefully attend him,
and minister unto him.

3. Consid. The greater thy Friends pain was, the more fervent prayers were put
up for him. You find David in Psalm. 38. lying under God's afflicting hand, what
servent ejaculations he sent up toward the Throne of Grace. So Asaph Ps. 77.2.
In the day of his trouble sought the Lord. So Jesus Christ in his Agony prayed
more earnestly, Luke 22.44. Great Miseries make the loudest Eccho's in the ears
of Mercy. And as the afflicted party himself, so all that saw him, or heard of
his misery, would be ready to pity and pray for him. Methinks the sad groans of
a dying Friend are sufficient to dissolve an heart of stone into prayers and
tears, especially godly Friends would pray fervently for him: And these are
most likely to prevail; for Jam. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. That Ship saileth the surest to the haven of
Heaven, which is driven with the breath of godly men's prayers.

4. Consid. The greater the pain was, the shorter was the continuance of it.
Dolor si gravis brevis, si longus levis. We read how Aeneas kept his bed eight
years, and was sick of the Palsy, Act. 9.33. We read of one that had an issue
of blood twelve years, Mat. 9.20. and had suffered many things of many
Physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but
rather grew worse, Mark 5.26. So John 5.5. there we read of one that had an
infirmity thirty eight years. Now if thy Friend's pain had not been so great,
he might have continued still a burden to thee and to himself; but the
greatness of his pain hastened death, which put an end to all trouble and
grief: his great pangs and struglings (as throes of a traveling woman) made
way for deliverance. And therefore,

5. And lastly, Consider, Thy Friend is now at rest. Rev. 14.13. Let them die
of never so cruel a death, if they die in the favor of God, they are blessed,
for they rest from their labors. It may be thou grievedst but little whilst
thy Friend labored for rest, and will thou grieve much when he rests from his
labors? Whilst thy Friend was ground with the Stone, or burnt up with a
Fever, and rouled upon his bed without sleep, thou had cause to weep, and it
was thy duty to sympathize with him, Romans 12.15. but being dead he is at rest,
Isa. 57.2. (for death to a Child of God is but a sleep, Joh. 11.11, 12, 13. so
Act. 7.60.) and being buried he has laid his head upon the lap of his mother,
(for so the Earth is called Job 1.21.) to be awakened again at the last Trump,
to the everlasting comfort both of soul and body: And shall we now weep? Surely
this sorrow is unseasonable. We prayed (or else we were to blame) whilst our
Friend was in pain, that God would deliver him, and therefore when God by death
has put an end to all his pain, we should give thanks to God, and rejoice
rather than weep. The Church, our careful Mother, has taught us as much in the
Funerals of the Dead, We give thee hearty thanks for that it has pleased thee
to deliver this our Brother (or Sister) out of the miseries of this sinful
world.

Another cries out, 10th Apology answered
This Eriend of mine dyed of a sad mischance, he fell into the Fire or Water,
or was killed of Lightning, fell off a Horse, or Cart, or was shot in War, or
otherwise, or he was killed by Thieves or wicked men, etc. or he fell suddenly
sick, groaned, sighed, dyed. And this troubles me that he dyed such a sudden,
violent and untimely death.

From sudden death (i. e. from death not thought-of, and so not provided-for)
good Lord deliver us; not only for our own sakes, but for our Friends sakes
too; they will take it, the less sudden it is, the more patiently. See how sadly
Jacob takes the supposed death of his son Joseph; upon the sight of his bloody
coat, he too rashly concluded his son was dead, that he was devoured by some
cruel beast: Significans in^ternum animi dilacerationem seu moestitiae^
And the Text tells you, Genesis 37.33, 34. He rent his clothes, in token, as
Pareus says upon the place, that his heart was rent through with sorrow, and
he put on sackcloth, a coarse and sorry stuff which was the usual Mourning-Weed
in those times: And he refused to be comforted: Thus his father wept for him,
for Joseph, who dyed (as he thought) a sudden death. David himself proclaimed a
solemn and public Funeral-Mourning for the death of Abner, who was cowardly
and suddenly slain, when he did least suspect it, by one that pretended peace
and friendship: And David himself laid aside his Royal Dignity and attended the
Corpse, joining with the People in that sad Consort, as you may read 2 Samuel 3.
toward the latter end of the chapter. So David weeps excessively for the space
of three whole years, because his son Amnon dyed so unnaturally, untimely, and
unexpectedly, being killed by Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.28, etc. And we read how the
true Mother of the living Child had rather her Adversary should have the
comfort of her Child, than that it should dye a violent and untimely death, 1
King. 3.26. And in that appeared both the truth of her affection toward it,
and that she was the true Mother of it, v. 27. Job hearing the heavy tidings of
the sudden death of his Children, could no longer contain, but vents his grief
in words, being more affected with the sudden loss of his Children, than all
the rest of his Goods, Job 1.18, 19, 20. But for your comfort,

1. Consid. It has been the lot of some of Gods dear Servants to dye so. Thus
righteous Abel was suddenly butchered by his brother Cain, Genesis 4.8. So old Eli
(though indeed he had his failings in not correcting and severely punishing his
wicked Sons, 1 Samuel 2.23, etc. and 1 Samuel 3.13. as he should have done, being
chief-Magistrate as well as Parent, yet) questionless was a good man, as may be
gathered from sacred Story; and the manner of his death was sudden, he fell off
from his seat backward, and his neck brake, and he dyed, 1 Samuel 4.18. So that
good King Josiah, 2 King. 22.19, 20. was suddenly cut off in War, 2 King.
23.29, 30. So the Prophet that came out of Judah (whether Shemaiah, mentioned 1
King. 12.22. or some other Prophet I know not, neither ought we curiously to
enquire, or positively determine any thing, where Scripture is silent, yet) he
was a true Prophet, as appears by his title (1 King. 13.1. called a Man of
God) by the Message it self, and confirmation thereof by miracles, ver. 4, 5,
6. And as a true Prophet, so questionless a pious Man: yet because he was too
credulous in believing the lie of the old Prophet, and did eat and drink
contrary to God's Command, a Lion met him, and slew him, v. 24. So blessed
Stephen, stoned in a popular fury, was put to a sudden and violent death, Act.
7.57, 59. Let us not conclude any to be in a damnable state, merely because
they die suddenly. Indeed God threatens the Wicked with sudden destruction, as
Job 15.32, 33, 34. so Job 22.15, 16. Psalm. 37.35, 36, 38. and 55.23. Prove.
10.27. Eccl. 7.17. and elsewhere. And I know that wicked men many times are
suddenly cut off in their wickedness, when they might have lived much longer as
to the course of nature. But all that die suddenly are not to be reputed wicked
men: For the Godly, as you have heard, may dye sudden, violent, and untimely
deaths. And the Wiseman tells you, Eccl. 9.1, 2. -- No man knows either love
or hatred by all that is before him: All things come alike to all, there is one
event to the Righteous and to the Wicked, etc. The Barbarians seeing the Viper
on Paul's hand (thinking the venom would presently have invaded his heart and
vital spirits, so that he would have died presently) rashly concluded him to be
a Murderer, and that Divine vengeance would not suffer him to live, Act. 28.3,
4, 6. Let not Christians (like these Barbarians) be rash censurers of any that
dye suddenly, seeing that Gods dear and peculiar People may dye so.

2. Consid. A sudden death is best, if we be prepared for it. Octavius
Augustus, as often as he heard of any man that had a quick passage out of this
world, with little sense of pain, he wished for himself and his ((...),
Similem, Sueton.) such an easy death. Suddenness (says that Prodigy of
Learning, Mr. Hooker) because it shortens grief, Eccles. Polit. page 277.
should in reason be most acceptable: and therefore Tyrants use what art they
can to increase the slowness of death. That monster of cruelty, Caius Caligula,
would not permit those that he put to death to be speedily dispatched, his
command was this, Ita feri, ut se mori sentiat. Sueton. Strike so, that they
may feel themselves dying, and endure the pains of an enduring death. Quick
riddance out of Life is often both requested and bestowed as a benefit. We
read, Judge. 8.20, 21. that Zeba and Zalmunna chose rather to fall by Gideon
than by Jether his son; either because it was more honorable to be killed by a
man like themselves, rather than by a boy; Mr. Fuller in his Coment on Ruth, 1
Chap.
Or rather (as a learned Divine observes) Because the Child's want of strength,
would cause the more pain. And he adds, Better to be speedily dispatched by a
violent Disease, than to have ones Life prolonged by a lingering torture. And
Erasmus, somewhere says, (Si pio homini deligere fas esset mortis genus,
nullum arbitror magis optandum quam subitum.) If it were lawful for a godly man
to choose the manner of his death, I think a sudden death most to be desired;
and he gives this reason of it, because (Non potest male mori, qui been
vixerit) he cannot dye ill, that has lived well: For though death be sudden in
its self, yet in regard of his preparation for it, and expectation of it, to
him it is not sudden. Improvisa nulli mors, cui provida vita. Sad indeed it is
to dye as Onan, Absalom, Amnon, Ananias and Sapphira, and several others that
we read of in Scripture, who were suddenly snatched away in their wickedness,
From such a sudden death, Good Lord deliver us; For it is a speedy downfall to
the bottomless-pit of Hell. But if a man live (as he ought to do) in continual
expectation of death, and so set his house and his soul in order, surely sudden
death is best for him, for it prevents much torturing pain, which others met
with upon their beds of languishment: and besides this, it is a speedy passage
into Life Eternal.

3. And lastly, Consid. Be thy Friends death never so sudden and violent, it is
that death which God in his providence has allotted him. God ordains our end
by an immutable decree, See Jer. 43.11. When he comes, Dr. Abbot on Jonah
4.3, 4. Lect. 26. page 543
he shall smite the Land of Egypt, and deliver such as are for death to death;
and such as are for captivity, to captivity; and such as are for the sword, to
the sword. This intimates, that by the Providence of the Lord, who did set that
King on work, several persons in their times are determined to their several
ends. We must not attribute any friends death, as the Philistines would their
destruction, to Chance, 1 Samuel 6.9.

Homer, speaking of Achilles, that slew many worthy Grecians, says, -- (...).
Iliad. a. v. 5. Joves will was fulfilled. Homer, though blind (as some report)
yet saw the hand of God in their destruction. And Mr. Fuller in his Coment on
Ruth 2.3, 4.
some observe the word ((...), or) Fortune, is not used in all his Works. It
was only the ignorance of true causes that made the name of Fortune.

Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia, sed te,
Nos facimus fortuna Deum -- Juven. Sat. 10.
For there is nothing fortuitous in it self, seeing Gods Providence orders all
events. Indeed some things are said to happen in Scripture, Ruth 2.3.4. Luke
10.31. but this is spoken not in respect of God, but in respect of us, because
ofttimes they come to pass not only without our purpose and forecast, but even
against our intentions and determinations; but yet those things which thus fall
out, are ordered by the secret working of Gods providence. We read 1 Kings
22.34. A certain man drew a Bow at a venture (or according to the Orig. in his
Simplicity, 2 Samuel 15.11.) not intending to bit Ahab, yet God's purpose was to
have Ahab slain, and accordingly it came to pass, for he smote the King of
Israel between the joints of the harness, and the King dyed, verse. 37. Thus
providence orders even casual events. Christ's death, with the manner, was
decreed by God, Acts 4.27, 28. Of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, whom
thou have anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
People of Israel, were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
counsel (that is, power and providence) determined before to be done. Wicked
men that kill our friends, they are God's Sword, or his Hand; God works by
them, Psalm. 17.13, 14. Old Eli saw Gods hand in the violent and untimely death
of his two sons Hophni and Phineas, and he took it patiently; 1 Samuel 3.18. It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Say then with Job, whose Children
were violently cut off, Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
(Septuag. inserts, (...), as it pleases the Lord, so come things to pass)
blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Another cries out, 11. Apology answered.
My Friend died of the Plague, that loathsome disease, and there was no funeral
solemnity: but he was carried forth like some sorry carrion, and buried, I know
not where, may be in some sorry pit; and this troubles me.

Anno Domini, 1665.
sent a fearful Plague amongst us; There dyed at London, (as appeared by the
weekly Bill.) above eight thousand some weeks. The Metropolis of this Nation
has been (as it were) plowed up and sown thick with dead Corpses. Great pits
were dug where the dead lay together, as Sampson said of the slaughtered
Philistines, by heaps upon heaps, Judge. 15.16. A sad time God knows they had,
Bells sadly toling, People sadly sighing, crying, dying. I believe many to this
very day, have sad thoughts of heart for the loss of dear friends, and think
they were not buried like Christians, because there were no Funeral
solemnities. I shall therefore to cheer up such, answer the particulars.

Did your Friend dye of the noysom Pestilence, for so it is called, Psalm. 91.3?

1. Consid. Gods dear servants have lain under such distempers. Hezekiah was
sick unto death 2 Kings 20.1. Some think he had the Plague, verse. 7. there is
mention made of his Boil, which some conceive did arise from the Plague.

Job labored under a Plague sore, Job 2.7. He was smitten (...) with an angry
burning Boil, insomuch, that his skin was broken and became loathsome, Job 7.5.
So David cries out, Ps. 39.10. Remove thy stroke away from me, some render,
Plagam tuam, thy Plague, which is a fearful stroke from God. Indeed God
promises Psalm. 91.3. etc. To deliver his people from the noisome Pestilence:
But this, as other promises of outward blessings, is a conditional promise. God
will deliver his People, if he sees it makes most for his glory and his Peoples
good. But God sees it good for them to dye of the Plague, which (though a sad
affliction in it self) is a means to hasten their glory. God sent a fearful
sickness amongst the Corinthians (some think it might be the Plague) because
they did not receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper with due preparation, 1
Cor. 11.30. and yet they were chastened of the Lord (says the Apostle) that
they should not be condemned with the World, v. 32. Godly Junius and his Wife
died of the Plague, as some report. The Plague, that hot burning distemper (if
God send it to his Children, so that they dye of it) like Elijah's fiery
Chariot, is a means to convey them more speedily to Heaven.

2. Consid. The Plague (as all other sickness) comes by Divine Appointment.
See Exodus 15.26. Numb. 14.12. and 16.46. Deuteronomy. 28.21. 2 Samuel 24.14, 15. Ps.
39.10. The Plague is an Arrow of God's shooting, a Messenger of God's sending.
And as the Centurion in the Gospel said to his under-Souldiers, Go, and he
goes: Come, and he comes: Do this, and he does it, Mat 8.9. so God gives this
Messenger charge whither it shall go, how far it shall advance, what execution
it shall do, and it faithfully obeys him. Therefore say with David, Ps. 39.9. I
was dumb, and opened not my mouth (he means murmuringly, impatiently, etc.)
because, O Lord, thou did it.

3. Consid. God prizeth his People let them die of what distemper soever. Psalm.
116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; He likes
them not the worse for dying of the Plague.

4. Lastly, Consider, They are happy, let them dye of what distemper soever, if
they dye in God's favor. Rev. 14.13. Their souls for the present are happy;
and at Christ's second coming their bodies shall be glorious. 1 Cor. 15.43. The
body, though sown in dishonor, is raised in glory. Bodies spotted through
sickness, shall then be made beautiful bodies, and all their deformities be
done away. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father, Mat. 13.43. For, Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall these also appear with him in glory.

Was there no Funeral Solemnity?

De Civit. Dei lib. 11. c. 13.
St. Austin says, Non contemnenda sunt and abjicienda Corpora Defunctorum:
Bodies of deceased Friends are not slightly and contemptibly to be cast away.
And again he says, Antiquorum Justorum Funera curata sunt, De Cura pro Mortuis.
and Exequiae celebratae; and Sepultura provisa: The Funerals of good men were
formerly celebrated with great solemnity. Abraham takes care for the Funeral of
his Wife Sarah, Genesis 23.3, 4. And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the
Cave of Machpelah, where his Wife lay, Genesis 25.9, 10. Jacob made Joseph swear
to perform his Funeral Rites, Genesis 47 29, 30, 31. and accordingly it was done
with great solemnity, Genesis 50, 7, 8, etc. So all Israel lamented Samuel and
buried him, 1 Samuel 25.1. And David spoke it to the commendation of the men of
Jabesh-Gilead, those loyal and grateful Subjects, that they showed kindness to
their Lord Saul, and buried him honorably, 2 Samuel 2.4, 5, 6. so Jehoida was
buried honorably, 2 Chronicles. 24.15, 16. so much people accompanied the Widows
son of Naim to his Burial, Luke 7.12. And devout men carried Stephen to his
Burial, and made great Lamentation over him, Act. 8.2. Our Savior Christ, who
was always moderate in his expenses, and would have the fragments gathered up
that nothing might be lost, John 6.12. yet admitted Mary's costly Ointment,
because against his Burial, Mat. 26.7, etc.

Indeed it is promised as a mercy, to have decent Burial, Job 5.26. Thus God
promised Abraham, that he should be buried in peace, and in a good old age,
Genesis 15.15. And it was promised Abijah, 1 King. 14.12, 13. that all Israel
should mourn for him, and bury him, for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the
Grave, because in him there was found some good thing, etc. and it was
accordingly performed, ver. 18. so the like was promised to Josiah, 2 King.
22.20. and he was peaceably buried, though killed in War, 2 King. 23.29, 30.

It is a part of humane misery to be without decent Burial, and it is threatened
as a judgment on the Wicked, to lie unburied, and dye unlamented; Deuteronomy. 28.26.
1 King. 21.23, 24. 1 King. 14.11. 2 Chronicles. 21.19. Isa. 14.20. Jer. 7.33. and
8.2. and 14.16. and 16.4. and 22.19.

Fit then it is that we attend at the Obsequies of deceased Friends; not that
it helps the Dead.

But, 1. For their Honor; it being a decent respect we pay to their name and
memory; for it is an honor to live desired, and die lamented.

See Dr. Walker Fun. Sermon on Luke 7.12, 13.
2. In Charity to the Living, for their comfort, and alleviating their sorrow,
while the burden is made lighter by many helping them to bear it. John 11.31.
The Jews were with Mary to comfort her at the death and burial of her Brother
Lazarus. Curatio Funeris, conditio Sepulturae, pompa Exequiarum, magis vivorum
solatia sunt, quam subsidia mortuorum. Aug.

3. For our own advantage, and increase of Piety, Eccles. 7.2, 3, 4.

4. And lastly. To testify our faith in that great Article of the Resurrection
of the Dead. For if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all
men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. Now it strengthens our faith of the
Resurrection, when bodies of Christians are not cast away as beasts bodies are.

But if thy Friend wanted decent Burial, if there was no Funeral-solemnity, for
thy comfort,

1. Consid. It cannot reasonably be expected that there should be
Funeral-Solemnities in Pestilential-places; for this would occasion further
infection. We read Luke 7.12. how the Widows son of Naim was carried out of the
City to be buried. Hinc collige Judeos Sepulchra sua habuisse non in Urbe, sed
extra Urbem, idque tum ob nitorem, tum ob sanitatem, ne cadavera suo faetore,
and putredine aerem inficerent. Cornel. a. Lap. The Jews buried out of the
City, that the Graves might not deface the comeliness of their Cities, nor
noisome Exhalations and Vapors of the Graves infect the Air, and hazard the
health of the Living. Great care is to be had that the Living be not infected
with the Contagion of the Dead. For if a living Dog be better than a dead Lion,
as Solomon concludes Eccles. 9.4. Surely the persons of Christians that
survive, are more to be respected than the bodies of those that are dead. Now
how dangerous were it for the Living to accompany the Corpse of such as dyed of
the Plague, how noisome to bury them there, where the Living have often
occasion to make their recourse? so that it were incommodious to humane society
to perform solemn Funeral Rites at such a time.

I end this with words taken out of that godly Exhortation at the end of
Divine-Service, appointed to be used on the Monthly-Fast during the continuance
of the Plague, The words are these; Though it be a Christian and laudable
custom, to accompany the Bodies of the Dead unto the Grave, and commend them in
decent manner unto their rest: yet seeing the end of such Assemblies as are
then gathered together, is, by the use of Prayer, and the Word preached, rather
to give comfort unto the Living, than any benefit unto the Dead; let men be
advised, persuaded and content, that their Dead should be buried with no more
company than is needful for the interring and laying them up in the Earth,
because the gathering together of Friends and Neighbors in so common a
Contagion, cannot be without present danger, and hazard of their health and
lives; and it is verily thought that Infection by this means of meeting has
ensued unto many.

2 Consid. It is all one to the Dead whether their Bodies be drowned, or burnt,
or buried; and if buried, it is all one where the Grave is made for them.

-- Facilis jactura Sepulchri. Lucan. lib. 16. If they fail of the
Burying-Place they expected, the loss is not great: for the Body is not
sensible how it is used: Neither do such Solemnities do the Dead either good or
hurt. Though they add to the comfort of the Living, yet not of the Dead.

3 Consid. What if the Body be thus used, the Soul is safe, if thy Friend
belonged to God. The Soul of man is his Darling, Psalm. 22.20. and 35.17. If
this Jewel be preserved; no matter what becomes of the Cabinet.

4 Consid. Many of Gods dear Servants have wanted decent Burial. See Psalm.
79.2, 3. The dead Bodies of thy Servants have they given to be meat unto the
Fowls of the Heaven; the Flesh of thy Saints unto the Beasts of the Earth,
their Blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none
to bury them. There was none to bury them, either none that durst for fear of
the enemy: or so many slain by the enemy, that the living sufficed not to bury
the dead. In persecuting times many Martyrs have been devoured of wild-beasts,
torn in pieces, hanged on gibbets, burnt to ashes, drowned etc. so that they
have wanted burial. Moses himself, a dear Servant of the Lord, was buried no
man knows where, Deuteronomy. 34.6.

5. And lastly, consider, The Dead in the Lord are never the worse thought of
by God, if without decent burial. Sore Lazarus had little cost bestowed on him
at his Death, that found so little mercy in his Life. It is said, Luke 16.22.
This Beggar died, no mention made of his Burial: yet he was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom; which as St. Ambrose Ambros. Orat. fun. de obitu
Valent.
says, is a certain retiring-place of eternal rest; (Sinus Patriarcharum
recessus quidam est quietis aeternae.) But it is said of the Rich-man, that he
died, and was buried: buried he was, and probably with great pomp; yet the next
news we hear of him is, that in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in torment,
ver. 23.

Another cries out, 12. Apology answered.
It troubles me to think the body should lie rotting and stinking in the grave,
and be eaten up of worms, and be turned to dust, disrobed of all amiable
features; so that after a few years, there are but few remains of our dear
friend; here perhaps a scalp, and there a bone, etc.



1. Consid. The Soul of thy Friend (if a Child of God) is in bliss whilst the
Body lies in the grave, that place of silence, rottenness, stench, and
corruption. That the Soul dies not with the Body, these places of Scripture
show.

See 1 King. 17.21. Elijah raising to life the Widows Son of Sareptah, cried
unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee let this Child's Soul come
into him again. Which expression, as it shows the Child was really dead, and
that death separates the Soul from the Body, so it shows that after death the
soul lives or has a being; for he said, Let this Child's Soul come into him
again, or, let it return; He does not say, let a new one be made for him. So
Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit
shall return to God who gave it. So Mat. 10.28. our Savior teaches that the
Soul cannot be killed, though the Body be. So Mat. 22.32. God is not the God of
the dead, yet he is said to be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: These
Patriarchs then were alive as to their Souls. You see then the Soul dies not
with the Body. And, if the Soul of a good man, it is in bliss and happiness,
even in the state of separation, as these places show, Luke 23.43. 2 Cor. 5.1,
8. Phil. 1.23. Rev. 14.13. The Body is as it were the Nest or Cage of the Soul:
Death disturbs this Nest, opens this Cage, and then the Soul, that Bird of
Paradise, flies away to the kingdom of Heaven.

Seneca Seneca ad Merc. cap. 24.
could tell disconsolate Mercia, Imago duntaxat filii tui periit -- ipse quidem
aeternus, meliorisque nunc status est, despoliatus onexibus alienis, and sibi
relictus. That the Image only of of her Son was defaced by death, and that
himself was Eternal, in a better state, eased of his uneasy burdens, and now
at freedom to enjoy himself.

2. Consid. There is not a fitter place for the Body of thy deceased Friend
than the Grave is. Genesis 23.4. Give me a possession of a burying place with you
(says Abraham to the Children of Heth) that I may bury my dead out of my
sight. He would be rid of Sarah when she was dead; he would have beautiful
Sarah removed out of his sight, he would have the Wife of his bosom laid under
foot. When once we are dead, all beauty and glory cease, and we become
loathsome to our best friends, and the Grave is the fittest place for us.

3. Consid. Thy friend fares no worse than Princes do. The Grave is called, The
house appointed for all living, Job. 30.23. Living men in short time become
dead men, and are housed there. Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that lives, and
shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the Grave? No,
death will attach the greatest, and the Grave be a Prison to hold their bodies
fast.

4. Consid. Is not the Grave a desirable place? Death is a sleep, and the Vault
or Grave is a Dormitory or Bed for the Body to rest in; See Isa. 57.1, 2. The
Righteous that are taken away, are said to enter into peace, and rest in their
beds. Poor afflicted Saints are glad when they can find the Grave. See, Job
desired it, Job 3.13. etc. and 14.13. O that thou would hide me in the
Grave! he longed for it.

5. And lastly, Consid. Thy Friends Body shall rise again, and (if he dyed in
the Lord) be made a glorious body. The Body of man shall rise again, as appears
by holy Writ, Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1 Samuel 2.6. Job 14.7, etc. Job 19.25, 26, 27. Isa.
26.19. Ezekiel 37.1, 5. Dan. 12.2. Joh. 11.23, 24. ^ Cor. 15. The Apostle spends
the longest Chapter in all his Epistles in proving the Resurrection of the
Body, against some in the Church of Corinth that denied it. Most of the
Heathens dreamed of an everlasting Separation.

Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux,
Nox est perpetuo una dormienda. Catullus.
But Christians make the Resurrection of the Body an article of their Faith.
Manchest All mon. in contemplatio mortis and immortalitatis.
And truly when we see (as an honorable person observed) worms, and flies, and
other creatures, that spend the winter season in a kind of Death, revive in the
Spring; when we see our selves dead every night, and alive in the morning, we
may easily conclude and believe the Resurrection of the Body.

No stone great enough could be laid in the mouth of Christ's Sepulcher to
hinder him from rising again; and nothing shall hinder the rising of God's dear
servants.

St. Austin says, Bodies of Believers shall be raised tanta facilitate, quanta
faelicitate, with as much facility as felicity, with as much ease as happiness.

The Body of a Believer is a precious treasure, which God locks up in the
Cabinet of the Grave; (so much is employed in that Phrase, Job 14.13. O that
thou would hide me in the Grave! We use to hide our choicest treasure) At
the great day of Judgment he will open his Cabinet, and take out the Body, and
it shall be as good, nay better than before. There shall then be a new Edition
of the Body in a fairer Letter more amended; for Phil. 3.20, 21. Our
conversation is in Heaven (says the Apostle) from whence we look for a
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the working, whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself. The same Body shall rise again, the same
for substance but not for quality; a change of it there shall be, but it is for
the better; The vile body shall be changed, that it may be fashioned like unto
Christ's glorious body; and that you should not doubt of it, he tells you it is
done according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself. q. d. There is nothing too hard for Omnipotency to effect. Your
friends body, though sown in corruption, is raised in incorruption: sown in
dishonor, yet raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15.42, etc. It shall then be a glorious
body indeed, for it shall be beautiful, full of brightness, active and nimble,
not stand in need of outward refreshment, it shall not be subject to irksom
labors, afflictions and diseases, it shall not dispose the soul to sin, nor
the soul make use of the body, as a weapon to fight against God; it shall be an
immortal body, and every part and member of it shall have as much happiness as
it is capable of. Such honor have all the bodies of Believers at Christ's
second coming.

So then, thy Friends Soul is not eternally divorced from his Body, nor shall
the Body lie for ever in the grave, but at Christ's second coming (which will
be shortly) it shall rise again, and his Soul be reunited to it in a more
glorious and firm contract, and they shall enter together into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 25.34.

Dr. Abbot on Jonah Lect. 15.
To end this; You know a Watch is taken in pieces before it be mended; and
things new cast are broken first: So thy Friend's Body must be knocked in pieces
by death and the power of the grave, that it may be new cast, not only in its
old figure, but to a better form in the day of the Resurrection, Wherefore
comfort one another with these words, 1 These. 4.18. With what words? with those
words going before, verse. 13, etc. Whereof this is the sum, that they shall
rise again, and be for ever with the Lord.

13th Apology answered
Another cries out, This Friend or Relation that God has taken away, was a good
and useful person, a very charitable man, etc. not only I my self, but the
whole Town and Country too will have a loss of him, for the streams of his
goodness flowed abroad plentifully to the refreshing of many.



1. Good men are very scarce; See Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord, for the godly man
cease, the faithful fail from among the children of men. So Ps. 14.1, 2, 3.
The fool has said in his heart, There is no God; they are corrupt, they have
done abominable works, there is none that does good. The Lord looked down from
heaven, upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand
and seek God: They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there
is none that does good, no not one. So Romans 3.10, etc. Good men are as the
shaking of an Olive tree, and as the gleaning Grapes when the Vintage is done:
as it is Isa. 24.13. So Mic. 7.1, 2, 3, 4. The Church there complains of her
small number. Christ's flock is called a little flock, Luke 12.32. Orig. (...),
a little little flock. They are indeed little in their own eyes, little in the
eyes of the world, and little or few in number.

In God's field there are many Tares, little good Corn: In this great house of
the World, many Vessels of dishonor, but few there are of honor; Salvian
Salvian de Gub. Dei, lib. 3 page 87.
cries out, Ipsa Dei Ecclesia quae in omnibus esse debet placatrix Dei, quid est
aliud quam exacerbatrix Dei, aut praeter paucissimos quosdam, qui mala fugiunt,
quid est aliud pene omnis coetus Christianorum quam sentina vitiorum. So then
they can ill be spared, they are so few.

2. Good men are blessings to the places where, and persons among whom they
live. See Exodus 32.9, 10, 14 compared. God often spared Israel at the prayer of
Moses. The Righteous keep off God's Judgments, as these places show, Job 22.30.
Prove. 29.8. Jer. 5.1. Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. Had there been but ten righteous persons
in Sodom, it had not been destroyed, Genesis 18.32. And God tells us he would not
destroy it, till righteous Lot was gone forth, Genesis 19.22. And God oft-times
for the sake of the Righteous, removes Judgments inflicted, see Psalm. 106.23,
29, 30. so Isa. 65.8. It is an extraordinary case when God will not spare for
the sake of Moses and Samuel, Jer. 15.1. so, when Noah, Daniel and Job shall
deliver but their own souls, Ezekiel. 14.14. The Tares are usually spared till the
Harvest, for the Wheat's sake. A cursed Cham was preserved in the Ark with
Noah, Genesis 7.1. St. Paul saved the lives of all that sailed with him in the
Ship, two hundred threescore and fifteen souls, see Act. 27.22, 23, 24, 37
compared. Indeed the Righteous are Conduit-pipes of Blessings, the greatest
Benefactors to the places where they live. See what Jacob says to Laban, Genesis
30.30. It was little that thou had before I came, (...).
and it is now increased to a multitude since my coming; or, according to the
Original, at my feet. Blessings are sent to every place where the Saints feet
tread. So God blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake, Genesis 39.5. Wicked
men are beholden to the Godly for their Lives, Liberties, estates, etc. In a
word, the Righteous are the Equites cataphracti, the Chariots and horsemen of
Israel, 2 King. 2.12. They are the glory and safety of a Nation; they are
instruments of doing much good by their purses, prayers, counsels, reproofs,
and good example: They, like Lamps, spend themselves for the good of others;
and when such Lights are extinguished by death, how can we choose (if we
seriously consider it) but be overcast with darkness and sorrow.

3. And lastly, The loss of a good man is great, if we consider that the death
of good men bodes misery. It is a sad symptom or prognostication of approaching
Judgments. The people of Rome when they heard Germanicus was recovered of his
sickness, they sang it about the streets, Salva Roma, salva Patria, salvus est
Germanicus: While that good man was well, they thought it could not be ill with
them. And indeed a good man is (...), as Greg. Nazianzene Gregor. Nazian. Orat
in laudem Patres.
calls him, a crutch, prop, or pillar to support the Church: when these pillars
are taken away, the building of frame of outward prosperity continues not long:
It is like Sampsons pulling down the pillars, whereupon ensued a great
destruction, as you may read, Judge. 16.29, 30. A man intending to break up
House, removes his goods; and truly God usually removes his People (which are
his peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5.) either into some other place of the World,
or out of the World, when he intends to leave a sinful people naked, and
destitute of defense and safety.

When Noah was housed in the Arc, the storm came, and the whole world (save
some few with him) were buried in a watery winding sheet, Genesis 7. When Lot
entered into Zoar, the Sun was risen upon the Earth, Genesis 19.23. The Sun was
risen, and the wicked Sodomites thought they should have had a fair day on it,
but it was presently overclouded, and there followed a fearful shower of fire
and brimstone, verse 24. Then (when Lot was removed) the Lord rained upon Sodom
and Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.

After the death of good Josiah, evil ensued upon Israel, 2 King. 22.20. And
this was a chief reason why Jeremy and others made such sad moan at the loss of
that good man, and ever after in their doleful Elegies made mention of his
death, as you see they did, 2 Chronicles. 35.25. After the death of St Austin, Hippo
was sacked by the Vandals: when Luther was dead, then the civil wars broke out
in Germany. So then, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 57.1. The Righteous are taken
away from the Evil to come. And he there complains of a peoples stupidity, when
they do not lay to heart the death of righteous and merciful men. We should
weep, if not for them, yet for, our own sakes, who may justly fear miserys
coming upon us: Yet we must not weep immoderately, or murmur at God's handywork.

To this end, let us consider,

1. Consid. Good men must dye as well as others. It is said, Genesis 47.29. The
time drew nigh that Israel must die. The godly must of necessity dye one time
or other. All the Patriarchs and godly Prophets are dead, Zach. 1.5. John 8.52.
The Apostles and Ministers are Earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. like those Pitchers
of Gideon, Judge. 7. they are Earthen pitchers, and have a Lamp in them: they
are chosen Vessels to bear the name of Christ, to witness to his truth, Acts
9.15. but earthen pitchers still, and must shortly be broken by death. We are
all made of the same clay, Isa. 64.8. And as rich gilding upon an earthen pot
keeps it not from breaking, no more does righteousness (the rich workmanship of
God's blessed Spirit, Ephesians. 2.10.) preserve any man from mouldring to dust.
Moses, Joshua, David, Job, Daniel, etc. are dead and gone. Dorcas, that woman
full of God works and almsdeeds which she did, fell sick and died, Acts 9.36,
37. Holiness is no armor of proof to keep off the dart of Death. The shield of
faith and breast plate of righteousness, which are able to resist the fiery
darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. yet are not able to defend a man from the dart of
Death. The best persons are not persons privileged from the arrest of Death,
that surly Sergeant.

2. Consid. God can raise up other good men in their stead. A Phoenix may arise
out of the ashes. There may hopeful branches come in their stead.

-- Uno avulso non deficit alter,
Aureus, and simili frondescit virg^metallo.
Virgil. See 2 Epist. of John 1st and 4th verses compared, That Elect Lady,
that worthy Matron, honored for her wealth and liberality to the poor, had
Children constantly professing the true Religion, and living according to it,
who might succeed her in works of charity and piety.

Buxtorf. floril. Heb. p. 204.
The Jews have a saying, Quando occidit Sol (vir illustris and utilis) oritur
Sol: (viz. alius similis ipsi.) That never does there die any illustrious man,
but there is another born as bright on the same day. To which they accommodate
that place, See Mr. Patricks Sermon. on Psa. 90.12.
Eccles. 1.5. Nay they observe further, that he makes some Star or other arise
before the Sun be set; as Joshua began to shine before Moses his light was
darkened. And before Joshua went to bed, Othniel the Son of Kenaz was risen up
to judge. Eli was not gathered to his fathers before Samuel appeared to be a
most hopeful youth; and among the other sex they also note, that Sarah was not
taken away till Rebeccah was ready to come in her stead. Furthermore we find in
Scripture, how Elisha succeeded Elijah; Eleazer, Aaron; Haggai and Zechary
supplied the loss of Daniel and Christ arose in John Baptists stead: And
hopeful Timothy, in the room of Paul the aged. Consider then that others as
good and useful in their generations may succeed in their stead.

3. Lastly consid. The happiness that a good man is estated in at death. The
righteous like Stars, though they set in one place, yet they rise in another.
These trees of righteousness are translated into the Celestial Paradise, so
that though they be not with us, yet they are with God. If we truly love them,
we cannot but congratulate their feasts of joy, their rivers of pleasures,
their palms of victory, Dr. Stuarts Cathol. Divin. page 158. Aug. Manuals c. 7
de gaudio.
their robes of majesty, their crown of glory. O vita vitalis, vita sempiterna,
and sempiterne beata, ubi gaudium sine moerore, requies sine labor, sanitas
sine languore, opes sine amissione, perpetuitas sine corruptione. In heaven
there is life indeed, an eternal blessed life, where there is joy without
sorrow, rest without labor, health without sickness, riches without loss,
everlastingness without corruption. Even Balaam saw the happy condition of such
as dye in the Lord, which made him cry out, Let me dye the death of the
Righteous, and let my last end be like his, Numb. 23.10. Let us not then weep
immoderately for those from whose eyes God has wiped away all tears. Let us
rejoice in their joy, as we are commanded, Romans 12.15. and not weep as though
we envied their happiness. Indeed we have great loss when good men are taken
away: but let us not look altogether upon our loss, but likewise on their gain,
and let the one at least counterballance the other.

14. And last Apology answered.

Another cries out, 14th Apology answered
This Friend or Relation of mine lived an openly profane wretch, and he died
without any show of penitential sorrow: As he lived sottishly, (so for ought I
could see) he died securely. I fear he is a damned creature, and this troubles
me.



To this end let Parents consider;

1. Consid. Many of Gods dear Servants have had wicked Children. Our first
Parents Adam and Eve (as Divines generally observe) had laid hold on that
promise, Genesis 3.15. and were renewed by faith and repentance, yet they had a
very wicked Son, their firstborn Cain was an hypocrite and a murderer, Genesis 4.
So Noah, a just man and upright in his generation, and one that walked with
God, Genesis 6.9. had a cursed Cham. Genesis 9.22. Abraham, whom God boasts of, Genesis
18.19. had a persecuting Ishmael, Genesis 16.12. Gal. 4.19. Isaac, a good man, had
Esau a profane wretch, Heb. 12.16. Jacob, who wrestled with God in prayer, and
prevailed, Genesis 32.28. had Simeon and Levi as well as Joseph and Benjamin.
Samuel, one devoted to the Lord, when he was old, made his sons Judges over
Israel, but they walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre. 1 Samuel
8.3. David, a man after Gods own heart, had not only Solomon that was beloved
of God, but likewise incestuous Amnon, ambitious Absalom, and treacherous
Adonijah, 1 King. 1.5. Josiah, that good King, left wicked sons behind him,
Jehoahaz, 2 King 23.30, 31, 32, and Jehoiakim, verse. 34, 36, 37. so Jer. 22.18.
Many more examples might be brought out of Scripture to prove this; but in a
point so clear, and known to be too true by daily experience, let these
suffice. Be content then thy case is not singular.

Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. 2. Consid. Gods servants have been
patient when God has before their eyes cut off their children in their
wickedness. When Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire before the Lord, by fire
from the Lord as with lightning they were destroyed, Livit. 10.1, 2. And how
does their Father take it? See verse. 3. Aaron held his peace, either because
his grief was so great, as that he could not vent himself in answerable
expressions; Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent; or rather, he held his
peace, being convinced of the justice of divine vengeance, for Moses had said
to Aaron, This is that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them
that come nigh me, and before all the People I will be glorified. So old Eli's
sons were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12. though indeed
being educated by their godly Father, they had a notional knowledge of God and
his Laws, yet they had not a spiritual, practical, saving knowledge: You may
read of their wickedness, and how God threatened to cut off Eli's posterity,
Samuel tells him this sad news, 1 Samuel 3.11, 12. What says Eli, verse. 18. It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Job's Children were no better than
they should be, they used to feast much, and Job was afraid lest they should
sin much at such a time, Job. 1.5. he feared lest at such a time of feasting,
they should offend God (as we are apt so to do) by excessive mirth, immodest
gestures, luxury, intemperance, forgetfulness of the poor, etc. or by having
irreverent thoughts of God: and at a feast his Children were suddenly swept
away by a great wind in the midst of their jolity, verse. 18.19. Yet see Jobs
patient carriage, verse. 20, 21, 22. He charged not God foolishly, but thought
well of him and his providence, notwithstanding the manifold miseries that
befell him.

3. Consid. Weeping, though never so excessive, cannot recall them, either from
the gates of death or hell. Incestuous Amnon being slain when drunk, 2 Samuel
13.28. David bewailed him for a great while together, verse. 37, 38, 39. but as
you may there read, David at last ceased mourning, because it would not fetch
him again. He was comforted concerning Amnon seeing he was dead.

4. Consid. God is glorified even in the destruction of the wicked, Prove. 16.4.
The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked for the day of
evil. So Job 21.30. God got himself glory by wicked Pharaoh, Exodus 9.16. So
Exodus 14.4, 17. Moses told Aaron, even now mentioned, that God would be
glorified, and this made Aaron hold his peace, when his sons were cut off in
their act of sin, Levit. 10.3. See Romans 9.21, 22, 23.

5. Consid. If thy Child had lived longer, he might have been a greater grief
and burden to thee. He might with the Prodigal have spent thy substance in
riotous living, Luke 15.13, 30. and so he would have brought shame to thee: for
he that is a companion of riotous men shameth his Father, Pro. 28.7. Yea thy
whole family might have fared the worse for him; he might have taken such
courses as would have brought him to the gallows, which would have been a
greater shame and grief to thee; nay farther yet, if he had lived longer, he
might have gone about to take away thy life; from all which frights, fear and
shame, God by cutting him off has delivered thee. It was sure a great weakness
in David so pathetically to lament the death of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.33. who went
about to take away his life, 2 Samuel 16.11. and was a continual grief and
vexation to him.

6. Consid. If he had lived longer, he would have multiplied his sin here, and
sorrow hereafter. Impenitent wretches, (as it is said of the Crocodile, quam
diu vivit crescit) daily add something to their stature in sin, Job 36.13. The
hypocrites (or, as it is in the Orig. Profane men) in heart heap up wrath. So
Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be smitten any more? ye will revolt more and more. Jer.
9.3. They proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, says the Lord. 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men, and Seducers shall wax worse and worse. It was a sad curse
wherewith David did imprecate some of God's implacable enemies, Psalm. 69.27.
Add iniquity unto their iniquity; q. d. Give them over to a Reprobate sense, as
a punishment of their incorrigibleness, that so they may increase their sin
here, and sorrow hereafter. Such as these do treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath, Romans 2.5. They do (...), heap up wrath in manner of a treasure, which
you know increases by daily addition. Forbearance (we say) is no acquittance.
God suffers some to run their race to the utmost length, as the Amorites were
suffered to make up the full measure of their offenses to the full, Genesis 15.16.
He lets some wicked men live, become old, etc. Job 21.7. but it is for their
greater punishment at last. For God will more severely punish these. Psalm.
50.21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest (says
God to the impenitent wicked wretch) that I was altogether such a one as thy
self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
Confusion will cover that man's face, whose sins God sets in order before his
eyes. Lasa patientia fit furor: The longer the hand is in lifting up when it
str^kes, the greater will the blow be when it falls The Watercourse the longer
it is stopped, the more violently it breaks fo^th. The Justice of God (as one
says) whilst dormant, is crescent, and though couchant will be rampant. Psalm.
50.22. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, (says
God) and there be none to deliver you. Well then, consider, if thy Child had
lived longer, it might have been worse for him.

7. And lastly, consider, If he be damned, who can help it? Religion cannot be
conveyed to Children, as House and Lands, etc. it descends not from Father to
Son, John 1.12, 13. What the Apostle speaks of Ministers, may be here applied,
1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Paul may plant, Apollos water, but God gives the increase: so
then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God
that gives the increase. The Husbandman may plant and sow, yet he cannot bring
down the early and latter rain, to bring seed to perfection. So Parents may
instruct, reprove, exhort, correct, pray for Children, and go before them by
good example, but it is God that must reform them; It is God that quickneth
such as are dead in trespasses and sins, as we are all by nature, Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3, 5. Regeneration is Creation-work, v. 10. which is only proper to God. A
Parent can but show the way wherein a Child should walk; It is God that must
draw him that way, Cant. 1.4. John 6.44. It is God that delivers from the power
of darkness, and translates us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13. It
is he that effectually calls us out of darkness into his marvelous Light, 1
Pet. 2.9. It is God that gives Faith, Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.8. He gives
Repentance, Act. 5.31. 2 Timothy 2.25. He sanctifies us, Jude 1. He saves us, Ephesians.
2.5, 8. Romans 8.30. Well then, if we have done our duty, and yet fail of our end
and desire, (viz.) the conversion of our Children, or any other Friends and
Relations, let us rest contented, assuring our selves, 1 Cor. 3.8. Every one
shall receive his own reward according to his own labor; not according to our
success, but according to our labor: We may say, Liberavimus animas, we have
freed our souls from the guilt we might have contracted through negligence, (
Ezekiel. 3.18, 19, 20, 21) And so the Will of the Lord be done. Why should we vex
our selves for what we cannot redress? Archbishop Abbot says well to this
purpose, Lect. 24. on Jonah 4.1.157.158.
If God according to his unsearchable purpose, after we have done our duties,
leave our Friends in darkness, let us admire God's Justice toward them, and
his Favor to us; stand amazed at the one, and kindly embrace the other, but be
patient in both. We may not take upon us to be more pitiful to our friends,
than God who is perfect Pity; Let us in humility sigh and groan for them, and
be thankful for our selves, but let there be no anger, no displeasure.

To shut up this: We read Exodus 14.31. That when the Egyptians were
overwhelmed in the Cataracts of God's displeasure, The People feared the Lord.
And when Ananias and Sapphira were suddenly struck dead for their hypocrisy,
it is said, Act. 5.11. Great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as
heard these things. So let the death of thy Relation, cut off in his
wickedness, work a fear in thee, and turn thy sorrow for him into sorrow for
thine own self, and manifold sins, lest thou come also into the place of
torment.

CHAP. IV. Containing some Practical Directions to prevent immoderate Weeping.
WHat I have delivered in former Chapters may suffice by way of consideration;
I shall now Direct to something by way of Practice to prevent excessive grief
at death of friends. I pray you observe these 8 Directions and put them into
speedy practice.

1. Direct. Accustom thy self to bear lesser afflictions which you may daily
meet with.

There is scarce a day passes over our heads but God does try our patience in
one kind or other. Job 5.7. Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward.
Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth. Every day, like a big-bellied woman, is with child of
somewhat, and we know not beforehand what trouble it may produce, whether
great or small, but Mat. 6.34. Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof. q. d.
Every day may bring enough grief and vexation with it, do not by distracting
care antedate the evil of it, or add sorrow to it. A Disciple of Christ must
take up his cross daily, Luke 9.23. If we daily bear lesser afflictions
patiently, we may be enabled to bear stronger trials. St. Paul by inuring
himself to bear lesser crosses which he daily met with he could in time bear
the greatest that God did lay upon him. Phil. 4.11. I have learnt in what ever
state I am, therewith to be content. Nay, he makes a light matter of all
afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.17. The Prophet tells us, Lam. 3.27. It is good for a man
that he bear the yoke in his youth. Much good comes by a timely bearing the
cross: It will make a man suffer willingly, v. 28. He sits alone and keeps
silence, because he has born it upon him. It will make a man suffer humbly,
ver. 29. He puts his mouth in the dust: It will make him suffer willingly,
verse. 30. He gives his cheek to him that smites him. Milo could carry a Bull,
being used to carry it daily when it was a Calf; by daily bearing lesser
troubles you may be enabled for greater trials. But if you sink under light
burdens, what will you do when great ones come?

2. Direct. Expect such losses before hand.

It is reported of Anaxagoras, (and some report the like of Xenophon) that he
was not much troubled at the death of his son, for said he Memini me genuisse
mortalem, I looked upon him as a mortal man. Troubles that come of a sudden, and
unexpected, are most troublesome, because they find u^ unprepared to bear them.
An heavy burth^^ cast on a man's shoulders unawares, startles him, sinks him,
and makes him cry out, because he thought not of it, and so was not prepared to
bear it. Weigh then such burdens in your thoughts aforehand.

Qui sua metitur pondera far queat. Spinx Philosophica. p. 635. Look upon
Friends and Relations, standing like Nebuchadnezzars Image, on feet of clay,
frail and mortal, and that death ere long will separate betwixt dearest
friends, Ruth 1.17. Expect the worst that may befall thee. Make account the
time we live here is short: Man and Wife and such like Relations must shortly
part, and then when this divorce comes, you will weep as if you wept not, 1 Cor.
7.29, 30, 31. so moderate will you be in weeping.

3. Direct. Set not your affection too much upon any Relation.

The more we love any thing, the more loath we are to leave it. Isidore says,
Cum gravi dolor amittuntur quae cum magno amore habentur. Isodor. de sum.
bonor.
Inordinate affection causes extraordinary affliction, according to that of
the Poet, Quem res plus nimio delectavere secudae
Mutatae quatient, si quid mirabere pones
Invitus, -- Horat. Epist. 10. lib. 1.
If we love and rejoice too much in Relations whilst we have them, we shall
grie^^ too much when we lose them. How impatiently did Jacob take the supposed
death of Joseph, you may read Genesis 37.33, 34, 35. There was such a vain of
grief opened as could not be stenched, and the reason was (if any reason can be
given for it) He loved him more then the rest of his Children, verse. 3. So he
is impatient of Benjamins going out of his sight, Genesis 42.38. and all was
because he loved him so dearly, Genesis 44.20. Jonah overjoyed in his Gourd whilst
he had it, Jonah 4.6. But when the next morning God withered his Gourd, verse.
7. he takes it so impatiently that he wishes his own death, verse. 8.9. We find
Judge. 18.24. Micah was sore troubled when his Idol-Gods were taken away; Many
make Idols of their Children and Relations (poor Idol-Gods that cannot defend
themselves from death) and when they are taken away, they are sore troubled,
ready to weep themselves into their Graves with them, whom they too much
affected.

4. Direct. Labor to clear up your interest in God.

Make him your friend, who will be light to you when you sit in darkness, Mic.
7.8. and comfort you under any trouble, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6. Such an one that has
an interest in God may say in midst of trouble, Psalm. 116.7. Return to thy rest
O my soul. God is indeed the souls only resting place, Jer. 50.6. God is
Centrum quietativum animae. Jehovah is compounded of quiescent letters ((...),
Literae quiescentes) to show there is no true rest but in him. And in him there
is rest. As Noah was safe in the Ark, whilst tossed with tempests. Make then
but God thy Friend, and thou may with Noah's Dove have recourse to the Ark,
and find rest there, when floods of miseries are abroad. We read, Mat. 8.26.
Christ rebuked the Winds and Waves, so that there was a great calm. In him we
may have peace in the midst of worldly troubles, John 16.33. Tranquillus Deus
tranquillat omnia. If God give comfort, who or what can create trouble, Job
34.29? Indeed it is a sad case when we are without our Friends and God too: But
if we have made our peace with God, whatever storms come, we know where to cast
Anchor and put in for Harbor. See Psalm. 46.1 2, 3. God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble: Therefore will we not fear, though
the Earth be removed: and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the
Sea. Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the Mountains
shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.

We find, 1 Samuel 30. beginning of that chapter, David was greatly distressed,
Ziglag was burnt, his two Wives amongst others taken captives, and the People
(looking upon David as the chief cause of all their loss and misery) spoke of
stoning him: But David (v. 6.) encouraged himself in the Lord his God. God
being his God, he chears up: And no wonder, for all that is in God, is for that
man's good that has an interest in him: and if this will not satisfy, I know
not what can, Wherefore, as it is Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with him,
and be at peace, thereby much good shall come unto thee.

5. Direct. Acquaint thy self with the Word of God.

The two Testaments are two breasts of Christian Consolation. The Word of God
is more precious than Gold, sweeter than Honey, Psalm. 19.10. and 119.72. It
quickens and comforts the soul, as you may read, Psalm. 119.25, 50, 54, 81, 82,
92, 111 verses. so Romans 15.4. the Apostle mentions the comfort of the
Scriptures. Especially hoord up, or have in readiness Scripture-promises, which
are as so many clusters of sweet Grapes growing on the Vine CHRIST, (John 15.1.
2 Cor. 1.20.) and Faith presses out of them the Wine of Consolation.

What the Jews write falsely of their Manna, that it had omne delectamentum and
was suiting to every man's palate: we may most truly say of the Promises of the
Word, that they are very sweet, and suitable to Christians in every condition;
that such as are heirs of them, may have a strong consolation Heb. 6.16, 17,
18. As bladders, they keep Christians from sinking, when cast on the waters of
affliction.

The Cloud of Calamity can never be so great and spreading, so black and
dismal, but they (whom the Spirit of God persuades of an interest in the
Promises) may see some Sunshine through it. Well then, read plentifully the
Word of God, Let it dwell richly amongst you, Col. 3.16. especially have
recourse to Scripture-promises (such as I have beforementioned page 89, 90.)
and from thence, as the Be gathers Honey from several flowers, so you may
distill the sweet Spirits and Quintessence of Christian-Consolation.

6. Direct. Be much in the exercise of Faith.

A Ship rests quiet when Anchor is cast, notwithstanding the winds and waves
that beat against it. So a Christian being anchored on God by Faith, is at rest
amidst the manifold afflictions he meets with. Abraham, Job, David, and such
like Scripture-Worthies that lived much in the exercise of Faith, could undergo
patiently great trials. Peter sunk not, before his Faith began to sink, Mat.
14.31. One that is rooted and built up in Christ, and established in the faith,
as that expression is Col. 2.7. such a one, I say, is not easily overturned and
unsettled, but is like that House built upon a Rock, and the rain descended, and
the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that House, and it fell not,
for it was founded upon a Rock, Mat. 7.24, 25. True Faith puts to flight vain
fears and needless troubles. Joh. 14.1. Let not your heart be troubled: ye
believe in God, believe also in me. It is not a little that can disquiet a
strong Christian that lives in the exercise of Faith.

7. Direct. Study the Art of Self-denial.

That man that has learnt to deny himself, is likeliest to bear his cross;
according to that of our Savior, Mat. 16.24. If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross. Take heed of self-reasonings, of
conferring with flesh and blood, that cannot away with trouble, Gal. 1.16. Take
heed of selfwill: get your will melted into the very will of God. Crosses can
be no crosses to that man that submits his will to the will of God.

8th and last Direction. Pray to God to give you Patience.

A very worthy Dr. Abbot on Jonah 4.2. Lect 25. p. 522.
Divine (whom I have often quoted upon occasion) says, If there be any thing
which may appease sorrow, and ease the grieved heart, oppressed with the
feeling of temporal occurrents, or wounded with the want of spiritual
consolations, it is to have recourse to the Throne of Grace, and there with
watered eyes, and cheeks bedewed with tears, to lay open those grievances which
breed sorrow unto us. And again he says, The burden of affliction is best
supported with this firm underlyer of Prayer. See what Christ says, John
16.24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full: And the Apostle
prescribes instant continuance in prayer, as a means to make us patient in
tribulation, Romans 12.12. So Phil. 4.6, 7. Be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known unto God. And the Peace of God which passes all understanding, shall
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. God is styled the God of all
Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. The God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. from whom comes every
good and perfect gift, Jam. 1.17. and in particular he is called the God of
Patience, Romans 15.5. Therefore go to him whose grace is sufficient for you, and
whose strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. pray him to put under
his everlasting Arms, Deuteronomy. 33.27. and plead that promise in prayer, Isa.
41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I
will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my Righteousness. God there promises to strengthen, to help, to
uphold (not with either hand, but) with the right hand, which is the stronger
hand of the two: Manum fortior est dextra. If God put under his helping-hand,
you may bear any burden he lays upon you.

Multorum manibus grande levatur onus. St. Paul tells us, Phil. 4.11. I have
learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. How came he to learn
this hard lesson? Why, Christ was his Teacher and Assistant, Ver. 13. I can do
all things (says he) through Christ which strengthens me. O then, pray for
patience, and get others too to pray for thee. The more company, the more cry,
and the likelier to prevail, Mat. 18.20. Joining of hands in prayer makes us
stand the surer. St. Paul prays for the Colossians, that they might be
strengthened with all might, according to his glorious Power, unto all patience
and long-suffering with joyfulness, Col. 1.9, 11 compared. I know there is a
kind of bastard counterfeit patience, which (as one says) arises from the
natural constitution, whereby the heat not abounding too much, the man is not
so prone as some others, to choler and discontent, but uses his reason in
ordering of himself, and bears what he cannot avoid: but this is but (...), the
shadow and picture of true patience, which indeed is an herb of Grace, not
growing in Natures Garden; or, if you will, it is a Slip taken from the Tree of
Life, and planted in the Soul by the finger of God, it is of an heavenly
extract or descent, from God as well as Faith, Phil. 1.29. Men naturally meek
(good natures, as we call them) may bear a little, but not enough, nor in a
right manner, nor to right ends, without the supernatural work of patience: The
Apostle places it amongst the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23. Well then,
If any man be afflicted, let him pray, Jam. 5.13. Let him (under loss of
Friends, or any other Affliction) lay open his sad condition before God in
prayer, as a man opens his mind to his Friend; So did Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.12. and
then with her (ver. 18.) he may in time come from prayer, and his countenance
no be more sad.

The End of the First Part.
Deo gratias.
A Funeral Handkerchief.

The Second Part.

Containing several Uses which we ought to make of the Death of Friends.

By Thomas Allestree, M. A. Rector of Ashow in the County of Warwick.

(...).

Nocumenta, documenta.

Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, Mic. 6.9.

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Psalm. 90.12.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1671.

To that Worthy Gentleman, and my much esteemed Kinsman, Mr. William Allestree,
Living in Darby; Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Dear Sir,
DIvine Providence has deprived you of many dear Friends and Relations,
amongst others he has taken away your Religious Parents, and lately your dear
M^is. Frances Lorymore
Wife, the choicest under heaven of all your outward Possessions and Delights,
made nearer unto you by Marriage than either Father or Mother. I call her one
of Gods Jewels (such there are Mal. 3.17.) she was little of stature, but of
great worth: She was a Great Fortune, but, which is more considerable, she was
an huge good person. She was a constant frequenter of the Ordinances, a strict
observer of the Sabbath; her Family-devotion was great, and her secret
ejaculations fervent and constant. She was meek, modest, chaste, courteous,
charitable, patient, humble, etc. These and the like Virtues came streaming
into her Soul from the Fountain of Divine Grace. She was no scoffing Michal,
nor you a churlish Nabal: The only strife betwixt you was this, which should
show most dearness and tenderness; so pleasing was your deportment each to
other, that one would think, one Soul animated two Bodies. You did never grieve
her Spirit but by your excessive grief to see her in that extremity of She
dyed in childbed.
pain; which, with greatest care you could not remedy, and with admirable
patience and Christian courage she cheerfully underwent. She was not afraid of
Death. Though she loved her Husband as dearly as any Christian ought to do, yet
she loved him much less than her Savior, and she knew that Death would bring
her to an happy sight of him; and I doubt not but she is with him whom her soul
longed for.

What remains, sweet Sir, but that you look upon your self, at least as half
dead, and become a most serious and mortified man. I know when God first
snatched this precious Jewel out of your bosom, you were sadly affected with
your loss (indeed her Funerals were celebrated with great solemnity, with many
a weeping eye and sorrowful heart) let not sensual delights make you to forget
it. Labor to get good by this affliction: Let her Memory be still precious
with you, not for adoration (leave that foppery, to the Papists) but for
imitation.

And that you may make a right use of this, and such like losses, which have
and may still befall you, let me entreat you to peruse this following Treatise,
to which I take the boldness to prefix your Name, to testify my thankfulness
for former Favors, and to declare to the world, That I am

SIR, Yours unfainedly, T. Allestree.
Ashow, March 3d. 1670.
A Funeral Handkerchief. Part 2.

CHAP. I. Containing several Uses which we ought to make of the Death of
Friends.
SAint Austin cried out against some who did not profit by afflictions, August.
de Civit. Dei lib. 2 cap. 33.
Perdidistis utilitatem calamitatis: Ye have lost the benefit of your
affliction.

Christians should improve cross Providence to their spiritual advantage. Sad
it is when (as Salvian Salvian lib. 7. de Cub. Dei p. 231.
complains, Cura ipsa deteriores sumus) we are made worse by that which should
make us better. It is with Spiritual as with bodily Physic, if it makes us not
better, it leaves us worse than we were before.

I shall therefore, Courteous Reader, for thy spiritual benefit, show thee what
Use ought to be made of the Death of Friends; which discourse, like the Wine in
the Gospel, John 2.10. though it come now at last, yet through God's blessing
may be best of all. And here my Prayer is, That my Doctrine may drop as the
Rain, my speech distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and
as the Showers upon the Grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

Now if you would make a right Use and spiritual improvement of the Death of
Friends and Relations, you must

1. Eye the hand of God in such losses.
Gods Providence reaches to all worldly occurrences. Not a Sparrow falls to
the ground, nor an Hair from our Heads, without the will of our heavenly
Father, Mat. 10.29.30. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to
whom be glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11.36. God works all things after the
Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. There is no evil befalls us but God has
a hand in it. Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City (he speaks of malum
culpae, of the evil of punishment) and the Lord has not done it? God is the
appointer of the Rod, as the Prophet Micah tells us, Mic. 6.9. In particular,
God has an hand in loss of Friends, as I showed at large in the former
Treatise; and therefore under such losses, look up to God, and give him the
glory of all. The Psalmist, Psalm. 28.5. there threatens with destruction all
such as regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands. So
Isa. 26.11. Lord (says the Prophet) when thine hand is lifted up, they will
not see: but they shall see, and be ashamed --. It is a most grievous sin, when
people do (like the Dog) snap at the stone, forgetting the hand of him that
sent it. It is a belying of God so to eye second causes, as to forget the
first. Jer. 5.12. They have belyed the Lord, and said, It is not be. Let not
therefore loss of Friends be imputed to chance, or secondary causes, but to God
the supreme efficient: For, as Eliphaz says, Job 5.6. Affliction comes not
forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground. He looks too
low, that under loss of Earthly-Friends looks lower than the Hand of Heaven.

2. Have good thoughts of God and his ways, under such losses.
Many at such a time have hard thoughts of God, as though he dealt hardly with
them, and strange thoughts of his ways, as though it was in vain to serve him.
They have little mind to pray, read, hear the Word, etc. some refraining the
Church, as though they had cast off all care of Religion. Satan, who has his
devices to ruin souls, and rob them of spiritual comfort, is very busy at
such a time to suggest, that God intends their ruin, endeavoring by this
means to drive them to despair of God's mercies, and withal he tells them, It
is in vain to serve God: Hence it is that many are ready to say (with that
wicked King in a time of Famine) 2 King. 6.33. Behold, this evil is of the
Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? and, as they said, Mal. 3.14.
It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? Even
Job that eminent Servant of God, lying under sad afflictions, the saddest of
which were the loss of his Children; though you read, Job 1.21. That in all
this, or hitherto Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly; so the like you
read, Job 2.10. Yet afterward when affliction did lodge with him, and he began
to be wet to the skin, we find him uttering many unsavory speeches: In the
third Chapter you find him cursing the day of his birth: And Chap. 6. ver. 8,
9. he wishes God would destroy him, and cut him off: And chapt. 16.9. he said,
God hated him; and chap. 30.21. he said, God was become cruel to him. So David
lying under much affliction whilst the wicked prospered, had much ado to keep
his feet in the ways of Godliness, Psalm. 73.2. As for me (said he) my feet
were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped: and ver. 13, 14. Verily I have
cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence; for all the day
long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning. But though God's
Children through the prevalency of temptation have spoken unbeseeming things of
God and his Ways, yet upon second thoughts (which are ever Secundae
cogitationes meliores.
better) they have humbled themselves for such speeches. So did Job, Job 42.3,
6 compared. And the like did David, Psa. 73.22. he confesses there, that in
speaking dishonourably of God and his ways, he had played the fool, and acted
the part of a Beast rather than a Christian; and ver. 28. he concludes, That it
was good for him to draw near to God. It is good for us under greatest losses
to draw near to God, and to have good thoughts of him and his ways: for, as
Azariah said to Asa, Judah, and Benjamin, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you
while you be with him: And if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you. So Ezra 9.22. The hand of our God is upon all
them for good that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against all them
that forsake him. Heb. 10.38. God's Soul has no pleasure in such as draw back;
they that draw back, do it to their perdition, v. 39. O then, part not with
your Religion when you part with your Friends; neither have hard thoughts of
God: Look upon him with Scripture-Spectacles, which represent him to be (as
indeed he is) a most wise, just, holy, faithful, and merciful God. Even in his
terrible Acts there is abundance of his Goodness and Righteousness appears,
Psalm. 145.6, 7. His end and design is (as you heard in the former Treatise) to
purge out sin, to implant holiness in thee, and so to fit thee for future
happiness. Therefore let God be exalted in his Judgments, Isa. 5.16. Sing a
part in that Heavenly Hymn, Rev. 15.3, 4. Great and marvelous are thy Works,
Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall
not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy. --

3. Labor to find out the particular sin that has provoked God to deprive
thee of such a Friend or Relation; and having found it, confess it, be deeply
humbled for it, pray for pardon thereof, and be careful for the future to avoid
it.
This Use I shall divide into three parts, which I shall speak unto distinctly.

1. Labor to find out the particular sin that has provoked God to deprive
thee of such a Friend or Relation. Nos coelestis ira ignem accendimus, et
excitamus incendia quibus ardeamus, Salvian lib. 8. de Gub. Dei p. 288.
as Salvian speaks, We kindle the sparks of God's wrath, that burn up all our
comforts. Isa. 50.11. We are the cause of our own calamities, Nos calamitatum
nostrarum authors sumus. Ibid. And he adds a little after, A Deo punimur, sed
ipsi facimus ut puniamur: Cum autem punire nos ipsi facimus, cui dubium est,
quin ipsi nos nostris criminibus puniamus? Salv. Ibid page 288, 229.
quia quicunque dat causam qua puniatur, ipse se punit: Our sins procure our
sorrows. That Cloud of Calamity that hangs black over our heads, and is rained
down in Judgment upon us, was first raised by the ascending vapors of our
sins. Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings
shall reprove thee: know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and
bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. -- We find in a great
tempest, the Heathens said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots,
that we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us, Jona 1.7. They
concluded it was sin that caused that fearful tempest: so (as a worthy Dr.
Abbot on Jonah 1.5, 6. p. 77.
Divine says) if any cross befall us, let us straightway with fear and
trembling examine our selves, and enter into our consciences, and sift them in
sincerity as in the sight of God, what sin it is that plucks this cross upon
us. God's People have enquired of the Lord by Prayer and deep Humiliation when
disasters have befaln them, as you may read Judge. 20.26. so 2 Samuel 21.1. so
Jer. 16.10. and Lam. 3.40. Job looked upon his sins as the procuring cause of
all his miseries, Job 13.23. How many are mine iniquities and my sins? make me
to know my transgression and my sin: And before this he had said to God, Job
10.2. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. When God takes away Relations
he testifies against you (as he did against Naomi, who had lost her husband
and two sons, Ruth 1.5, 21 compared) that something in your lives has been
displeasing to him. God oft-times visits the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children, Exodus 20.5. and 34.7. 2 Samuel 12.14. 1 King. 15.29, 30. Isa. 14.21.
Parents may by their sins provoke God to bring upon their children a temporal,
but not an eternal death: for, Ezekiel. 18.20. The soul that sins, it shall
die. Indeed all persons, as well Children as Parents, ow a death to God; if not
by reason of actual, yet of original corruption that is in them; Psa. 51.5.
Romans 5.12. Yet God many times takes away Children and other Relations, not
having an eye so much to their sins, as to the sins of parents and others, that
provoke God to inflict a penal evil. Well then, pray to the Lord to discover to
thee thy sin, which provoked him so soon to take away thy Friend. Psalm. 4.4.
Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. When others are a
sleeping, do you be a thinking what sins you were guilty of, that might cause
God to deprive you of such a Relation. Search into God's Word, and see for what
sins God usually punishes with loss of Friends. Now God might take away thy
Relation for such sins as these;

1. Thy sin might be undervaluing thy Friend. May be thou did not prize him
according to his worth, and now God will teach thee the worth of him by the
want of him: You would not follow his good counsels, reproofs, example, etc.
and therefore God might (because you did not work by it) put out this burning
and shining Light. It may be you dealt by him as the Philistines did by
Sampson, make sport with him, and a laughing stock of him, and therefore God
took him away. Or,

2dly. Thy sin might be overvaluing thy Friend. You might over-love him, too
much rejoice in him, or trust in him too much. God breaks the Conduit-pipes
when you forget the Fountain. Gustavus the renowned King of Sweden, said, God
would take him away, because he was too much admired; and his words were too
true a prophecy. Indeed hopeful Children, godly Relations they are Jewels, Mal.
3.17. but if you take them, and make a golden calf of them, and idolize them,
God may justly break them to powder, as Moses dealt with the golden Calf, Exodus
32.3, 4, 20 compared. So Hezekiah brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses
had made, when he saw the people give divine worship unto it, 2 King. 18.4.
When you make Idols of Friends and Relations, bestowing that love, joy, and
delight upon them, which is due to God, he may justly break them to pieces.
Jonah took more delight than he should have done in his refreshing Gourd, and
that hand that sent it, sent a worm to destroy it. Fond Parents, like foolish
Apes, kill their young ones with embraces. Or,

3dly. Thy sin might be foolish indulgence. Eli was too indulgent toward his
Sons, 1 Samuel 3.13. his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not,
or (according to the Original) frowned not upon them: he was too gentle in his
reproofs and corrections, as you may see 1 Samuel 2.22, etc. and God threatened
that all the increase of his house should die in the flower of their age, and
his two sons, Hophni and Phineas, should in one day die both of them, ver. 33,
34. And accordingly it came to pass, 1 Samuel 4.17. So David too fondly affected
Absalom, and he lived to see him come to an untimely death. Or,

4thly. Thy sin might be undutifulness to thy own Parents. Absalom (even now
mentioned) had once three sons, as you may read 2 Samuel 14.27. but he lived to
see them all buried, as you may gather from 2 Samuel 18.18. Absalom was an
undutiful child, seeking to take away the life of his Father, and God takes
away his childrens lives. Or,

5thly. Thy sin might be Lasciviousness or Wantonness. You read 2 Samuel 12.14.
The Child gotten in Adultery dies. Solomon loved many strange women, 1 King.
11.1. and he left but one son behind him, as we read of in Scripture, Rehoboam
by name, v. 43. and he no wiser than he should be, as you may read 1 King. 12.
Or,

6thly. Thy sin might be Bloodshed or Murder. God threatened Ahab's posterity
for his murdering of Naboth, 1 King. 21.21. so God threatened David for his
murdering Uriah, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10. that the Sword-should never depart from his
house; and he lived to see two of his Children slain, incestuous Amnon, 2 Samuel
13. and rebellious Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. Or,

7thly. Thy sin might be Oppression. See Job 27.13, 14, 15. God there threatens
that the Sword, or Famine, or some such sudden and fearful Judgment shall sweep
away the Oppressors Children. So Amos 4.1, 2. There is the posterity of
Oppressors threatened. God may most justly take away the lives of their
Children, who take away the livelihood of others Children. It is seldom seen
that a covetous griping Oppressor or Usurer leaves many Children behind him.
For these and some other sins (mentioned before) God may suddenly deprive us of
dear and near Relations. Now what says Conscience? does it not fly in your
face and tell you, that you have been guilty of some one or more of these sins?
With Pharoah's Butler call to mind thy fault this day, Genesis 41.9. And having
thus found it out,

2. Confess it to God, be deeply humbled for it, and pray heartily for pardon
thereof. Say as Joseph's Brethren did, Genesis 42.21. We are verily guilty
concerning our Brother. Let your uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and accept of
the punishment of your iniquity, as the Expression is, Levit. 26.41. Turn
sorrowing for your Friend, into sorrowing for your Sins, that have deprived you
of his sweet society. We find, 2 Samuel 24. David sinned in numbering of the
People; and God punishes him in lessening the number of them. See what David
does, verse. 10. His heart smote him after he had numbered the People: and he
said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done: And now I
beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy Servant, for I have done
very foolishly. No sooner was David convinced of his sin, by the testimony of
his Conscience, acted by the Spirit of God, but presently makes his humble
addresses to God, confessing his sin, and heartily bewailing his folly, he
prays to God for pardon thereof: verse. 17. David seeing the People smitten by
the destroying Angel, he cries out, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done
wickedly; but these Sheep what have they done? David knew very well that the
People were not without their faults, justly deserving this and a greater
judgment; yet reflecting upon his sin as an occasion of this judgment, he
endeavors to acquit them, taking the fault wholly upon himself, and yearning
in his bowels with bitter grief, that he should be the cause of bringing this
destruction upon his dearly beloved People. So should we, when our sins have
been a cause to hasten the death of our dear Friend, confess them unto God, be
deeply humbled for them, and pray heartily for pardon thereof. And then,

Thirdly and lastly, Let us be careful to avoid these sins for the future. This
God expects, Job 36.9, 10. He shows them (who are holden in the Cords of
Affliction) their work, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded; he
opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity. This the Church has practiced in times of great distress, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Oh! how should
our hearts rise against such sins as rob us of our dear Friends. If any mortal
man had murdered our Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, Brother or Sister, or
any other near and dear Friend or Relation: We would not endure that man, but
prosecute the Law on him to the uttermost; and we would rejoice to see justice
done upon him: Our hand would not spare, our eye would not pity him. Oh then,
take an holy revenge upon your Lusts, which have provoked God to take away such
or such Relations, let your hearts be transported with infinite indignation
against them, 2 Cor. 7.11. Say in the Language of Elihu, Job 34.31. I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more, nor provoke God in this manner by my
sins to take away my Friends. Mortify therefore your earthly members,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, etc. Coloss. 3.5. (...), kill
or make dead. Pursue these sins with a deadly implacable hatred, (not only odio
aversationis, but inimicitiae). Oh! let not your sins survive any longer, but
as they have killed your Friend, so let them be buried with him in his Grave.

4. Imitate deceased Friends in what is good.
There is no Friend so universally bad, but there is something of good in him
worth imitation; some good might be distilled from him, if we put under the fire
of Charity. Who so deeply buried ( Refined Courtier p. 58.
says a learned man) under the rubbish of his own ruins, that something of
goodness may not be discerned by a charitable Surveyor. We find David
commending Saul in that Panegyric, or Funeral Oration, mentioned, 2 Samuel 1. Do
not, like the silly Sheep leaping off a Bridge, follow one another in irregular
ways to your destruction. Nequaquam facere nos improbos improbitas debeat
aliena, Salv. Salv. de Gub. Dei lib. 7 p. 241.
What you find in any materially good, follow it; but chiefly imitate your
godly Friends, Phil. 3.17. But in as much as they have their failings, (as pure
Gold has its dross, and the purest Wheat its Chaff) follow them so far only
as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Make then your godly Parents your Paterns,
as Mr. Dugard in Epist. de^icat. to his Sermon on Ps. 89 48
Constantines Sons are said to resemble him to the life. (...), Eusebius. Write
after those good Copies which deceased Friends have set you. Jerome having read
the Life and Death of Hilarion, who died Christianly as he lived Religiously;
Well, said he, Hilarion shall be the Champion whom I will follow. Zeno
Cilliaeus consulted with the Oracle how he might live well, and he received
this answer, (...), If he was of the same color with the dead: This he
interpreted to mean, That he should get and read all the ancient Books that he
could hear of, and then steep and die his mind in those sacred Notions. A Mr.
Patrick in his Sermon on Psalm. 90.12.
Reverend Divine says of this Sentence, what St. Paul did of Epimenides's
Sentence, Tit. 1.13. This testimony is true: If you would live well, Look as
like to the dead in the Lord as ever you can, and labor to turn your Souls
into their shape. As living Examples are to be followed, so the dead are not to
be forgotten. Heb. 6.12. Be not slothful, but followers of them, who through
Faith and Patience, inherit the Promises. It is said of Abel, Heb. 11.4. That
being dead, yet speaks, which as it may be understood of his blood calling
for Vengeance, Genesis 4.10. Heb. 12.24. So likewise of his example calling for
our imitation, Heb. 12.1. Well then was thy Friend a strict observer of the
Sabbath, a constant frequenter of the Ordinances, a diligent reader of God's
Word, a faithful Instructor of his Children and Servants? Was he a lover of
good Ministers, a reliever of good People, a reprover of Vice, an encourager of
Virtue? Was he much in praying, laborious in his Calling? Was he serviceable to
his Neighbor, faithful to his Friend, a forgiver of his Enemies? In a word,
Was he temperate, meek, patient, peaceable, humble, honest, heavenly-minded,
etc? If these and the like virtues were conspicuous in thy Friend, Go thou and
do likewise, Luke 10.37: Though your Friend be dead and buried, yet let his
virtues live in your practice.

5. Admire Gods goodness, who as yet continues thee in the land of the Living.
Life is a mercy that we ought to bless God for, Psalm. 66.8, 9. O bless our
God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard, who holds our
soul in life. -- So Ps. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. The Psalmist there, amongst other
mercies, blesses God for healing his Diseases, and redeeming his life from
destruction. Indeed God's delivering our Soul from Death, is an effect of his
bounty, as ye may gather from Psalm. 116.7, 8. It is of the Lords mercies that
we are not consumed, Lam. 3.22. For God to maintain that radical moisture, that
Oil that feeds the Lamp and Light of thy Life, is (as Mr. Goodwin on Romans 2.4,
5.
one says) as great a miracle, as the maintaining the Oil in the cruse of the
poor famished Widow, 1 Kings 17.16. When thou therefore hear of the death of
any Friend, Neighbor, or Relation, consider with thy self, it might have been
thine own case; thou art made of no better Mould then he was: It Is God only
that preserves the House of Clay from falling to the ground. As thou
accompaniest him to the Grave to pay the last office of Love; consider thou
might have been carried forth, and others have accompanied thee. Is it not a
miracle of mercy, that the Dart of Death should kill many round about thee, and
yet miss thee! Conclude, that the Hand of God guides it, and it is his mere
mercy that thou art yet spared. When Lot (as I told you before) had his Wife
turned into a Pillar of Salt, and his Sons in Law swept away by a fearful shower
of Fire and Brimstone, he took it for a great favor that God had spared his
life; Genesis 19.19. Behold now, thy Servant has found grace in thy sight, and
thou have magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed unto me, in saving my
life. Oh then, let death of others put thee upon blessing and praising God for
sparing thee; and not only praise him with thy Lips, but with thy Life too;
Love him, obey him, cleave to him, for he is thy Life, and the length of thy
days, Deuteronomy. 30.20.

6. Let death of Friends teach you not to trust in the arm of flesh.
God would not have us, by any means, to put our trust in man, as these places
show, Isa. 2.22. Isa. 30.23. Isa. 36.6. Jer. 17.5, 7. So Psalm. 118.8, 9. Luther
on that place, [It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
man, etc.] calls it, Artem artium and mirificam, and sacrificium omnium
gratissimum, and suavissimum, and cultum omnium pulcherrimum, To trust in God,
and not in man, is the Art of Arts, the wonderful and great Art, a most
excellent Sacrifice, and commendable piece of Religion. He that builds his
hopes on so weak a foundation as the life of Man, he is like that foolish Man
in the Gospel that built his House on the Sand, Mat. 7.26. Or like a foolish
Merchant that ventures all his substance in a crazy Vessel. The Psalmist tells
you, Men of low degree are a vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, (he
gives great ones the lie) Psalm. 62.9. He means all Friends both of high and low
degree, are lying vanities, and perform not what they seem to promise; so that
whoever trust in any Friends, as it is said in another case, Isa. 28.15. They
have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood they have hid themselves. And
these Friends that they trust in, like Absaloms Mule, 2 Samuel 18.9. many times
give them the slip, when they have most need of their support and assistance;
for if they fail them not through willful treachery, (as many times they do,
Psalm. 55.12. Mic. 7.5, 6. Luke 21.16.) yet they may, through unavoidable
mortality, as Jonathan failed and disappointed David, of whom he says, I am
distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26, 27. Mr. Duguard's Sermon
on Psalm. 89.48. p. 17, 18.
Caesar Borgia, that wicked Son, of a more wicked Father, Pope Alexander the
sixth, grounded many designs on his relation to the Pope; but the Pope suddenly
dies and dashes all: And Borgia, when he heard of his death, cried out, I never
dreamed of such an accident, now all my purposes and projects are stifled and
come to nothing. He that knows man well enough, knows him better then to trust
in him. Wherefore as it is Psalm. 146.3, 4. Put not your trust in Princes, nor
in the Son of man, in whom there is no help; his breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish. His thoughts and
designs of doing thee good (if he had any) die with him, and thine hopes and
expections are buried in his Grave: therefore, as it follows, verse. 5. Happy is
he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God.
He casts Anchor amiss, that casts it any where else save on the Rock of Ages.

7. Let death of Friends teach you not to set your affections too much upon any
Relation.
We see Friends stay but a short time with us; who would be too fond of them?
We may love and rejoice one in another, Husband in Wife, Wife in Husband;
Parents in Children, Children in Parents, etc. But it must be moderately, as
though we rejoiced not, seeing the time of enjoying is short, and will quickly
be expired, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. The rivolet of our affections may run to other
things, but the full stream must run toward God. Luke 14.26. If any man come
to me (says Christ) and hate not (that is, loves not less then me, Mat.
10.37.) Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Say then with the Psalmist, Psalm.
73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee. God is called the Living God, Psalm. 42.2. Let therefore
the life and vigor of your affections, as love, joy, delight, etc. be for ever
set upon him, and not upon mortal Friends, which like Noah's Dove, however they
bring an Olive Branch promising peace and comfort, yet they are upon the Wing,
and presently fly from us: Or like Thorns under a Pot, though they give a
little blaze, shining, and comfort for a while, yet they presently drop into
ashes. When you too fondly set your affections on them, and think to hold them
fast, they give you the slip, as Juno did Ixion, or as Joseph did his Mistress
when she laid hold on his Coat, Genesis 39.12, 13. Let therefore these perishing
comforts have perishing affections.

8. Let death of Friends put a stop to covetousness, and immoderate desires
after the riches of this World.
The wise man says, Prove. 23.4. Labor not to be rich. And the Prophet
Jeremiah says to Baruch, Jer. 45.5. Seek thou great things for thy self?
Seek them not. And David says, Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase, set not your
heart upon them. Riches indeed are a very uncertain tenure, 1 Timothy 6.17. Orig.
(...). Silver and Gold, those refined parts of the Earth, are but corruptible
things, 1 Pet. 1.18. Worldly possessions are nothing certain, Prove. 23.5. If
they leave not us, (which they may do, for they are subject to many casualties,
Fire may burn them, Thieves steal them, etc.) yet we must ere long leave them.
Death gives a Bill of Ejectment: It divorceth from Gold and Silver, Houses and
Lands, etc. It squeezes those Spunges that have sucked themselves full, and
leaves them as dry and empty as they were at first, Job 1.21. Eccles. 5.15, 16.
Psalm. 49.10, 17. comp. Luke 12.20. 1 Timothy 6.7, 8. Death that surly Sergeant (as
you see daily) will not be bribed to put off his Arrest. In a word, you may be
sick and die, and be turned to dust, yea and be damned too for any thing your
riches can help you, Prove. 11.4. And therefore project not for time to come, as
if this life would never be done.

9. Let death of Friends be a curbing-bit to restrain intemperance in eating
and drinking, and an eager prosecution of sinful pleasures.
Many in the last days of this Worlds continuance, Jehu-like, drive on
furiously in sinful pleasures. They are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, 2 Timothy 3.4. but God would not have us to indulge our selves in rioting and
drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness; he would not have us to make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof, Romans 13.13, 14. And
methinks the meditation of death of Friends should be a means to prevent
intemperance. As I have read of one, who had continually, amidst the multitude
of his dainties, a Deaths Head served up in a Charger, to mind him of his
mortality, and keep him temperate in the use of Gods good Creatures. Oh
consider, thou wretched Epicure, that thy pampered body will shortly be a most
noisome Corpse. Job 24.20. The Worm shall feed sweetly on it. Consider, the
pleasures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11.25. Thou may hear that voice
this present hour in the midst of Drinking, Dancing, Feasting, Gaming, Whoring,
etc. which Pope Innocentius the 4th heard in his Court, and was found dead the
next day. Veni miser ad judicium, Come thou wretch to judgment.

10. Let death of Friends give a check to pride and ambition.
Dr. Stuarts Cathol. Divin. page 150.
Some say, The hand of a dead man stroaking the part, cures the Tympany.
Methinks the spectacles of mortality, presented so frequently before us, should
assuage the swelling of pride that is within us. Who would be proud of popular
applause, which is indeed but a fancy, (for so Agrippa's pomp is called, Acts
25.23. Orig. (...)) did he consider his own mortality? Herod would not have
erected the plumes of pride, as he did, when the people flattered him, had he
looked on himself as a mortal man, and that he should be so soon eaten up of
Worms, the vilest of Creatures, Acts 12.21, 22, 23. Who would be proud of
beauty, considering if Deaths Hand do but touch the best complection'd Persons,
like the Contacto^ cinerescunt.
Apples of Sodom, they drop speedily into dust and ashes? Who would be proud of
Gifts and Parts, seeing the Wise Man dies as well as the Fool? Psalm. 49.10. Who
would be proud of stately and pleasant Houses, considering shortly he must be
housed in dark and dankish rooms under ground, Job 17.13? Who would be proud of
his Pedigree, considering he must say ere long to corruption, Thou art my
Father: and to the worm, Thou art my Mother, and my Sister, Job 17.14? Who
would be proud of Apparel, which must shortly be laid aside? Or, who would be
proud of Riches, which must be left at death, and we know not to whom, Psalm.
39.6? Who would be ambitious of great swelling titles, as your Worship, your
Honor, your Grace, your Excellency, your Greatness, your Highness, etc.
considering that the Greatest die, and their Titles with them, and their Glory
will not descend after them, Psalm. 49.17? Ambition, like a blazing Comet,
portends no good, and in a while vanishes and comes to nothing. How
unbefitting a thing is it for man to be daily aspiring, who is daily expiring;
to soar so high, who must lie so low, even under the feet of those whom he
desires to tread upon? Ahasuerus that could reckon 127 Provinces under his
command, Esth. 1.1. had but about seven foot Sepulcher at most, being dead: And
Alexander that sweated within the compass of the world, as too narrow for him,
Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi.

Juvenal Sat. 10. Yet being dead, had but a little patch of ground to contain
his Body, and that was with much difficulty obtained.

There is indeed some odds betwixt men whilst living, in respect of birth,
education, wealth, wit, alliance, honor, beauty, etc. yet to pull down the
top-sail of pride, man should consider that the same God made us all, Job
31.15. Mal. 2.10. and of the same matter, and we all at last return alike to
the same earth, Genesis 3.19. Eccl. 12.7. There is no odds amongst dead men.
Respice sepulchra, and vide quis servus, quis dominus, quis dives, and quis
pauper, discern si potes vinctum a Rege, fortem a debili, pulchrum a deformi.
Aug. lib. de not. et great.
Aust. Take a view of the Graves of men, and you shall find all there have a
like hollow eyes, flat noses, ghastly looks, noysom scents, etc. there Dives
cannot be distinguished from Lazarus, nor beautiful Rachel from blear-eyed Leah.

At a game of Chess (as a learned * Doctor observes) we see Kings, and Queens,
and Bishops, Dr. Stuart's Catholic. Divinity page 151, 152.
and Knights upon the board, and they have their several walks, and contest one
with another in points of state and honor; but when the game is done, all
together with the pawns are shuffled in one bag. In like manner in this life
men appear in different garbes, and take diverse courses, some are Kings, some
are Officers, some Bishops, some Knights, some of other ranks and orders. But
when this life, like a game, is done, which is sometimes sooner, sometimes
later, all are shuffled together, with the many or vulgar sort of people, and
lie in darkness and obscurity. All their pomp is brought down to the grave, and
the worms shall cover them; Isa. 14.11.

To shut up this point. A proud man is a vain supercilious bubble, that swells
for a while, and danceth about with a splendid gaiety upon the surface of the
waters, but presently disappears and is seen no more. Who would then boast
himself with Theudas to be some body, Act. 5.36. or, with Simon-Magus, look
upon himself as (...), Act. 8.9. some grand Magnifico, whereas in his best
state he is but altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5.

11. Let death of Friends be a Cordial to keep you from fainting under any
affliction.
You see Friends die daily, assure your self ere long your turn will come, and
by death you shall be delivered from all your sorrows. A Christian may say with
Jacob, Genesis 47.9. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been.
This is Jacobs Arithmetic: he casting the account of his days, tells you, they
were by substraction and diminution, Few, by addition and multiplication, full
of evil. Indeed, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the Righteous. The
Latin word Quies, which signifies rest, wants the plural number, for there is
little rest in this world. A good man meets with contempt from the world,
temptations from the Devil, assaults from the flesh, sometimes with rebukes
from God, checks from Conscience, with spiritual desertions, with poverty,
sickness, reproach, etc. like a Ship sailing on the Sea of this world, no
sooner is he freed from one way but he is immediately lifted up by another; but
when he dies, he is safely landed on the shore in the haven of Heaven, above a
state of misery and mortality too.

Old Chaucer's Epitaph is a good one, Manch. Al. Mond p. 61.
Mors aerumnarum requies: Death puts an end to all sorrow. We may write upon
the Gravestone of a Spiritual Pilgrim, Hic mortuus requiescit semel,
Qui vivus requievit nunquam.
Death is a Sleep, and the Coffin a Couch; In quo ille mollius dormit quisquis
durius in hac vita se gesserit. Ambros. The Sepulcher is a place of rest, for
the Ancients called it Requietorium, or Dormitorium: And the Prophet Isaiah
calls it a Bed, Isa. 57.2. They shall rest in their Beds. Men being
hard-work't all day, sleep sweetly at night: So the Righteous when the night of
Death approachcth, after all their hardship and sore labors, have their bodies
laid down to rest in the Grave, where they sleep quietly until the
Resurrection. Cheer up then, ye Servants of the Lord, under all your
Grievances, your Afflictions cannot continue long, because your life is short.
See 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. Weep as if you wept not, for it will be shortly better
with you than now it is. God will wipe away all tears from your eyes, Rev.
7.17. and 21.4. As Athanasius said of his Banishment, so may you of your
Affliction, what ever it be, Bp. Pilkington, on Neh. 4.16.
it is but Nubecula cito transitura, a little Cloud that will soon be
dissipated and blown over. Niceph. 10. cap. 19.

Thus, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 30.5. Weeping may endure for a night, but
joy comes in the morning. After a wet night of Affliction comes a bright
morning of Consolation, which no night shall ever overtake.

Though Spectacles of Mortality administer Comfort to the Righteous under
Affliction, yet they may strike terror into the hearts of impenitent Wretches:
for they may read their own death in the death of their Friends. They must
shortly die as well as others; Job 24.24. Psalm. 37.35, 36. and 49.10. And though
Death put a period to the sorrows of the Righteous, yet it is an inlet to the
wicked man's misery. See Job 20.5, 6, etc. The Lord laughs at the cruel wicked
man, for he sees that his day is coming, Psalm. 37.13. The day of vengeance is
drawing on, therefore envy him not, v. 1, 2. Neither be afraid of him, Isa.
51.12. To end this, we read Dan. 5.5, 6. There came forth fingers of a man's
hand, and wrote over against the Candlestick upon the plaster of the wall of
the Kings Palace: and the King saw the part of the hand that wrote: These
fingers did not snuff the Candle of Belshazzars joy to make it burn the
brighter, but quite put it out: for the King's countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his bones were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another. Methinks every Spectacle of Mortality should
be to wickedmen as this Handwriting upon the wall to Belshazzar, It should
make them crest-faln and stand in fear: For Death, like Isreal's Pillar of the
Cloud Exodus 14.20. as it brings Light to the Godly, so Darkness to the Wicked:
Prove. 13.9. The Light of the Righteous rejoices, but the Lamp of the Wicked
shall be put out.

12. Let death of Friends make us careful to do all good with as much speed as
we can.
It is said, Genesis 47.29. The time drew nigh that Israel must die. So the time
of thy Departure draws nigh: therefore whatever thine hand finds to do, do it
with all thy might, Eccl. 9.10. hide not thy Talent in a Napkin, thou know
not how soon thou may be called to an account; assure thy self, when a night
of Death comes, no man can work, John 9.4. Why stand you idle, the day of your
life being (for ought ye know) well-nigh spent? A man cannot think to have his
money when he has spent it; you cannot spend your time and have it. As you
have therefore opportunity, do good to all, especially to them of the household
of Faith, Gal. 6.10. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations, Luke 16.9. and, as Solomon advises, Withhold not good from them
to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it: Say not to
thy neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it
by thee, Prove. 3.27, 28. Be provident to lay up something for Wife and
Children, Prove. 13.22. 1 Timothy 5.8. We hold our life with great uncertainty; be
careful as may be with a good conscience, to lay up something for posterity to
live upon. Joseph in a time of plenty laid up against dearth and scarcity, Genesis
41.48. especially labor to promote the spiritual welfare of Relations and
others whom you converse with; lead an exemplary life, reprove, rebuke,
instruct and pray for them. Ministers should do so ex officio, they are called
and appointed hereunto, Isa. 58.1. 2 Timothy 4.2. Private Christians should
likewise do it ex charitate, out of christian care and charity, Levit. 19.17.
so 1 Pet. 4.10. And for encouragement consider Prove. 11.30. He that wins
souls is wise. And Dan. 12.3. They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness
of the Firmament; and they that turn many unto righteousness, as the Stars for
ever and ever. So Jam. 5.19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth,
and one convert him, let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins.

Furthermore, if we endeavor the conversion of souls and do not effect it, yet
the Apostle tells us for our comfort, we shall not lose our reward; 1 Cor. 3.8.
Every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labor. It is not
said according to success, but according to labor. Heb. 6.10. God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love. This comforted the Prophet,
Isa. 49.4. Then I said I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for
naught, and in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work (or
reward) with my God. However as another Prophet shows, Liberavimus animas,
Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, etc. we free our selves from that guilt which we might have
contracted through negligence. Well then, have thou a treasure of spiritual
Wisdom and Grace, labor to communicate it betimes, for Death ere long may stop
either your mouth, or the ears of others, and then it will be too late to make
Dives's motion, to forewarn your Brethren, lest they come into the place of
torment, Luke 16. latter end.

The Apostle Peter was diligent in putting people in remembrance of good
things, knowing that shortly he must put off his tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14,
15. And St. Paul is earnest in his exhortations and spiritual directions to
Timothy, especially knowing the time of his departure to be at hand, 2 Timothy
4.5, 6.

Mr. Perkins his Motto was, Hoc age, do the business you are about, what
concerns you most, Abel-Redivivus in Life of Mr. Perkins.
do it speedily, exactly; And truly that good man, as if presaging that his
life was likely to be short (for he dyed at the 44th year of his age) husbanded
his time with double diligence to God's glory, and the good of many others. Oh
then, let us consider, the taper of our life may be almost spent, and therefore
(tanquam ultimus lucernae fulgor) let us now shine most gloriously to the good
of others. And truly (as some think) if there were grief in Heaven, it would be
most of all for this, that Believers did no more for their God, who now does so
much for them; that they did not glorify him more on Earth, who glorifies them
so much in Heaven.

13. Let death of Friends put us on to get what good we can by living Friends,
we see they die soon.
We hold our Friends but durante beneplacito Dei, how soon he may call for
them, we know not: And therefore (as one says) let us do with them as with
some Books which we borrow, let us read them presently, and take out thence
profitable lessons as soon as we can, for we know not how soon the owner may
take them from us: Books of our own lie by us, and we may read them at
leisure. Thus if Friends were so our own that we might have them by us at our
own command, we might be the more careless; but in regard they are but lent us,
and may speedily be called for again: It is good to improve their company
whilst we have them; and gather from them what may make for our profit both
temporal and spiritual; especially let us improve their society to our eternal
advantage.

The old World was to blame in not being bettered by the good example of Enoch,
Methuselah, Noah, and some other few good persons that were amongst them: And
the wicked Sodomites to blame for not improving the society of Godly Lot to
their spiritual advantage, Genesis 19.7, 8, 9. 2 Pet. 2.5, 6, 7. Let the patience
of good men, check thy impatience; their zeal, thy luke-warmness; their
charity, thy cruelty; their temperance, thy luxury; their strictness, thy
looseness. Yet a little while (says Christ) is the Light with you, walk while
ye have the Light, Joh. 12.35.

The Light of God's Word is principally to be followed, Psalm. 119.105. Gal.
6.16. yet the light of good Example is not to be neglected, Mat. 5.16. Heb.
12.1. Walk and work by the Light of both, and that with all possible speed that
may be.

To shut up this; Death silenceth the best Preachers, breaks up the best
Company; and therefore deal with gracious Companions and faithful Guides, as
Elisha did by Elijah, who would not leave him, till he had gotten his Spirit
doubled upon him, 2 Kings 2. from ver. 1, to 16. Or, as Jacob dealt with the
Angel, who would not let him go until he blessed him, Genesis 32.26, 27, 28. So
let us be careful so to improve their company, that before they leave us we may
get a blessing from them.

14. Let death of Friends mind us of our own death.
Eccles. 7.2. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the House of
Feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart.
The house of Feasting is apt to put out of our minds the thoughts of goodness,
Deuteronomy. 8.12. Job 1.5. but the house of Mourning may seriously affect the heart
with good thoughts; as of the greatness of God's Power, who takes away our
breath, Psalm. 104.29. and with thoughts of our own frailty and mortality: for,
as it is said of Abel, he being dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. So the dead
corpse in the house of Mourning, seems to speak our inevitable mortality. We may
call the death of a Friend or Neighbor (says a worthy Mr. Harrison in his
Sermon. on Isa. 57.1. p. 42.
Divine) as some do the Sacrament, Visibile Verbum, a visible Word, a Sermon
teaching us our Mortality; for what we are, they were; and what they are, we
may be, and we know not how soon. Quod tueris, tu eris; do thou behold a dead
corpse carried forth, thou shall shortly be such an one thy self. Alas! Alas!
what is this life that we make such account of, that we so much talk of? It is
rapidissimus cursus a tumulo ad tumulum, a very swift motion from the womb of
our Mother, to the womb of the Earth. Natures dim eye saw the shortness of it.
Will you hear what it is? One compares it to an Herb green now, See Mr.
Ambroses Sermon. on Genesis 47.9
and presently withering ( Ut Herba Solstitialis. Plaut.) Another calls Life
the Image of Death. ( Mortis Imago. Cato.) Another calls Man a Dream of a
Shadow ((...). Pindar.) Another, a shadow of Smoke, ((...). Aeschyl.) Another
compares it to Leaves on Trees soon falling, (...).

Tale genus hominum, quale foliorum. Homer. Iliad. 3.

Another says, Our whole life is but a point of time, ((...). Plutarch.) which
Seneca well interprets, saying, Punctum est quod vivimus, and adhuc puncto
minus: The time we live is but a point, yea less than a point. It is but an
instant, for what is past we enjoy not, and what is to come is uncertain; so
that the present instant is the time we live, and that gone as soon as spoken.

You have heard some of the Heathens speak of the Life of Man, I pray you
hearken to what the holy Ghost speaks of it in Scripture. Job compares it to a
Weavers Shuttle, Job 7.6. which being thrown by the hand of the Weaver,
speedily passes from one end of the Web to the other; and v. 7. compares it to
the Wind, that passes speedily away: what more swift or uncertain than the
Wind? he compares it to a Shadow that passes away, Job 8.9. (so does David,
Psalm. 102.11. so does Solomon, Eccles. 6.12.) Job likewise compares his Life to
a Post, that runs or rides swiftly on the Earth; to a Ship that moves swiftly
on the Waters; and to an Eagle hastening after her prey, that moves swiftly in
the Air; Job 9.25, 26.

David compares the Life of Man to Grass, ( Muscul. in Genesis 1. p. 13.
Mane quidem floridum, vesperi vero aridum); and to the Flower of the Field,
which soon withers and fades away, Ps. 103.15, 16. So does Moses, Psalm.
90.5, 6. So does the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 40.6, 7. David likewise compares it
to Smoke which is quickly dispersed, Psalm. 102.3. He likewise compares it to an
(...) palmus, est mensura 4 digitorum junctorum. Byth.
Hand-breadth, Psalm. 39.5. which is one of the shortest of measures, the
breadth only of four fingers put close together. Our Savior would have us
look upon our Life but as a Day, Mat. 6.11. and Moses reckons by Days, Psalm.
90.12. so did Jacob before him, Genesis 47.9. And indeed (vita nostra non est
diuturna, Propera vivere, et singulos dies singulas vitas puta, nihil interest
inter diem and seculum. Sen.
sed diurna) every day is a little Map of our Life: for as the poor Hireling
when the day is spent, goes home with his wages with him; so when the day of
man's life is spent, with his wages about him he returns to his long-home, the
Grave.

St. Paul calls our Bodies Earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. and 2 Cor. 5.1. The
earthly house of this tabernacle: Here the Apostle who was a Tent-maker,
compares the Body to a Tent or Tabernacle, which is speedily taken down and
removed.

St. James catechizing us in this point, asks us a question, and answers it
himself, Jam 4.14. What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a
while, and then vanishes away. It is a vapor, and that is such a thing as is
next to nothing, an apparition rather than reality, and that apparition
vanishing out of sight.

Moses tells us, Psalm. 90.9. We spend our years as a tale that is told: A tale
is not long in telling. Thus the Life of Man is short considered in it self,
but very short compared with the existence of God: For, as the same Moses tells
us, v. 4. A thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past;
and as a watch in the night, which is but three hours continuance. Christ calls
it an hour, John 5.25. The Wiseman calls it a moment, Prove. 12.19. so does St.
Paul, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our lifetime here is but as a watch in the night, as an
hour, yea but a moment, compared with the existence of God, and duration of
eternity.

David sets out Man in his fading colors, Psalm. 39.5. Mine age is as nothing
before thee: verily every man in his best state is altogether vanity. Selah.
Or, according to the * (...)
Original, it may be rendered, All vanity every man living, or every living man
is every vanity: Universa vanitas omnis homo subsistens. Byth. Or, Universa
vanitas omnis homo stans. Pagnin. Take man standing on his Pantofles in all his
beauty and bravery, and he is no other than a compendium of all vanities under
the Sun. Name what vanity you can or will, man is that: call him any thing but
vanity and you call him too much. Some have comprised the vanity of man's life
in these verses, Somnus, bulla, vitrum, glacies, flos, fabula, foenu^,
Umbra, cinis, punctum, vox, sonus, aura, nihil.
Man is not only vain, but vanity in the abstract (et abstracta sunt
significatiora) not vanity in the worst, but best state; nay, not vanity only,
but altogether vanity. There is not a verier vanity than vain man is: And that
we may not doubt it, he ushers it in with a Verily, and concludes it with
Selah. Which word (growing of a root which signifies to lift up) being added, a
(...) elevavit. Byth.
shows we should lift up our minds seriously to consider the vanity of man.
Nay, not only every man, but all Nations before him are as nothing, and they
are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity, Isa. 40.17.

Yet though Man be so vain, his life so short, some are loath to acknowledge it.
Agnoscere nolumus quod ignorare non possumus. Cyp. de mort. David prays, Put
the Heathen in fear, that they may know themselves to be but men, Psalm. 9.20.
It seems they took themselves to be more than men. So did Empedocles, -- Deus
immortalis haberi
Dum cupit Empedocles. Horat. Art Poet. Dr. Prideaux his Introduction to
Histories p. 198.

And Domitian the Emperor arrogated to himself Divine Honors, and would be
styled, Dominus et Deus noster, Our Lord and God; to which afterward the
Canonists entitled the Pope. But the Pope has little reason to admit this
title, for (as Dr. Prideaux observes elsewhere) one year, Introduc History, p.
151.
four months and three days made an end of four Popes, (viz.) Sextus the 5th,
Urbane the 7th, Gregory the 14th, and Innocent the 9th.

Most know they must die, but they seldom think of it. Thoughts of the last
end, are the last end of many men's thoughts; Witness that profane Proverb
which is much in use amongst us, when we would express that we never thought of
such a thing, we say, we thought no more of it than of our dying-day. Most sad
it is that where spectacles of Mortality are most frequent, as in Cities and
Corporations, and great Towns, there they are the least regarded. Mr. Fuller
tells us of a Bird peculiar to Ireland, called the Cock of the Wood; these
Birds will fly many together in Woods, and if one of them be shot, the rest
remove but to the next bough or tree at the furthest, and there they stand
staring at the Shooter, till the whole company be destroyed. As foolish as the
Bird is, it is wise enough (says he) to be the emblem of most in point of
mortality. Death sweeps away one, and one, and one, and the rest remain nothing
moved at it, or minding of it, till at last a whole generation is consumed.

When we are in health we put Death far from us: And when we are sick we are
apt to say, as our Savior did of Lazaru's sickness, Jo. 11.4. This sickness is
not unto death. Thus men spend their days in wealth, or mirth (for the Orig.
will bear either) and in a moment (when they little think of it) they go down
into the Grave, Job 21.13. We read of some, Isa. 28.15. that said, They had
made a covenant with Death, and with Hell (or the Grave) were at agreement. A
League or Covenant is made betwixt Parties consenting, but merciles Death makes
a League with none: so that there is no Covenant made indeed, but only in the
wicked man's imagination, who without any ground for it, thinks Death will not
yet seize on him. So those Epicures said, Isa. 56.12. They would fetch Wine,
and fill themselves with strong Drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant. It is said of Jerusalem, Her filthiness is in her Skirts,
she remembers not her last end, Lam. 1.^9. So the rich Farmer sang a Requiem
to his Soul, Luke 12.19, 20. Soul, take thine ease, thou have Goods laid up for
many years, eat, drink, and be merry. He reckoned on many years, but reckoned
without his Host, and so was brought to a second reckoning far more sad than he
thought on, for God said to him, Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be
required of thee. He is branded with the name of a Fool for so doing to
succeeding Generations. So there were some in St. James's time, James 4.13.
That said, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there
a year, and buy and sell, and get gain. We read, Isa. 40.6. the Prophet was to
cry, All flesh is Grass: This crying does intimate, that men drowned in
security, forget their own mortality.

Now the reason why many presume upon long life, is either,

1. Because they would have it so; for, facile credimus quod volumus, We are
apt to believe what we would have come to pass: Or,

2. Because they reckon by false See Mr. Patrick's Sermon. on Ps. 90.12.
rules; as, (1.) Some reckon by their Age: They are young, healthful, and
strong, of good Constitutions, and so think to live many days: Whereas
(according to what a worthy Dr. Walker in his Sermon. on Luke 7.12, 13. p. 13.
Dr. says) Their less confirmed constitution is sooner discomposed and out of
temper: Their fresher blood is more susceptive of infection; their warmer and
agil spirits more easily blown up into a feverish heat and flame. Infectious
Distempers, as Plague, Measels, Smallpox, etc. soonest seize on the purest
Complexions, and speedily overturn the best-built structures of Nature. The
purest Fruit soonest perishes. When Jonah's Gourd was fullest of Sap and
Verdure, then the Worm smites it, and it is gone. Strong Cedars, sturdy Oaks,
are hewn down, when Death lays the Ax to the Root of the Tree. Great Zerxes
wept to think that the strength of his Army could not keep Death out of his
Quarters. If thou be as strong as Sampson, or David's three Worthies, whom
you read of in 2 Samuel 23.8. yet sickness may soon weaken thee, and Death lay
thee flat on thy back. (2.) Some measure their life by the lives of others, as
their Neighbors, and their own Kindred. They see many Neighbors older than
they by many years; and besides, their Father is alive, and Grandfather lived
long: Their Generation used to be long-lived, and therefore they reckon on many
years: But this is deceitful reckoning, for young men die as well as those that
are stricken in years, see Job 21.23, 24, 25, 26. So Job 36.14. They die in
youth. So Jer. 9.21. Death is come up into our Windows, and is entered in at
our Palaces, to cut off the Children from without, and the young Men from the
streets. Old Age is a Distemper that very few (in comparison) die of. And
though your Father be alive, and your Grandfather lived long, yet many times
Children die before their Parents. Genesis 11.28. Haran died before his Father
Terah. Absalom outlived all his Children. Naomi lived to see her Children
buried as well as her Husband, Ruth 1.5. So did Job, Job 1.18, 19. To end this,
The Sons of Jacob, (as Mr. Fuller in his Comment on some of Ruth.
one observes) when they came to the Table of Joseph, sat down, the eldest
according to his Age, and the youngest according to his Youth, Genesis 43.33. But
Death observes not this method, he takes not Men in seniority, but sometimes
sends them first to their Burial, that came last from the Birth; and those that
came last from the Womb, first to their Winding Sheet. (3.) Some think they
shall live long, because they are temperate and chaste. Intemperance doubtless
destroys many. Plures gula quam gladio, More perish by gluttony than by the
Sword. Multos morbos multa fecerunt fercula. Seneca Epist. 95. And drunkenness
is destructive to the bodies of those that delight in it, Prove. 23.29, 30.
Whence come Dropsies, Gouts, Fevers, Rheums, and such like Distempers, but
usually from excess in eating and drinking. Lasciviousness and excessive
wantonness is likewise an impairer of strength, Prove. 5.11. so Prove. 31.5. But
yet the most temperate and chaste men may die soon. For these are very subject
to infectious Maladies, neither are they privileged from manifold chances, and
unexpected surprisals, which may suddenly put an end to life. (4. and lastly,)
Others because they have been sick and are recovered, they hope to see many
days. But alas! how ordinary are relapses into the same distemper that men
think they are recovered of: And those relapses (as Physicians say, and
Experience does witness) most dangerous. But if a man be perfectly recovered of
one distemper, how ordinary is it for that man to fall irrecoverably into
another. Ambros. de Obitu fratris. 3 Tom. p. 16.
Satyrus (St. Ambrose's Brother) returned from Africa by a perilous Voyage,
(for he suffered shipwreck, and escaped drowning very narrowly by swimming) yet
having escaped so great a danger, within a short t me after his arrival and
return to his Friends, fell sick and died amongst them. If you escape one
danger, you know not how soon you may fall into another: If you recover of one
distemper, you are but reprieved, for how short a time God only knows.

O courteous Reader, deceive thy self no longer, Death like a Mole is secretly
undermining thee. Thou art far nearer Death and the Grave than thou art aware
of. Consider,

1. How many Diseases thou art subject to, which like so many Worms lie gnawing
at the Tree of Life. The very eye (as some Oculists observe) has above sixty
Diseases attending it. Innumerable then must the diseases be which the whole
body is subject unto. This Body of ours, which is fearfully and wonderfully
made, Psalm. 139.14. like a curious Watch, is soon out of order; and oft-times
Physicians with all their skill cannot mend it again.

Non est in medico semper relevetur ut aeger: Ovid de Pont. Lib. 1. Eleg. 4.

Interdum docta plus valet art malum.
Some men's Bodies are ground to pieces with the Stone; some destroyed with the
Epilepsie, See Mr. Ley's Sermon on Jam. 4.14.
or an Imposthume, which insensibly gathers to an head, breaks in a moment, and
stops the breath of man's Bosom, or stifles the spirits of his Brain. Some
Bodies are blown up with the Cholick or Illiaca Passio: Some eaten up
insensibly by a Consumption; some drowned with the Dropsy; some burnt with a
Fever. And indeed many new Diseases break forth amongst us, which puzzle
Physicians not only how to cure them, but how to call them. These bodily
Distempers, are as so many warning-pieces which God many times shoots off,
before he send his murdering-piece.

2. De civit. Dei, lib. 22 cap. 22.
Consider the manifold chances which may befall thee. Quid de innumeris casibus
qui forinsecus corpori formidantur. Aug. There are casual mishaps (as well as
Diseases) innumerable, which may prove destructive to life. We all receive life
but one way, viz. by Generation, but we may lose it many Mill modis morimur,
Sen. l. 7. 1. Controvers.
ways: As we see in a Garden-Pot, the Water is poured in but at one place,
viz. the narrow mouth, but it runs out at an hundred holes. If we ride on
Horseback, the Horse may start or stumble, and cast us that we may rise no
more. Absaloms Mule running from under him, hastened his destruction, 2 Samuel
18.9, etc. If we walk on foot, we may take immoderate heats and colds, which
may bring with them incurable Distempers. Thieves and Robbers may surprise us,
wound us, and leave us for dead, Luke 10.30. Some Beast or other may kill us,
as the disobedient Prophet was slain with a Lion, 1 Kings 13.24. Or a Drunkard,
worse then a Beast, enraged by strong drink, Prove. 20.1. may speedily dispatch
us. Walking in the streets, a piece of Timber, a Stone, or Tile from an House,
may suddenly fall upon thee, and strike thee dead: As a piece of a Millstone
thrown from a Tower, broke the Skull of Abimelech, Judge. 9.53. D. Stuarts
Catholic Divinity, p. 163.
Martial makes mention of one that was killed with the fall of an Ice-sicle,
which caused the Poet to melt into tears, saying, O ubi Mors non est, si
jugulatis aquae?

What cannot make an end of us, if a little congealed Water can do it?
Aeschylus the Tragedian was killed by a Crab-fish, which fell from an Eagles
talons, who mistook (as it was thought) his bald Head for a Stone. If thou
stayest within doors, thou art not there safe neither. The House may fall upon
thee, as upon Job's Children: Fire may burn thee, a Spider may poison thee: Or
thou may have a deadly fall from some upper Room. As Ahaziah falling through
a Lattess in his upper Chamber, fell sick and died, 2 Kings 1.2, 17, compared.
And Eutychus falling into a deep-sleep, fell down from the third lost, and was
taken up dead, Acts 20.9. Pliny Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 53.
reports of Emilius Lepidus, that he did but hit his Toe upon the Door-sil, yet
(though the hurt was so far from his heart) he died upon it. And the same
Author tells us, That Anacreon the Poet was choked with the Kernel of a Grape:
And an Hair in a mess of Milk choked Fabius. See Dr. Abbot on Jonah 4.3, 4.
Lect. 26. p. 543.
And we read elsewhere how a Fly in the Cup choked Pope Adrian the 4th. And
Pope Victor was poisoned with Wine, and one of the Emperors with the Bread he
received in the Sacrament. When we lie down to rest, we are not sure we shall
arise again in safety. Sisera slept, but never awaked more in this World, Judge.
4.21. Benhadad being sick, was confined to his Bed, yet his sickness was not so
destructive to take away his life; therefore Hazael, that treacherous Servant,
under pretense of doing him a kindness, cunningly stifies him, as you may read
2 Kings 8. chap.

Furthermore we read in Scripture how Joab was slain at the Altar, Zachariah in
the Temple, Amnon at his Table. And profane stories tell us, That Carus the
Emperor was slain by a Thunderbolt; so was the Emperor Anastatius. Antiochus
was murdered in his Coach. Domitian in his Chamber. Caligula in the Theater.
Caesar in the Senate House; and Caracalla was put to death whilst he was about
to case Nature. Thus we are not safe by Land, much less by Sea, for there men
are within a few inches of Death.

Qui nescit orare, discat navigare.
The Poet said, Illi robur and as triplex circa pectus qui fragilem commisit
pelago ratem, Hor. He was a very bold man who first exposed himself to the Seas
in so frail a Vessel as a Ship is: How soon may it be split upon a Rock, and
cast forth its burden! So uncertain a thing is Life, that it is like a Candle
carried in the open Air, which every blast is ready to extinguish.

Thus, as Seneca says, Mors ubique nos expectat, tu si sapiens eris, ubique
eam expectabis. Death waits upon us every where, both at Sea and Land, at home
and abroad; let us in every place, and at all times, wait for it; sure I am it
will be our wisdom so to do. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they
would consider their latter end.

The Servants of the Lord expect it, and look upon themselves as dying
Creatures. Abraham counts himself but Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18.27. Jacob looked
upon himself as an Individuum Vagum, as a Stranger or Pilgrim, here to day, and
gone to morrow, Genesis 47.9. So did the rest of the Patriarchs, 1 Chronicles. 29.15.
St. Paul durst not presume on much time, but said, He would do this and that,
if the Lord permit, or if the Lord will, as you may read Acts 18.21. Romans 1.10.
1 Cor. 4.19. 1 Cor. 16.7. he thought himself Tenant at Will in the Clay-farm of
his body: So did St. James, James 4.13, 14, 15. St. Peter looked not to dwell
long in his earthly Tenement, 2 Pet. 1.14. Joseph of Arimathea erected his Tomb
in his lifetime in the midst of his Garden, (as some gather from Mat. 27.60.
compared with John 19.41.) that in the midst of his delights and pleasant
walks, he might think of Death.

The Heathens (some of them) have been very careful to preserve in their minds
the thoughts of Death. Plato, one of the chief, defined Life to be Meditatio
Mortis, a Meditation of Death: And truly Death (as the Philosopher writes of
the Heart, Cor est primum vivens and ultimum mo^iens.
(...), Aristot.) should be the first thing that lives, and last that dies in
our meditation. Some Manchest Al. Mond. p. 51.
Philosophers had their Graves always open before their Gates, that going out
and coming in they might always think of Death. And we read of one Ibid. p. 139,
140.
Philostrates that lived seven years in his Tomb, that he might be acquainted
with it against his Bones came to lie in it. And though Lewis the XI King of
France of that Name, gave a strict charge that none should dare to name Death
within his Court: Yet Philip the Father of Alexander, and King of Macedon,
every morning had a Monitor of Mortality; for a Trumpet every morning was
sounded at his Chamber, and these words uttered, with a loud Voice, by one whom
he had appointed, (...), Remember thou art a mortal Man: He was willing every
day to hear of Death, which might any day rush in upon him. Shall we, by
putting the thoughts of Death from us, prove our selves to be worse than
Heathens? God forbid.

God (as you have heard) has compared our Life in Scripture to things of short
continuance: And to such things as are often in our eye, that so we might not
forget Death. The two first Books of Moses, (...) Nativitas (...) Exitus.
called Genesis and Exodus, should mind us of that of the Poet: Nascentes
morimur, finisque ab origin pendet.
At Birth begin we life to end;
This end does on that Birth depend.
Every Dish of Meat that comes to our Table, stands as a dead Corpse. So true is
that of Seneca, Mortibus vivimus, We live by the death of other Creatures.

The four Seasons of the Year, the Garments we wear, scarce any thing that we
behold but may mind us of our change: for all things here below ring Changes.
The Sun setting may mind us that ere long the Sun of our Life must set. Our
very houses may mind us of our long homes. When we are in Bed, and darkness
round about us, we should consider that ere long we must lie in the Grave, that
House of Darkness, for so it is called, Job 17.13.

Furthermore, (for I would fain convince the Reader of the shortness and
uncertainty of his life) every degree of Life is a step to Death; one day added
to our lives, brings us nearer unto death. Your life is shorter to day than it
was yesterday. God threatened Adam, Genesis 2.17. That in the day that he did eat
the forbidden Fruit, he should surely die. Now we know Adam did eat, Genesis 3.
and the threatening took effect; for after that he had eaten, every day some
part of his life was gone. The wise Man tells us, Eccles. 3.2. There is a time
to be born, and a time to die. What, no time to live? Truly it may be the wise
man thought this lifetime was so short, that it was not worth taking notice
of; or it may be, he would give us to understand, that all the while we live we
are in a dying condition.

An Heathen by the dim candlelight of Nature had a glymps of this: for says
Seneca, Quotidie morimur, quotidie enim demitur aliqua pars vitae; Vita hominum
dum crescit decrescit, dum augetur, minuitur, Cylind.
as a Candle you know is no sooner lighted but begins to waste; it is not the
last blaze that spends it, but it spends all the while it burns. So an
Hourglass is no sooner turned, but presently the Sand begins to run out. The
longer a man lives; the less he has to live. Oh did we but see the Glass of
our Life running, many of us would see but little Sand remaining. Well then,
let your going to the House of Mourning, and following the Corpse to the Grave,
mind you of your mortality, that God will shortly bring you to the Grave, The
House appointed for all men living, Job 30.23.

15th and last Use.
Lastly, Let death of Friends put us upon preparing for Death.
Seneca said, Aetate fruere, mobili cursu fugit; Use time while you have it. He
meant it not in that sense in which the merry Greeks and voluptuous Epicures
take it, 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die: But he would
have us to employ our short time in doing virtuous actions. Labor that the
Temple of Grace be erected in your souls, before the Temple of your bodies be
pulled down.

I have read how Peter Waldo (about the year 1160.) a Merchant of Lions, Mr.
Fuller in his Holy War.
rich in substance and learning, was walking and talking with his Friends, when
one of them suddenly sell down dead; which lively spectacle of man's mortality
so impressed the soul of this Waldo, that instantly he resolved on a strict
reformation of life, which to his power he performed.

Mr. Dugard in his Sermon. on Ps. 89 48. page 39.

Ribad. de vita, Fr. Borgia, lib. 1. c. 9.


It is likewise reported of Sir Francis Borgia, a Spanish Courtier, That having
been at the Funeral of the Empress, and considering how little a Grave had
devoured all earthly Greatness, he said, when he came home, Augustae mors mihi
vitam attulit; The death of the Empress has brought me life: and forthwith he
became a wonderfully reformed man. So when Friends die, and we return from
their burial, let us resolve to lay aside worldly vanities, and return home
more grave and serious: Let us set our House and Souls in order: Luke 12.40. Be
ye therefore ready; for the Son of Man comes at an hour when ye think not. As
we know not the time of our general, so neither of our particular judgment. It
is good for us to stand upon our watch, Mar. 13.32. and to improve all our
opportunities both of doing and receiving good, that so we may be as the wise
Virgins, ( Mat. 25.) having Oil in our Lamps, Grace in our Hearts; and may be
fitted and prepared to meet the Bridegroom of our Souls when ever he comes.

Now because preparation for Death (though last mentioned) is a chief and
principal use that we should make of death of Friends; I shall therefore
somewhat enlarge upon it, and show you in the next Chapter wherein it consists.

CHAP. II. Showing wherein preparation for Death consists.
NOW preparation for Death consists in these following Particulars.

1. In praying unto God. 1. Dir. Praecandos

Confess thy manifold sins at the Throne of Grace, and pray to God for pardon
thereof. Moses, David, Daniel, Paul, and other good men mentioned in Scripture
were conversant in this duty of Prayer. Our Savior himself, in the days of
his flesh, offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong crying and tears,
Heb. 5.7. The Per miserere mei tollitur ira Dei.
Publican confessing his sins, and most humbly suing out the pardon of them,
went away justified, Luke 18.13, 14. How did Christ remember the Thief upon the
Cross praying to him, Luke 23. 42, 43. Jacob was frequent and prevalent with
God in prayer, Genesis 32.28. even when he was old and weak, he humbly presented
his devotion to God, Genesis 48.31. Heb. 11.21. Stephen that saw Heaven opened,
Acts 7.56. as he lived, so he died praying, Abel rediv. in life of Luther and
Erasmus.
verse. 59. Luther he died praying and resigning his Spirit into Gods hands.
Erasmus breathed out his Soul in these Ejaculations, Mercy sweet Jesus; Lord
loose these Bands; How long Lord Jesus? How long? Jesus Fountain of Mercy, have
mercy upon me, etc. Bishop Dr. Bernard in life of B. Usher.
Usher he died like Mr. Perkins, who expired with crying for mercy and
forgiveness. Pray then to God that he would pardon your manifold sins, and fit
you for death: say with David, Psalm. 39.4. Lord make me to know my end, and the
measure of my days, that I may know how frail I am. Pray with Moses, Psalm.
90.12. Dr. Abbot on Jonah 4.2. p. 521.
So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Prayer rightly performed (as a learned Doctor says) is the best Sacrifice
which the Soul can send up into Heaven.

2. Preparation for Death consists in bewailing our sins. 2. Dir. Peccata
deplorando

We should be like Doves of the Valleys, all of us mourning every one for his
iniquity, as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 7.16. A broken and contrite heart,
(says David) O God, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. The words are a (...);
(...).
he means, God highly prizeth a broken and contrite heart under the sense of
sin. St. Bernard says, Qui non plangit peccata, non sentit vulnera; He is not
sensible of his spiritual wounds, who does not bewail his sinful condition. And
again says another Father, St. Austin, Gravissima peccata gravissimus lamentis
indigent; Great sins call for great sorrows. David says, Psalm. 6.6. All the
night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears: and Psalm. 38.6. I
go mourning all the day long: so that night and day he mourned for his sins.
And Peter having sinned, he went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26.75. The crowing
of the Cock was a Monitor of his fault: And some say he never heard a Cock crow
after; but he wept bitterly for his offense in denying so shamefully (as he
did) his Lord and Master. St. Paul complains of a Body of Death, Romans 7.24.
Tertul. lib. de Panitent, c. ult.
Tertullian said, Nulli rei natus nisi poenitentiae, That he was born for
penitential sorrow. All that are fitted for death, are Benoni's, Sons of
Sorrow, and their tears for sin are so many dissolved Pearls. Nay they do not
only weep for their own sins, but likewise for the sins of others. So did Ezra,
Nehemiah, Daniel, etc. They endeavor to wash away those sins with a flood of
tears, which they cannot bear down with a stream of power. Thus did David,
Psalm. 119.136. So did Isaiah, Isa. 6.5. And Jeremiah wishes his eyes were a
Fountain, Jer. 9.1. he would have them not to drop as a Limbeck, but like a
Fountain send forth streams of tears to bewail the sins and miseries of the
People. So St. Paul could not speak of the sins of others without tears in his
eyes, Phil. 3.18. Now as St. Ambrose told Monica, weeping for her Son Austine,
Impossible est tantarum lachrymarum filium perire: So may I say to those that
weep for their own sins and the sins of others, it is impossible they should
eternally miscarry. Yea, Austin himself said of his Mother and other good
Women, Mulierculae istae lachrymis suis Coelum nobis praeripiunt; when we have
done all we can with our learning, these Women with their tears will get Heaven
before us. Indeed the way to Heaven is by Weeping-Cross. Jacob, as you read
Genesis 29. could not obtain Rachel, till he had first married Leah: Heaven is a
beautiful place, as Rachel was a beautiful person: but there is no obtaining
it, till we have got our eyes bleared ( Leah-like) with penitential tears. To
end this, Christ often went (as we read in the Gospel) from Bethanie to
Jerusalem. So a true Christian must go from the House of Sorrow to the Vision
of Peace.

3. Preparation for Death consists, In forsaking the sins we mourn for. 3. Dir.
Deplorata relinquendo.

After you have disgorged your sin by sorrowful confession, take heed you turn
not again with the Dog to your former vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22. which if you do, it
will highly aggravate your sin, not at all ease you of the burden. So says
St. Austin, Qui pectus suum tundit, and se non corriget, aggravat peccata non
tollit. And St. Bernard says, Verus poenitens semper est in labor and dolor,
dolet de praeteritis, laborat pro futuris cavendis; A true Penitent (says he)
is full of sorrow and care; sorrowful he is for what is past, careful he is for
the future to avoid the sins he has sorrowed for. And St. Ambrose says, Ille
vere plangit commissa, qui non committit plangenda; He truly lamenteth the sins
he has committed, who does not afterward commit such things as are to be
lamented. We ought to renounce all sin, Peccatum in deliciis, as St. Bernard
calls it, that darling sin which lies nearest the heart: According to our
Saviors Precept, we should pluck out a right eye, and cut off a right hand, i.
e. Part with sins that are as near and dear unto us as the members of our body,
Mat. 5.29, 30. Col. 3.5.

-- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.
Better to part with a gangrened Member that is offensive, then endanger the
whole life. So it is better for you to leave your dearest sins, or the
occasions and incentives thereto, then that the whole man should be utterly and
eternally ruined by them. St. Jerome. lib. 2. Ep. 15.
Jerome's counsel is to be followed, Nulli parcas, ut soli parcas animae; Spare
not lust but let it be mortified, that so thy Soul may be spared; for fleshly
lusts war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. Say not of any sin, as Lot did of
Zoar, Genesis 19.20. Is it not a little one, and my Soul shall live? O my Friend!
there is no little God to sin against, no little punishment reserved for any
sin: for Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, (...). It is not said, that the
wages of this or the other sin is death, but of sin indefinitely, i. e. of all
sin, of every sin, of any sin. Death not only temporal, but eternal too (for
this is chiefly here meant, as it appears by the opposition to eternal life in
the Text) is as due to every sin lived in, as wages is to him that earns it.
And thereupon St. Austin said, Audacior est qui cum uno peccato dormit, quam
qui cum septem hostibus: He is foolhardy indeed that can sleep securely in any
known sin. Even those sins which you count small faults, become great by
frequent repetition, and in a short time lay Conscience waste: As small
expenses multiplied insensibly waste a vast Revenue: and therefore says the
same Aust. lib. De december chordis.
Father, Noli illa contemnere, quia minora sunt, sed cave quia plura sunt, etc.
What your little sins (as you call them) want of other sins in weight, they
make up in number, and therefore take heed of them. See Resin'd Courtier.
Small wounds multiplied will let out life; and a great number of narrow leaks,
endanger the sinking of the stateliest Ship; and several minute drops of Rain,
swell to an overflowing deluge. Ehud killed Eglon, who was a very fat man, with
a Dagger of a cubit long, as you may read, Judge. 3.16. a long Sword could have
done no more, it may be not so much. A Pocket-Pistol, Penknife, or Stilletto,
are more dangerous many times than bigger Weapons, because not discerned, and
so no danger is suspected. Thus it is with your small sins, (as you are pleased
to call them) they are not taken notice of by you, and therefore you fear no
harm from them; whereas indeed because undiscerned they are the more deadly.
Resolve then with David, to refrain thy feet from every evil way, Psalm
119.101. Yea, to hate every fable way, verse. 104. Vain thoughts; verse. 113. as
well as lying, verse. 163. For Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law,
and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty of all: That is, (say some) he makes
it appear that he keeps no Precept in obedience to God, for if he did, he would
refrain from every sin as well as any sin. Or according to Dr. Hammond's
Paraphrase, It Is but a small excuse for you to think that this is but one
transgression, and therefore not considerable; for obedience to God's Will is
required universally to all that he commands, and he that offends in one,
though he keep all the rest, is guilty of the breach of that obedience, and
punishable as well as if he had broken all. In vain does any man hope for
Heaven that lives in any known sin. 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope, (viz.
of seeing God in glory, verse. 2.) purifieth himself even as he is pure. Heaven
is not like your common Inns that receive all comers, or like the Ark in which
entered both clean and unclean Beasts: No, there enters in nothing that
defiles, Rev. 21.27. and Rev. 22.15. see 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. and Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. There is a Catalogue of sins mentioned, I pray you observe them, and
learn to avoid them, if you expect to have a better life when this is ended. He
that dies to sin when he lives, shall live when he dies, and may say upon his
deathbed as Myconius said to Luther his Friend that came to visit him, Dr.
Boreman's Sermon on Phil. 3.20 p. 47, 48.
This sickness is not unto Death but unto Life: for when he dies to nature, he
shall live with God unto all eternity. Let us therefore (as the Author to the
Hebrews exhorts, Heb. 12.1.) lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.
As Racers lay aside things burdensome and troublesome, so do you lay aside
sin, which is a burden, and hinders you in your spiritual Race. See Crit.
sacra in vocem (...).
Some say the Greek word (...), signifies a casting off, as a man does a long
worn suit, that begins to do him discredit to wear it; or rather, as a man
coming out of Prison having filthy rags about him, and full of Vermin, hurls
them away into a Dunghill or Ditch, and never purposes to touch them more. It
is called (...), sin that does beset us or wrap us about. A Metaphor taken from
a long Garment. Deal with the old worn Garment of sin, as Elijah did by his
Mantle, 2 Kings 2.13. lay it aside, if ever you think to ascend to Heaven.

4. Preparation for Death consists in doing good works. 4. Dir. Benefaciendo.

Negative Holiness will not bring with it Positive Happiness. Many build their
hopes of future happiness upon this sandy Foundation, That they are no
Drunkards, Whoremasters, Swearers, Liars, etc. Because they are not guilty of
open scandalous miscarrages, therefore they bless themselves in their
condition, as the Pharisee did, Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as
other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. It
is good indeed to keep our selves unspotted from the World, but this is not
sufficient, we must do good works, visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
affliction; This is pure Religion, and undefiled before God, as St. James tells
us, Jam. 1.27. It is not enough not to do evil, but we must likewise do good,
Ps. 34.14. Isa. 1.16, 17. Romans 12.9. Sinful omissions are not to be looked upon
as bare negations or privations, but as breaches of a positive Law, which
commands the contrary; so that omission of duty is as damnable as commission of
sin. God cursed Meroz, not for fighting against the People of God, but because
they did not come out to their help against the Mighty, Judge. 5.23. It was as
true a fault in them, Hag. 1.2. etc. not to set up the House of God, as in
others to pull it down. The Tree that bears not good fruit, is fuel for the
fire, as well as the Tree that bears evil fruit, Mat. 3.10. Mat. 7.19. The
unprofitable Servant was cast into utter darkness, not for spending, but for
not improving his Masters Talent, Mat. 25.30. So the five foolish Virgins (as
you may read before, verse. 3. and 10. compared) were shut out of doors, not for
abusing in wasting, but for wanting of Oil: So you may read afterward in that
Chapter, many will be doomed to Hell because not active in works of charity,
verse. 41, 42, etc. It is not said, ye took away my Meat, Drink, and Clothes
from me, but ye gave me no Meat, Drink, Clothing, etc. therefore depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. So Luke 16.19.
Dives was cast into the place of torment, (non quod abstulit aliena, sed quod
non donavit sua) not for robbing, Greg. Hom 40.
but for not relieving poor Lazarus. Good works are necessary, Salvation is not
ordinarily, obtained without them, as these places show, Mat. 25.34, etc. Luke
16.9. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Gal. 6.9, 10. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Heb. 6.10. and
10.24. [ Nemo mala morte unquam moriebatur qui libenter opera charitatis
exercuit, Jerome. Bona opera sunt praedestinationis occultae indicta, futurae
foelicitatis is praesagia, via regni, Bern. Tractat. de gratia.
non causa regnandi, Bernard. Actus boni Christianae fidei quasi testes, quia
Christianus nisi bona opera fecerit, fidem suam penitus approbare non possit,
Salv. Salvian de gub. Dei lib. 4. p. 99.
] Now when I speak of good Works, I do not only mean works of Charity; for
works of Piety, and of our particular Callings, are also good works. Be much
then in praying, reading, hearing, meditating, alms-deeds, and the like. To
shut up this Particular, we read how Jacob when he went to his own Country,
sent his Droves before him, Genesis 32.16. and he followed after them: Heaven is a
Christians Country, send droves of duties thither aforehand, as Prayers,
Meditations, Affections, Longings, Alms-deeds, etc. that so when you depart
this Life, you may follow after them.

5. Preparation for Death consists in putting on the Virtues of Christ. 5. Dir.
Virtutes Christi induendo.

You set your Watch not by the Clock but by the Sun; order your motion
according to that of Christ, the Sun of Righteousness. Christ propounds himself
an Example, and commands us to learn of him, Mat. 11.29. 1 Pet. 1.21, 22. He
sets himself as a Pattern for us to work by, or as a Copy for us to write
after. I Will name some Virtues that shined forth with greatest luster in the
Life of Christ, and should likewise be conspicuous in the lives of all such as
expect Salvation by him.

1. There was in Christ Spiritual Wisdom.
Christ when he was a Child, was sitting among the Doctors, and was able to
pose them; Luke 2.46, 47. He was sitting among the Doctors, both hearing them,
and asking them questions; and all that heard him, were astonished at his
understanding and answers, Orig. (...), They were out of themselves with
admiration. It was beyond their understanding what they heard from him in the
praeludium of his Ministry. And he is said to increase in Wisdom, Luke 4.22.
ver. 52. In respect of his humane nature he did so, but as God, he was
absolutely perfect in knowledge. Solomon who was the Oracle of his Age, 1 Kings
4.29, 30, 31. was a Type of Christ, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. A Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, of Counsel and
Knowledge, did rest upon him, Isa. 11.2. Let us resemble him in Wisdom. Labor
to be filled with the knowledge of God's Will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, -- increasing in the knowledge of God, Col. 1.9, 10. The New Man
is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him, Col. 3.10.
Gods Children are savingly enlightened, 2. Cor. 4.6. Such as have their
understandings darkened through the ignorance that is in them, are alienated
from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. Yea, and from the life of Christ too.

2. There was in Christ meekness and patience.
Christ was a Man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isa. 53.3. He was a
Man of sorrows; it is an Hebraism, and signifies the manifold sorrows he met
with, as though he had been wholly made up of sorrow: and he is said to be
acquainted with grief; Grief was his Acquaintance, Tota vita Christi continuata
passio.
his Familiar, it lodged with him, it was no stranger to him. He was hurried
from place to place, posted from Judge to Judge, put over from torment to
torment, from the Garden to Annas, from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to
Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate again; Cruelty (as one
faith) walking the Circle, and Impiety (if ever) now treading the Ring. Yet
under all indignities offered, he opened not his mouth murmuringly or
impatiently: Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed, he was afflicted, (says the Non tam
Propheta quam Evangelista dicendus, Hieron. ad Paul. and Eust. Tom. 3. p. 26.
Evangelical Prophet) yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a Lamb to
the slaughter, and as a Sheep before the shearers is dumb, so he opens not
his mouth. He died the painful, shameful, and accursed death of the Cross,
without the least bleating of impatience, see Heb. 12.2, 3. so 1 Pet. 2.21,
22.23. This Lesson he would have us learn from him, promising that thereby we
shall find rest to our Souls, Matthew. 11.29. Considering the manifold
afflictions we may meet with in our Christian course, we have need of patience.
Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the Will of God,
ye might receive the promise.

3. There was in Christ humility and self-denial.
Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son. And
this Son emptied himself of his glory, Bishop Andrews, on Gal. 4.4.
(...). He that thought it no robbery to be equal with God, made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, etc.
Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. He was born in Bethlem, a mean City, in a Stable, a very
mean Room, the Manger was his Cradle, the Cobwebs his Canopy: He conversed with
(not as a Companion, but as a Physician) the meanest of men, Publicans and
Sinners: He sought not humane applause, but suppres'd his own praises. We read
in the Gospel how he forbad his Patients to declare their Cure, Mr. Abraham
Wrights 3d Sermon. Cant. 2.2.
and desired his Miracles might be as invisible as his Godhead: He unlockt the
mouth of the Dumb, and then cried, See you tell no Man; which was to tie up
that Organ which he had before loosed; so he drew the Curtain from the blind
man's eyes, and yet commanded him not to see and take notice of his Physician;
so he restored the withered hand, and straightway, as it were, dried it up
again in forbidding its use, crying, Point not at me. What greater token of his
humility and self-denial than this? Nay, when some would have made him King, he
withdrew himself, John 6.15. and elsewhere told them, His Kingdom is not of
this World. He washed his Disciples Feet, to teach us, by his own Example, a
Lesson of loving condescension, John 13.14, 15. Let us resemble Christ in
humility and self-denial, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me (says Christ) for I am meek
and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls. And Luke 9.23. Christ
said, Descend ut ascendas, humiliare ut exalta is, Aug.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
daily, and follow me. A proud man that will not stoop, cannot enter into the
narrow Wicket of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven belongs to the poor in Spirit,
Mat. 5.3. and to such as are little in their own eyes, Luke 12.32.

4. There was in Christ harmlesness and inoffensiveness.
He is compared to a Lamb, John 1.29. A Lamb he was for innocence as well as
meekness. The Spirit is said to descend upon him in the likeness of a Dove,
Mat. 3.16. What Creature more harmless then a Lamb among Beasts, and a Dove
among Birds? They may suffer wrong from others, but they do none to others.
Christ was very inoffensive, some of his very enemies acquit him, as you may
read Luke 23.4, 22. Judas who betrayed him, said, He had sinned in betraying
innocent blood, Mat. 27.4. He walked very inoffensively both before God and
Man, 1 Pet. 2.22. Though he made his Grave with the World, and suffered betwixt
two Malefactors, yet he did no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth,
Isa. 53.9. He is such an High Priest as is holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb.
7.26. Indeed many took offense at Christ, at the meanness of his Person,
strictness of his Life, purity of his Doctrine, etc. Mat. 15.12. Mar. 6.3. but
he gave none offense. Thus ought we to walk inoffensively, with St. Paul,
endeavoring to keep a Conscience void of offense both toward God and toward
Man, Acts 24.16. so 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none offense, says the Apostle. We
should he blameless and harmless, Phil. 2.15. so 1 These. 2.10. Christ would
have us to be harmless as Doves, as well as wise as Serpents, Mat. 10.16.

Ut nulli nocuisse potes, imitare columbam;
Serpentem, ut possit nemo nocere tibi.
5. There was in Christ usefulness and profitableness.
He did good both to the Souls and Bodies of all that came to him with a desire
to profit by him. He was anointed for this purpose, Luke 4.18, 19. And we read
Acts 10.38. He went about doing good. He did not confine himself to one place,
but as the Sun in its perambulation, so this Sun of Righteousness (for so he is
called, Mal. 4.2.) went about that he might do the more good. So let us do what
good we can both to the Souls and Bodies of such as we converse with. Let us be
useful with our Purses, Prayers, and wholesome Instructions. Believers are
profitable. Converted Onesimus was (...), according to his (...); Vtilis
fructuosus.
Name (to which perhaps the Apostle alludeth) he was profitable. God bestows
his Spirit upon them that they may be profitable, 1 Cor. 12.7. The Apostle
sought the profit of many that they might be saved, Muscul. in Genesis 1. p. 23.
1 Cor. 10.33. Mundo fideles utilitatem suae praesentiae non denegant.

6. There was in Christ zeal for his Fathers Glory.
Christ though cool in his own, yet was hot in the concerns of his Father. See
his holy indignation against such as profaned his Temple, John 2.15, 16, 17.
so John 4.34. He counted it his meat to do the Will of him that sent him, and
to finish his Work. When his Mother and Brethren would have taken him off from
Preaching, he would not then own them, for he said, Who is my Mother or my
Brethren? Mark 3.33. Not that he did despise them, but preferred the Service of
God before them; see Luke 2.48, 49, 50, 51. so should we be zealous for God's
Glory. We should be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, or according to Orig.
(...), we should be seething hot in Spirit, Romans 12.11. We should have a zeal
for God, and the duty that we are to perform. This God calls for, Rev. 3.19.
And Christ died to redeem unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works,
Tit. 2.14. Moses was zealous, Exodus 32.19. so was Phineas, Numb. 25.11. so was
David, Psalm. 69.9. so St. Paul, Acts 17.16. and so are all true Christians in
some measure zealous. St. Cyprian speaks of Christians in his time that were
Tanquam Leones ignem spirantes, Like Lions breathing forth the Heavenly fire of
Zeal.

7. There was in Christ compassion to his Enemies.
When his Enemies came to take him, one would have thought he should have
called for fire from Heaven, (as Elijah did, 2 Kings 1.10.) and thereby have
consumed his Adversaries: But this was against the loving Nature of Christ, as
well as against the Omne leve sursum tendit.
Nature of Fire, that it should descend to destroy them, Luke 9.54, 55, 56.
Nay, Christ would not only not destroy them, but he uses means to reclaim
them from sinful courses, that he may save them. This good Samaritan would
gladly have healed their spiritual Wounds. How passionately does he complain!
John 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. And again, Mat.
23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy Children together,
even as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, (which would have been
for your safety) and yet ye would not. When his Enemies hearts became (like to
Clay) more hardened by the Sunshine of those favors which should have melted
them, he then grieved for the hardness of their hearts, Mark 3.5. and like a
Judge, passes Sentence with tears in his eyes, Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was
come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou had known,
(there he weeps) even thou, (there he weeps again) at least in this thy day (he
goes on still weeping) the things that belong unto thy peace, (now he weeps a
main, and tears do so fast trickle down his cheeks that they hinder him from
speaking; and he breaks off abruptly as men do in a passion) but now they are
hid from thine eyes. Our Savior here shed tears for them who were about to
shed his blood. Yea, we find him praying for his Enemies, when they had given
him the worst that malice could invent, or cruelty impose. Luke 23.34. Then
said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Then said
Jesus, -- When said he this? Why even then when he was suffering the painful,
shameful, and accursed death upon the Cross. Yea some think he prayed for his
insulting Enemies, before he provided for his weeping Mother, John 19.26, 27.
Let us then pity and pray for our Enemies, so did Stephen, Acts 7.60. This
Christ commands by Precept, as well as commends by Pattern, Matthew. 5.44, etc.
Let us bless them that curse us, Romans 12.14. Nay, we should mourn for them in
affliction, as David did, Psalm 35.13, 14. In a word, if thine Enemy hunger,
feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. -- Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good, Romans 12.20, 21.

8. There was in Christ love to the godly.
He loved them with a love of complacency and delight, John 13.1. He bare a
constant love toward them. They were like golden Letters engraven indelibly
upon his heart. His love to them appeared by his accompanying with them, by
counselling, reproving, comforting, clearing their innocence, etc. Matthew. 9.14.
Mat. 12.3, 4. rejoicing in their welfare, Luke 10.21. taking what is done to
them as done to himself, be it good or bad, Mat. 25.40, 45. Acts 9.4. praying
for them, Luke 22.31. John 17.9, 11, 17, 20, 21. But his dying for them was
above all an eminent instance of his love, Gal. 2.20. He thought nothing too
dear to part with for their sakes: He shed his precious Blood in great plenty
for them, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Acts 20.28. When our Savior shed but a few tears
for Lazarus, the Jews collected thence his love toward him, John 11.35, 36.
Surely Christ's shedding his precious Blood in great plenty for the Elect, is a
manifest token of extraordinary love toward them. Let us imitate Christ in
love to the godly. Let us delight in them, and accompany with them, as David
did, Psalm. 16.3. and 119.63. Let us sympathize with them, Romans 12.15. Let us
pray for them, so did St. Paul for the Colossians, Col. 1.9, 10, 11. and for
the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.23. In a word, We should be ready to lay down our
lives for them if need require. 1 John 3.16. Hereby we perceive the love of
God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives
for the Brethren. And this unfeigned love to the godly, is as sure a note to
know whether a man be in the way to Heaven, as pronouncing the word Judge. 12.6.
Shibboleth was to know an Ephramite from a Gileadite. Here what St. John the
beloved Disciple says, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from Death to
Life, because we love the Brethren. Be ye therefore (as St. Paul says, Ephesians.
5.1, 2.) followers of God as dear Children; and walk in love, as Christ also
has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to
God for a sweet smelling savor.

9. There was in Christ thanksgiving.
When Christ are Victuals, he lift up his eyes and gave thanks, John 6.11, 23.
He was thankful for Spiritual Blessings. Mat. 11.25. At that time Jesus
answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto Babes. This is spoken by Christ, after the seventy had returned and told
him what good success they had, as may be gathered from Luke 10.17, 21. He did
thankfully acknowledge God's mercy in revealing Gospel-Mysteries to poor simple
Creatures that knew no more in Gospel-Mysteries, then Babes knew in
Worldly-Businesses. And John 11.41. Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father I
thank thee that thou have heard me. Indeed Christ's whole life was a glorifying
of God: John 17.4. I have glorified thee on Earth. Let us imitate Christ in
thankfulness; Let us thankfully acknowledge both spiritual and temporal Mercies
to proceed from him, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.20. Giving thanks always
for all things unto God and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1
These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the Will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you. Adam had he continued in Paradise, should have sung
praise unto God: And the Saints now in Heaven, as so many blessed Quiristers,
are continually chanting forth Divine Anthems of praise, Rev. 4.10, 11. And Dr.
Sibs says, They that begin not Heaven upon Earth, shall never go to Heaven
when taken from the Earth. Let us then bear a part here in singing praises to
God, (which is a pleasant and comely duty, Psalm. 147.1.) if we would hereafter
have admittance into the Celestial Quire, to sing forth perpetual Hallelujahs.
Future happiness is called Glorification, John 13.32. And he that gives not
glory unto God here, shall not hereafter be glorified by God. Let us then be
much in thanksgiving; for as God says, Psalm. 50.23. Whosoever offers praise,
glorifieth me; and to him that orders his conversaition aright, will I show
the Salvation of God.

10. And lastly, to name no more, There was in Christ Heavenly-mindedness.
He lived on Earth, as if he had been still in Heaven: The gaudy vanities of
this World were too pitiful a lure for him to be taken with. So
Heavenly-minded he was, that he extracted many spiritual contemplations and
instructions from all sorts of earthly objects and occasions that were before
him. Upon the sight of Jacob's Well, he preaches to the Woman of Samaria
concerning the Living-Water, John 4.10. By which Theophilact understands, (as
we are told) (...); the Grace of the Holy Spirit, which refreshes the weary
Soul even to life eternal, verse. 14. So when he had wrought the Miracle in
feeding five thousand with five Loaves and two Fishes, he teaches them that
sought after him, that they should not labor for that Meat that perishes, but
for that Meat which endures to everlasting life, John 6.27. And after tells
them, He was the Bread of Life, verse. 32.33. so John 15.1. passing through or
by some Vineyard, he tells them, That he was the True Vine, and his Father the
Husbandman. It was Christ's usual manner, upon the sight of things temporal,
to raise Spiritual and Heavenly Meditations. Let us play the Divine Chemists,
and extract Spiritual Instructions, and Heavenly Meditations, from Worldly
Occurrences. The Moralist could say, Senec. Praefat. in Natural. Quest.
Quam contempta res est homo, si non supra humana se exercuerit! What a
dunghill wretch is Man, if he mind only earthly things! The Apostle tells you,
The end of such is destruction, Nos ut Coelorum cives, nos-met gerimus, Beza
Phil. 3.19. but says he, verse. 20. Our conversation is in Heaven: Christians
are (ad majora nati) born to look after greater things than the World affords.
Let us then (as we are commanded, Col. 3.2.) set our affections upon, (or
according to (...).
Orig.) let us savor and mind the things that are above, and not the things
upon earth. Let not the Heaven-born Soul be imprisoned in an earthly body, See
Dr. Boreman's Sermon. on Phil. 3.20
or be chained in Fetters of earthly cares, but let it be dilated in its ardent
desires after Heaven and Heavenly Objects.

These and the like virtues which appeared in the Life of Christ, must appear
in our lives and conversations, else we cannot be saved. 1 John 2.6. He that
says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk even as he walked. Christ
was full of Grace, John 1.14. and true Christians that are in Christ, not only
in regard of outward profession, but likewise in respect of saving union, they
partake of his fullness, verse. 16. All God's Elect are conformed to the Image of
his Son, Romans 8.29. 1 Cor. 11.1. The Oil poured on Aaron's Head, ran down upon
his Beard, and went down to the Skirts of his Garments, Psalm. 133.2. by which
was signified, That the very same Oil of Grace that was poured on the Head
Christ Jesus, is thence derived unto all, even the meanest of his Members. As
Jacob was blessed by his Father Isaac in the goodly Raiment of his Elder
Brother, Genesis 27.15, 27, compared. So must we have on the Spiritual Garment of
Christ's Virtues, who is our Elder Brother, if we expect the Blessing of our
Heavenly Father. These and the like Virtues are called Glory, because they
undoubtedly lead to Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. View then Christ's Image in the Glass
of the Gospel, and labor to be transformed into that Image. Put on therefore
(as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness
of mind, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another,
etc. Col. 3.12, 13. And as St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 10, compared,
Giving all diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and
to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience,
Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness,
Charity; -- for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. And thus much for
the fifth Direction.

6. And lastly, Preparation for Death consists in Believing. 6th and last
Direction, Fidendo.

This though^ mentioned last, is not the least, but chief Direction; see John.
3.14, 15, 16, 18, 36. To this Paul directed the trembling Jailer, Acts 16.31.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. Acts 10.43. To him
give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in
him, shall receive remission of sins. Christ is the Lord our Righteousness,
Jer. 23.6. He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, as he tells Thomas, John
14.6. He is the true way to Eternal Life, Qui aliter vadit, cadit; He that
thinks to go to Heaven any other way, will fall short of it. For there is none
other Name given among men whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. See for farther
proof of this, Gal. 2.20. and 3.11. 1 Pet. 1.5, 9. 1 John 5.13. Those Worthies
mentioned Heb. 11. died in the Faith. St. Paul would not be found at the Day of
Judgment in the most righteous Work that ever he did, Phil. 3.8, 9. Nay
Bellarmine himself, after a long Discourse concerning the merit of Works, he
overturns all in his last conclusion, Propter incertitudinem propriae
justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totam insola
Dei misericordia reponere; He thought it the safest way to put his whole trust
in the mercy of God alone. Works must needs be a Sandy Foundation to build
hopes of Eternal Life upon: For our best Works are imperfect, they flow from a
foul Fountain; (for there is no mind so illuminated, but there is some darkness
in it; See Bp. Andrew's Sermon. on Jer. 23.6.
no Heart so sanctified, but there is some uncleanness in it); and therefore
actions issuing thence, cannot be perfect, and consequently not meritorious.
Yet a true justifying Faith is ever accompanied with purity and charity, Acts
15.9. Tit. 3.8. Jam. 2.14, etc. Jude 20. Maccovius's Distinct. cap. 13. de
Justif.
Fides sola justificat, non solitaria; Faith alone does justify, yet that
Faith which justifies is not alone; as the Eye alone sees in the body, yet the
Eye which sees is not alone in the body without the other senses. Good Works
are the Pulse and Breath of a lively Faith. Mr. Abraham Wright's Sermon. on Luke
16.9.
It is as impious to deny the necessity, as to maintain the merits of good
Works. God has joined good Works and Salvation together in his Word, and what
God has joined together, let no man put asunder. But when we have done all we
can do, let us confess our unprofitableness, and cast our selves upon Gods Love
and Favor, as the surest hold. Let us build our hopes of happiness upon
Christ's satisfaction only, for indeed there is no other way then by this Ark
to escape drowning. The Church is described, Cant. 8.5. leaning on her Beloved,
which as it betokens infinite familiarity within, so likewise faithful
dependence upon him. Well then, as Joseph said to his Brethren, Ye shall not
see my face, (he means with safety and favor) except your Brother Benjamen be
with you, Genesis 43.5. So neither shall we comfortably see God's Face hereafter,
except we bring the Lord Jesus (that Benjamin, the Son of his right Hand, Col.
3.1. Romans 8.34.) with us in the Arms of Faith. Let us then act Faith upon the
Lord Jesus, who alone delivers us from wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10.

Thus much for the matter wherein preparation for Death consists. I shall now
show you how you ought to put these Directions into practice.

CHAP. III. Showing how we ought to put the forementioned Directions into
practice.
OUR Savior says, Luke 13.24. Many will seek to enter in at the strait Gate,
and shall not be able. Stella, on Luke 13.24.
And Stella gives this reason, Quia tarde and insufficienter quaerunt, because
they seek not after a right manner. Right means are to be used after a right
manner. Put then the forementioned Directions into Practice.

First, Early. Secondly, Earnestly. Thirdly and lastly, Constantly.
1. Festinanter.
First, Early or speedily, whilst young, healthful and strong.
This God calls for, Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth. God's Adverb is mane, betimes or early; the Devil's Verb is mane, tarry
till afterward: Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto the
Devil more than unto God, judge ye, Acts 4.19. O do not put off preparation for
Death till sickness. Thou may perhaps die suddenly: An Imposthume,
Squinancy, Apolexy, or some such Distemper may suddenly dispatch thee, in so
much that thou shall not have time to call upon God for mercy. Some that have
gone to bed in good health, (as they thought) have been found dead the next
morning; dead they were before they could tell what ailed them. But in case God
exercise thee with sickness, thou will be very unfit to go about this great
Work; thy thoughts will be upon thy pain, and they enquieries will be after a
Remedy proper for the removing the Malady. Friends about thee (without any
ground for it) will be ready to tell thee, (what thou art glad to hear, and
willing to believe) that there is great hopes of thy recovery. These flatterers
are miserable comforters; for in case thou growest deadly sick, (as thou may
do of a sudden) then it is ten to one thy Will is to make. Worldly things are
to be disposed of, (for men generally are too too blame herein, putting this
off to extreme sickness) and this making thy Will, takes up a considerable part
of that little time allotted thee. Upon this follow exclamations and outcries
of near Relations, together with the clamor of thy sins, (if Conscience be
awakened) enough to distract thee: Impertinent visits of Friends which come
only with an How do you? I am sorry to see you in this condition, etc. do
rather hinder than further Devotion: And perhaps by this time, through want of
sleep and extremity of pain, thou will be lightheaded, unfit to listen to any
good counsel, if given to thee; as the Israelites who hearkened not to Moses for
anguish of Spirit, Exodus 6.9. Do not then put off this great Work till
sickness, no nor till old Age neither; for Life is uncertain, as I have showed.
We know not how soon our Pulse may leave beating: We can call no time ours but
the present. (...); This day is mine and thine, whose to morrow may be we know
not. To day then cannot be too soon to set upon this Work, because to morrow
may be too late. I have read of Archias the Lacedemonian, that whilst he was in
the midst of carnal Jollity quaffing with his Companions, one presented to him
a Letter (wherein was signified that some did lie in wait to take away his
life) and desired him to peruse it presently, for it was a Letter of serious
concernment; but he carelessly replied, Seria cras, let serious things alone
till to morrow; and that very night he was slain. Oh! then reckon not of many
years, seeing thou art not Lord of to morrow, Prove. 27.1. But if God should
grant thee longer space to repent in, yet he may deny thee the means of Grace,
or he may deny his Grace to make a good improvement of the means. See what is
said of Jezebel, I gave her space to repent of her Fornication, but she
repented not, Rev. 2.21. Repentance is not in our own power to be performed at
pleasure, it is God's-Gift, Jer. 10.23. Acts 11.28. 2 Timothy 2.25. And if we
slight God calling upon us now, (who in the seasons of Grace is willing to be
found of us, 2 Cor. 6.2. Isa. 66.5. Prove. 8.17.) he may justly slight us in
sickness and old age, when his judgments break forth upon us: We may then seek
early, and that early be too late to find him, Prove. 1.24, etc. As Jeptha said
to the Elders of Gilead, Judge. 11.7. Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my
Fathers House? And why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress? So may
God justly say to such as defer preparation for Death till sickness or old Age:
Did not ye hate me in your youthful time, whilst healthful and strong, and say
unto me, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? Job 21.14.
Why do you now, forced through fear or pain, come to me in your distress? Do we
think God will be pleased with the Devils leavings? What King will receive a
cripled Rebel that has spent the best of his strength and time under his
Enemies Colors? Cum nemine obtrudi potest, itur, ad me, Ter.
What Husband will receive his Wife that has spent her youthful days amongst
Ruffians and debauched Companions. If thou think the flower of thine Age too
good to give, God may justly think the dregs of it too bad to receive. How
can thou reasonably think that God should take pleasure in those days of
which thou thy self wilt say, Thou have no pleasure in them, Eccles. 12.1. 2 Samuel 19.35. It Is task sufficient for old Age to bear up under the infirmities
of it. Preparation for Death in old Age or sickness, is usually weak and sickly
like the party, and proceeds rather from fear than love. How kindly does God
take it when we dedicate the firstling of our years to his service; Jer. 2.2. I
remember thee (says God) the kindness of thy youth. -- Youthful bodies are
most active and strong, and so most fit for the Service of God, who is a
Spirit, a pure Act, and a living God. He whose Name is I Am, Exodus 3.14. cares
not for such as say, They will be, but are not. Now, Courteous Reader, what I
have here spoken is out of a good intent, not to drive any to despair, but to
prevent presumption. Well then, as Abraham rose early in the morning to
sacrifice his Son, Genesis 22.3. so let us early in the morning of youth sacrifice
our sins, or dedicate our selves, both Soul and Body to God's Service.

2. Ardenter.
2. Put the forementioned Directions into practice Earnestly.
This God calls for, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate. ((...)
Cornelius a Lap. in locum.
Quasi in agone contendite, extremas summasque vires velut agonizantes
exerite). Strive as Wrestlers do, put to all their strength: so the word
signiffes. We should give diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2
Pet. 1.10. Yea, all diligence, v. 5. Thou have commanded us (says David, Psalm.
119.4.) to keep thy Precepts diligently, (...) valde, that is, with all
diligence and watchfulness, and earnest endeavor. So Dr. Hammond in Loc. Nay,
we are not only to give diligence, but to put forth holy violence, Mat. 11.12.
Luke 6.16. The twelve Tribes are said to serve God instantly, day and night,
Acts 26.7. Orig. (...), with a kind of extension or vehemency. (...), sig.
Omnibus viribus, vehementer, prolixe, liberaliter, toto animo. Cornel. a Lap.
in 1 Pet. 1.22.
St. Paul tells you what he did, Phil. 3.13, 14. (...), Like a man running a
race, he pressed forward, stretched forth his Neck and Arms, and ran swiftly
toward the Mark. True Christians are called lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. They
are compared to stones for solidity and stability, but called Lively Stones for
their Zeal and Activity. Lazy wishes, and lukewarm desires, will not serve our
turn. Numb. 23.10. He lies under the prophetic Curse, that does the Work of
the Lord negligently, Jer. 48.10. All that we do for God without zeal, is but
opus operatum, mere performance of the Work, which can no more ascend to
Heaven, than Vapors from the Still, unless there be fire under it, as a worthy
Mr. Ward in Sermon. on Rev. 3.19.
Divine tells us, Dullness, Drowsiness, Luke-warmness is unsuitable to the work
of the Lord. We should serve him with most awakened affections, and most
serious intentions of Spirit, Deuteronomy. 11, 13. Mat. 22.37. God has threatened to
spue the lukewarm out of his mouth, Rev. 3.15, 16. Some say that Speech is
drawn from warm-water, which the stomach cannot by any means brook: so God
cannot away with lukewarm persons. Gregory somewhere says, It is better to be
cold, than lukewarm in Religion; not because the lukewarm person sins more
hainously, but because he is reclaimed more hardly. Dum enim se sanum putet,
medicinae opem non quaerit, Marlor. A cursed formality, or customary
performance of duties, without fervent love to them, undoes many, and renders
the Times so perilous, 2 Timothy 3.5. -- Having a (...).
form of Godliness, but denying the Power; from such turn away. Let us then
with Caleb, follow God fully, Numb. 14.24. And as Barnabas exhorted, Let us
with full purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11.23. As Peter and John
strove which should come first to our Savious Sepulcher, Joh. 20.4. so let us
strive which should attain first to true mortification of sin. Let us strive to
outstrip one another in goodness. (...).
This is a commendable contention. The greatness of the Work, calls for our
greatest endeavors: We have many Duties to perform, many Graces to get, many
Sins to subdue and conquer. The manifold opposition which we meet with in our
way to Heaven from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, should make us active,
1 Cor. 16.13. Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Former mispence of time
should put us upon a more diligent improvement of it for the future, Ephesians.
5.16. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. Vespatian an Heathen, lamented the loss of a day wherein
he had done no remarkable service. Heu diem perdidi! was his word, Alas! I have
lost a day. We have let slip many days without doing good; squandred away many
precious opportunities not to be regained. Let us improve time whilst we have
it with the best diligence we can; shortly we would be glad to have it that we
might improve it. If God would but vouchsafe to the damned creatures a little
time of trial here on earth again, how eagerly would they accept it! how holily
would they spend it! like those Creatures mentioned Ezekiel. 1.14. They would run
and return as the apperance of a flash of Lightning: They would, Angel-like, be
upon the Wing, ready to fly upon the hardest Errand God should send them about:
But alas! their Glass is run, and shall never be turned more. The Door of Mercy
is shut against them; their possibilities are ended. Let us be wise in time,
and work whilst we may, for when the Night of Death comes, no man can work,
John 9.4. Stella in Luke 13.24.
Nunc erga poenitentiam age, ne praeoccupatus die mortis, quaeras locum, quando
invenire non possis. The wise Man makes this consideration a Whetstone to
Industry; Eccles. 9.10. Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
Grave, whither thou go. If thy Work be not done when Death comes, thou wilt be
undone for ever, for there will be no second Edition of thy Life to alter or
amend what is done amiss. Nicodemus's saying according to the flesh is true,
John 3.4. No man can enter the second time into his Mothers Womb, and be born.
O then be not remiss and negligent in matters of such consequence. Let us pray
in good earnest, repent in sober sadness; let us put on Christ's Virtues by
imitation, and his Merits by application, with as much diligence as may be. Old
men especially should bestir themselves who have (as we say) one foot in the
Grave already. A Omnis motus naturalis velotior est in fine.
Stone, the nearer it comes to the Center, the swifter it moves. The nearer any
come to Death, the greater should their preparation be for it. It is Abel
Rediv. in life of Mr Perkins.
observed of the Birds of Norway, that they, having in Winter very short days,
fly swifter than other Fowl in other Countries, as if principled by the
instinct of Nature, thriftily to improve the little light allowed them, and by
the swiftness of their Wings to regain the shortness of their time. How speedy
and earnest should old men (especially) be in preparing themselves for Death,
who (if they have neglected God in their youthful days) have a great deal of
work to do in a very short time.

3. Constanter
3. And lastly, Prepare your selves for Death Constantly, so long as life shall
last.
This God calls for, 1 Cor. 15. last verse, Be constant and immovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord. This was David's resolution, Psalm. 119.112.
I have inclined my heart to keep thy Statutes always, even unto the end. So it
was Job's, Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my
change come. So Job 27.5, 6, -- Till I die, I will not remove my integrity from
me: My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live. The like did Saint Paul, as you may read Acts
20.24. Phil. 3.13, 14, 15. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. God has promised to give the
Crown of Glory, or Eternal Happiness, to such as persevere in a Christian
course of life; see Rev. 2.10. so Rev. 3.11, 12. Heaven is not got per saltum,
at one sudden leap: you must set out betimes, and advance forward in the race
of Christianity so long as you live. You must run, and not be weary; walk, and
not faint, Isa. 40.31. Charles the fifths Motto [Ulterius] becomes every
Christian, he must advance still forward, for he that runs half the Race and
then gives it over, Ioseth the Wager as well as he that never set forth. See
what is said, Ezekiel. 18.24. When the Righteous turns away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he has done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die. If any
man draw back, (says God, Heb. 10.38.) my Soul shall have no pleasure in him;
and again, ver. 39. They draw back unto perdition. Let Christians then, who
expect the Crown, fight manfully under Christ's Banner against the World, Sin,
and the Devil, and continue Christ's faithful Soldiers and Servants unto their
lives end. Let them do that in their Spiritual, what Caesar is said to do in
his Temporal-Warfare.

Nil actum credens, siquid superesset agendum. Lucan. Pharsal. Lib. 2.
Be still doing, as though they had done nothing, till all be done. Now there
will be always something for a Christian to do till Death give him his Quietus
est, a Writ of Ease. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, --
they rest from their labors: There must be no resting till death: We should be
Volunteers in God's Service till Death disband us. When William the Conqueror
landed his men in Sussex, he caused all Ships to be sunk, that all hope of
flying back might be taken away. We are here landed (says an ingenious Dr.
Boys in his Postils on Rev. 12.7.
Divine) in this Valley of Tears, we must neither faint nor fly, but fight it
out valiantly; till Death, the last Enemy, be destroyed. 1 Cor. 15.26. Good
Christians are like Wine full of Spirits, that continues good to the last
drawing; yea, the older they are, like good Wines, the better they be, L^k.
5.39. They are compared to Trees in Scripture, Psalm. r. 3. so Isa. 61.3. called
Trees of Righteousness, because filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, Phil.
1.11. These Trees are never past bearing, They shall bring forth Fruit in old
age; they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92.14. It is an honor to be thus
gray headed in Religion. Prove. 16.31. The hoary-head is a Crown of Glory, if it
be found in the way of Righteousness. God highly prizeth a Mnason, an old
Disciple (as he was, Acts 21.16.) that has served him from his youth upwards.
Well then, let us put the former directions constantly into practice: Let us
pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Let us have our Stata tempora.
set-times for Prayer, and at least morning and evening let us offer unto God
the sacrifice of Prayer. Let us daily mourn for the sins we daily commit. Nay,
those sins which God has pardned, we should reflect upon with grief of heart,
and pray for a farther manifestation of pardoning Grace, so did David; For the
one and fiftieth Psalm was penned by David after he had gone into Bathsheba, and
after Nathan had brought him the news of a Pardon, 2 Samuel 12.13. Some Mr. Smith
in his Doctrine of Repentance, p. 105.
observe, after God had cast Adam out of Paradise, he set him e regione Horti,
over against the Garden, in the very sight and view of the place where he had
offended; that so often as he looked toward the Garden he might remember his sin,
and lament for it. Let us constantly avoid such sins as we do lament; So did
St. Paul, Acts 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward men. Let us do good works constantly,
Gal. 6.9, 2 These. 3.13. Let us constantly put on the virtues of Christ, growing
in number, measure, and exercise of grace. Let us daily act faith upon Christ.
If we do thus, not only begin well, but continue in thus doing until death, we
shall (when we have acted the last part of our life upon the Stage of this
World) every one of us apart here that joyful Sentence pronounced by Christ
himself, Euge bone serve, Well done thou good and faithful Servant, -- Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matthew. 25.21.

Thus you see the forementioned Directions are to be practiced Early,
Earnestly, and Constantly; these three Ingredients make our Services a sweet
Perfume. But because we are so backward to these things, I shall in the next
Chapter lay down a few Considerations to quicken us to the performance of the
whole, and so conclude.

CHAP. IV. Containing certain Motives to move us to prepare for Death.
NO Man can truly say of mine advice touching preparation for Death, as Hushai
said of Ahitophel's, 2 Samuel 17.7. It is not good at this time. Sure I am,
advice to it, or practice of it is never unseasonable, for this is the (...)
the main business that we come into the World to perform. God sent us not into
the World as he did the Psalm. 104.26.
Leviathan into the Sea, to take our sport and pastime therein: but he sent us
hither as into a School to learn this one Lesson to die well. Yet alas! how
negligent are most as if unconcerned herein? This great concern is the least of
their care. Tell them of preparing for Death, and they are ready to put us off
as Felix did Paul, Acts 24.25. -- Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee; but we never read that he called for
him after. I shall therefore, Courteous Reader, lay before thee some
Considerations to move thee to prepare thy self for Death, according to the
forementioned Directions. And here I have a large field before me; but as the
Disciples passing through the Field of Corn, plucked only an ear or two and
rubbed them in their hands; so shall I content my self with three
Considerations amongst many, and handle them as briefly as I can with
convenience. First then,

1. By this means thou shall live comfortably.
2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity, and Godly sincerity, -- we have had our conversation in the World.
Rejoicing and working Righteousness is put together, Isa. 64.5. What joy and
peace is there in believing? Romans 15.13. If the Angels in Heaven rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner, as the Scripture affirms, Luke 15.7, 10. surely the joy
of a sinner converted must needs be very great in his heart. How can it
otherwise be? For such an one is reconciled to God, his sins are pardoned;
whereupon follows peace with God, and rejoicing in hope of the Glory of God, as
you may see, Romans 5.1, 2. And this peace of Conscience passes all
understanding, Phil. 4.7. It is joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.
A continual Banquet, together with the joy of the Harvest, and of such as
divide the spoil, are but dark representations of it, Prove. 15.15. Isa. 9.3.
This is Manna in the Wilderness, a foretaste and earnest of future Jubilees;
such an one is even in the Suburbs of Heaven, so that the Term of a godly man's
life (who is continually fitting himself for Death) may be truly called Hilary
Term, for a pure Crystal Torrent of Divine Joy comes streaming into his Soul
from the God of all comfort: What should such an one fear? Of whom should he be
afraid? At what should he be dismayed? If he lives, he lives to the Lord; if he
dies, he dies in the Lord: Living or dying he is the Lords, Romans 14.8.

But do not we see those who take most pains in fitting themselves for Death,
most sad and sorrowful, mourning for their own and other men's sins, do they not
meet with most trouble and afflictions, so that their lives of all men are most
uncomfortable?

Prove. 14.10. The righteous have meat to eat which the World knows not of. They
have hidden Manna, secret joy; 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing: Their weeping for their own and other men's sins, Est quedam flere
voluptas.
makes way for spiritual comfort. As April-showers refresh the face of the
Earth: When the Righteous have been shedding tears at the Throne of Grace, they
often arise from their knees with their hearts brim full of comfort. If they meet
with outward trouble, as the Waves increase, so does the Ark of Comfort arise
above these Waves. See 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort, who
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which
are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of
God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ. We read, Acts 5.41. how the Apostles rejoiced that they
were counted worthy to suffer. When Saint Paul was in that great storm at Sea,
Acts 27. When neither Sun nor Stars in many days appeared, verse. 20. In the
midst of that danger his Soul was ((...), Chrysostom.) in a quiet Haven, Dr.
Boreman in Sermon. on Phil. 3.20. p. 33.
even in the bosom of God: In that great darkness he had a light within, the
light of joy and comfort, because God was with and in him. I end this with that
of Solomon, Prove. 29.6. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare,
(that strangleth his joy) but the Righteous does sing and rejoice.

2. By this means you may die comfortably.
A man who in his lifetime has been fitting himself for death, is not afraid
of it, when God shall please to send it: He can say, Come Death, come Lord
Jesus, come and well-come. He can say to Death, as Adonijah did to Jonathan the
Son of Abiathar the Priest, 1 King. 1.42. Come in, for thou art a valiant man,
and bring good tidings. He knows Death sets his Soul at liberty out of the
Prison of the Body, as the Angel did Peter out of Prison, Acts 12.7. Upon the
sight of Death his Spirit revives, as Jacob's did, when he saw the Wagons that
were sent to carry him from a place of penury and misery, to a place of plenty
and happiness, Gen, 45.27. When Moses the Servant of the Lord had finished his
course, God bids him Go up and die in the Mount, Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50. and Deuteronomy.
34.5. It is there said, He died according to the Word of the Lord, (secundum os
Domini). The Jews say that his Soul was sucked out of his mouth with a kiss. God
dealt by him, as a fond Nurse by her Babe, kissed him and laid him down to
sleep. Elijah requests God to take away his life, 1 King. 19.4. Aged Simeon,
like a Swan, welcomed his approaching death with this melodious Song, Sapientis
animus totus in mortem prominet, hoc vult, hoc meditatur, hac semper cupidine
fertur. Sen. ad Marcium, c. 23.
Nunc dimittis, etc. Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in
peace, according to thy Word, etc. St. Paul cries out, Cupio dissolvi, Phil.
1.23. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. St.
Ambrose ready to depart, said to his Friends, Non sic vixi ut me pudent inter
vos vivere, sed nec mori timeo, quia bonum Dominum habemus: He was neither
ashamed to live, nor afraid to die. Old Hilarion being somewhat backward at
first to entertain Death, he checked himself for his vain fears, Egredore anima,
quid times? Septuaginta annos servivisti Deo, and jam mori times? Egredere
Anima; Go out my Soul, (said he) what fear thou? Thou have served God these
threescore years and ten, and what art thou now afraid to depart? Go out my
Soul. And with that he laid himself down upon his Pillow and quietly slept in
the Lord. That good man Oecolampadius when he lay a dying, being asked by some
of his friends whether the light did not offend him? he clapped his hand on h s
breast, saying, Hic sat lucis est, Here is light enough, meaning comfort. So
that solid Divine and eminent Christian, Master Bolton, said to some of his
Friends that came to visit him at the point of death, I am (said he) by the
wonderful mercies of God, as full of comfort as mine heart can hold, and feel
nothing in my Soul but Christ. I could produce great store of such like
Examples, but let these suffice.

But are not some of God's dear Servants unwilling to die, as was David, Psalm.
102.24. and Hezekiah, Isa 38.1, 2, 3? Do not some die with little or no comfort?

David and Hezekiah, they were public Magistrates, and desired to live longer,
that they might be serviceable in their Generation, and bring glory to God:
They knew if they had died at such a time, the wicked would have insulted and
made Songs of Triumph at their Funeral. They feared Distractions both in Church
and State which might follow upon their death: And happily they were the more
unwilling to die, because in their apprehensions not sufficiently prepared for
Death: Possibly by falling unadvisedly into some sins, they had blurred their
evidences, and wounded their Consciences. It is therefore good counsel which
Dr. Boreman in Sermon. on Phil. 3 20. p. 45.
Carthusianus gives, and that is, so to provide for the coming of Death, (ut
nihil in mente resideat, quod Conscientiam mordeat, and cum quo mori timeat)
that no sin reside or remain in our breast, which may wound and trouble the
Conscience, and with which we (being guilty) cannot die in peace and safety.
Sin like Jonah in the Ship, raises a tempest in the Soul. The reason why many
find so little comfort at death is, because they are too negligent in preparing
themselves for it. I end this with that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace.

3. and last. Consider.
3. And lastly, By this means you shall arise again with comfort.
That there will be a Resurrection of the Body is clear from Scripture:
Insomuch that our Savior told the Sadduces which said there is no
Resurrection, Matthew. 22.29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures. When Jesus
told Martha that her Brother should rise again, Joh. 11.23. she replied, verse.
24. I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last Day. And
the Apostle spends the largest Chapter in all his Epistles in proving this
Point against some in the Church of Corinth who denied it, 1 Cor. 15.12. Well
then, at Christ's second coming to Judgment, we must all rise again with our own
bodies, and give an account of our own Works, as you may see 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans
14.12. This will be a joyful day to such as have lived in expectation of it,
and preparation for it. For when Christ their life appears, they shall appear
with him in glory, Col. 3.4. They shall have a Crown of Righteousness conferred
upon them, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. They shall rise to everlasting life, Dan. 12.2. John
5.29. They shall lift up their heads with joy; They shall have confidence, and
not be ashamed before him at his coming, 1 John 2.28. For he who is their
Savior, Surety, Intercessor, Head, and Husband, will be their Judge. He will
at that day gather them together, and place them on his right hand, and
pronounce that blessed Sentence, Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World. They
shall be Assessores in judicio, like Justices of the Peace upon the Bench, with
the Judge approving of that righteous Sentence which Christ shall pronounce
upon the wicked, both Men and Devils. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Know ye not that the
Saints shall judge the World? -- Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? Psalm.
149.9.
This, and much more, honor have all the Saints in that great day. They enter
upon such happiness as shall never end; Dan. 12.3. -- They shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, -- and as the Stars for ever and ever; see 1 These.
4.14, etc. After the Apostle had spoken of the Resurrection and second coming
of Christ, he tells us that Believers shall be for ever with the Lord, verse.
17. And then he adds, Comfort one another with these words, verse. 18. This
eternal happiness will make amends for all our pains and care in our Christian
course.

Thus you see how comfortable their condition is that live in continual
expection of Death, and preparation for Death. They live comfortably, they die
comfortably, and they shall rise again with comfort. Whereas on the other side,
if men be careless herein, they have no true comfort whilst they live, even in
laughter their heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness,
Prove. 14.13. So it was with Belshazzar, Dan. 5.4, 5. God says again and again
by the Prophet Isaiah, That there is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 48.22. and
57.21. And if they have no true peace and comfort whilst they live, I am sure
they have none when they come to die. As Ahab said to Elijah, so may a wicked
man say upon the approach of Death, 1 King. 21.20. Have thou found me, O mine
Enemy? Death to him is the King of Terrors, as Bildad in Job called it, Job
18.14. Or as the Philosopher, Arist. Eth. ad Nic, lib. 3. c. 9.
(...), Nothing is so terrible to him as Death. The Soul at such a time is
usually full of horrors and heavy apprehensions: Pangs of Death, horror of
Conscience, sense of Guilt, and frights of Hell, are sufficient to render him
perfectly miserable. If there be any wicked men that die with little sense of
pain, and less fear of Death, (as Psalm. 73.4.) we must know that this is
security and senseless stupidity, no true peace. And if they have no true peace
and comfort neither in life nor at death, they will have none after death, nor at
the general Resurrection; for no sooner is the soul separated from the body,
but God passes a particular judgment upon it, Eccles. 12.7. Heb. 9.27. and
dooms it to misery: Even as Sodom and Gomorrah -- are set forth for an Example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. And at the second coming of
Christ to Judgment, the body shall rise, and be reunited to the soul, and
Christ will pronounce that dreadful Sentence upon all wicked persons, Mat.
25.41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his angels. And this Sentence being once passed, shall never be altered:
Hence it is called Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6.2. If Felix trembled to hear of
judgment to come, as you may read he did, Acts 24.25. How will wicked men
tremble when Christ comes to execute Judgment upon them, (as you read he will,
Eccles. 11.9. and 12. last verse. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. Jude 15.) Wicked men will
then cry to the Hills to fall upon them, and hide them from the face of him
that sits upon the Throne, etc. Rev. 6.16, 17. They would then count it an
happiness to be able to die; but alas, They shall seek for death, but they
shall not find it, and they shall desire to die, but death shall flee from
them, Rev. 9.6. So then wicked men shall rise again, but it will be to their
everlasting shame and misery, Dan. 12.2. They shall come forth to the
Resurrection of ^ Damnation, John 5.29. And they shall have bodies to be
tormented in, which Devils have not: and they shall be miserable as long as God
is happy, and that is to all eternity, and for ever; Mat. 25.46. These shall go
away into everlasting punishment. Sinner and Hellfire shall never be parted:
This word never breaks the heart of a sinner, and gives new life to those
insufferable torments which exceed all expression or imagination. When ten
hundred thousand millions of Ages are past, the misery of the damned is as
fresh to begin, as it was the first moment they entered upon it. If there was
any hope of an end, 'twould something ease the heart, but Eternity is
intolerable. O Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! Methinks the dreadful terrors of
Eternity should strike fire out of a Flint, and make the hardest heart to melt
into tears for sin, and quicken the dullest soul to Godliness. Death, which is
the end of all things, Ex hoc momento pendet Aeternitas.
shall bring Man to a condition that shall never end. Vegetative and sensitive
Creatures, when once dead, they have no more a Being. But Man, when this life
is ended, shall live again, and that to eternity, either in bliss or misery:
Where are men's wits, or what think they on that they do not prepare? Wherefore,
Courteous Reader, as David said to Solomon in another case, so say I to thee, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise, and be doing, and the Lord be with thee. Amen.

FINIS. (...).
Epaphroditus's Sickness AND RECOVERY.

In three Sermons.

The First Preached at St. Michaels in Coventry, upon the 14th day of December
in the morning, being the Lecture day.

And the two other Preached the Lords Day following, being the 18th of the same
instant, in the same Church, Anno Dom. 1670.

By Thomas Allestree, M. A. Rector of Ashow in the County of Warwick.

-- I was brought low, and he helped me, Psalm. 116.6.

The Lord has chastned me sore; but he has not given me over unto Death,
Psalm. 118.18.

Ne umbra quidem corporis, nedum vivo ac sano corpore dignus est, quisquis
usque adeo Stoicus est factus, ut vitam ac sanitatem corporis, qua utraque ad
gloriam Dei uti poterit, non sentiat donum esse divinae munificentiae, sed
susque deque faciat, sive sanus sit sive aegrotet, vivatne vel moriatur.
Musculus in Psalm. 102.3, 4.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1671.

To the Right Worshipful Mr. Thomas King Mayor, with the Aldermen his Brethren,
and the rest of the Inhabitants of the City of Coventry.
The Author wishes continuance of health with increase of grace and peace.
SIRS,
THese three following Sermons (though conceived elsewhere) were first brought
forth in your Ancient and Honorable City. The subject matter of them is
seasonable for these sickly times. Though you in your City, (as I am informed
by Mr. Feak and Mr. Wanley your present Ministers.
those who have best reason to know) have been this last year as healthful as
at other times, (a mercy which you can never be too thank-full for) yet the
Towns and Villages about you, yea the most part of this Nation (I hope you are
sensible of it) have been sorely visited with sickness; I therefore, at the
importunity of some Friends, thought good to make these Notes public. The Word
preached is too soon Vox audita perit. sed litera scripta manebit.
forgotten, and reaches but to few, but Printed may be seen by many, and
perused at pleasure. I hope these Sermons that found acceptance with many when
Preached, will, being Printed, find the like acceptance with the sober
Christian. You have that here presented to the eye, which was delivered to the
ear; for I have made little or no alteration, only I have inserted several
Latin Sentences, (which I did not mention in the Pulpit, partly because I
would avoid the suspicion of vainglory, and partly because they would have
taken up too much of that little time allotted, every Sand of which we should
frugally improve to the profit of the bearer). You that understand Latin, may
read these Quotations to your better satisfaction: You that like them not,
because you cannot understand them, may overlook them. These Sermons, like the
Author, come forth in a plain dress: My desire was not, with elegant cadencies
of words, to please an itching ear, but with plain Scripture-evidence, to
affect an honest heart: And strong-lines could not reasonably be expected from
one so weak as I then was, being but lately recovered of a grievous sickness.
Well, dear Friends, whatever they be, I humbly present them to your acceptance,
as a testimony of my thankfulness, and to show how willing I am

To serve your Souls in what I may, T. Allestree.
Ashow, March 27. 1671.
Epaphroditus's sickness. First Sermon.
PHIL. 2.27. For indeed he was sick, nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him.
--


THE Philippians, to whom St. Paul wrote his Epistle, were Inhabitants of
Philippi, which was a chief City of Macedonia, and a Colonie, Acts 16.12. It
was the Metropolis of that part of Macedonia, and a Roman Colonie, whose
Inhabitants came from Rome to dwell there, verse. 21. ( Musculus in Phil. 1.1:
Coloniae sunt gentes ad terram aliquam habitandum missae, says Musculus). It
was formerly called Crenida, (...), because of the fruitful Fountains that
issued from the Hill on which it was built. (Eo quod circa collem cui
inaedificata fuit uberrimi Fontes promanarent. Muscul. in Phil. 1. v. 1.) Some
Itinerarium totius sacrae scripturae, p. 539.
say there were veins of Gold found close by it. Philip King of Macedon, Father
of Alexander the Great, caused it in the year before Christ, 354. to be
reedified and enlarged, and then after his own name called it Philippos, or
Philippi. (Hanc Philippus Rex Macedoniae munitiorem reddidit propter vicinos
Thraces, ac in nominis sui memoriam Philippus vocavit. Muscul.). Muscul. in
Phil. 1.1.
It was enriched with many privileges, much Gold found there: but it was not
so happy in that, as in Paul's praying, who coming thither wrought many
Miracles, taught the Gospel, and converted many to the Faith and Knowledge of
Christ, as you may read, Acts 16. From See Dr. Hammond his Preface in Annot. on
2 Epist. Corinthians.
hence St. Paul wrote his second Epistle to the Corinthians, and sent it to
Corinth by Titus and Luke, which was, says an See Itiner. Tot. S. Scrip. 540.
Author, 292 Dutch miles. He wrote also this Epistle to the Philippians from
Rome, to the Inhabitants of Philippi, and sent it by the hands of Epaphroditus,
which was, says the same See Itiner. Tot. S. Scrip. 540.
Author, 628 miles; and he reckons by common Dutch miles, whereof four thousand
paces make a mile, (p. 3.). The occasion of this Epistle was this, The
Philippians hearing that St. Paul, who had planted a Church among them, was
imprisoned at Rome, sent Epaphroditus to visit him, and supply his wants: From
whom the Apostle having received the testimony of their kindness and constancy,
and with-all hearing that false Apostles were crept in amongst them, who were
enemies to the Cross of Christ, and perverted the Doctrine of the Gospel, he
writes back this Epistle as a necessary Antidote against these Seducers, and as
an acknowledgment of their favors; for Christianity does not abolish civility
and good manners. [ Heming. in argumentum, Epist. ad Phil.
Cum ut futuro periculo occurrat tum ut suam erga Philippenses animi gratudinem
declaret, hanc scribit Epistolam. Heming.]. Paul in the front of this Epistle
joins Timothy with him, because as he had formerly been at Philippi with him,
as you read Act. 16. so he was now at Rome with him, Phil. 2.19. being his
constant companion and assistant. This Epistle he sent back by the hands of
Epaphroditus, who was, as you may see verse. 25. a faithful Minister of the
Gospel, and their Messenger, that ministered to his wants, bringing that which
the Philippians sent to the supply of his necessities. [ Perferens ad ipsum
quae Philippenses miserant. Heming. in locum.] The Apostle thought fit to send
him back, having faithfully performed his Message. Epaphroditus himself was
willing to return, as you may see verse. 26. for he longed after you all. (...),
the word signifies a longing desire, as impatient of delays. Epaphroditus
would stay no longer from his People than he needs must; he was detained by
sickness, or else he had sooner returned. And he was full of heaviness, because
that they had heard that he had been sick. He was not so much troubled because
that he was sick, as because that they had heard of his sickness. Zanchius, in
Phil. 2.26.
[(...), ab (...) private. and (...), qui prae tristitia animi populi frequentum
fugit.] The word signifies, He sat solitary, as men in extreme sorrow love to
be alone: He was exceedingly disquieted to think what sorrow the report of his
sickness brought to them. But, good God! how are people otherwise affected in
these sinful times toward their faithful Ministers, wishing them sick, and
transported with joy to hear of their sickness: So that it is matter of grief
to many Ministers in their sickness to think that others do insult, and by
their rejoicing, add affliction to affliction. But the Philippians love toward
their faithful Pastor was so great, that they were even sick to hear of his
sickness; nay, Epaphroditus feared lest this sad news would be their death. (
Fuit anxius animi propter Philippenses ne nimina tristitia conficerentur,
Muscul. in locum.) He was grievously afraid lest they should wear away with
overmuch grief at the sad tidings of his sickness.

For indeed, says the Apostle in the words of my Text, he was sick nigh unto
Death; but God had mercy on him.

In the words we have two parts.

1. Epaphroditus's Sickness; where observe, first, the Patient, Epaphroditus,
he was sick. Secondly, The manner of his sickness, it was very grievous, for he
was nigh unto Death.

In the second part we have Epaphroditus his Recovery set down; wherein
observe, 1. the Physician, that was God. 2. The cure wrought by him, he had
mercy on him.

To begin with the first part, Epaphroditus was the Patient, and his Distemper
very grievous, for he was sick nigh unto death.

The Greek word (...) signifies to be very weak and sick, even at deaths door.
[(...) infirmis viribus sum, langueo, graviter aegroto, Joh. 11.3. (...), hinc
(...), ab (...) private and (...) robur. Omnibus viribus destitutus and tum sibi
tum aliis prorsus inutilis sicut cadaver. Beza in Romans 5.6.] He had faciem
cadaverosam, Death had taken possession on this sick man's countenance: He was
grown so weak (and it was matter of grief to them, Muscul. in locum.
Quod Apostolo amplius subministrare non poterat) that he was a burden and not
an help to the Apostle. But to show yet further how near death he was, the
Apostle adds (...). [Which some render vicinus morti, so Marlorat. And Musculus
who adds, Corripitur morbo tam gravi ut ad ipsas portas mortis usque pervenisse
videretur. Proxime mortem, Piscator, Hemingius. Proxime ad mortem, Beza. Usque
ad mortem, Tremel. Aquinas, Osiander, Estius, who adds, Lethali morbo laborabat
ita ut moriturum metuerem.] He was a Neighbor to Death, or neighboring upon
Death: He was even upon the confines of the King of Terrors. If every Man in
his healthful state be like a Mariner (as some say) in the Sea of this World,
Digitis amor tu remotus, Quatuor aut Septem. Juven.
within a few inches of Death: Surely languishing Epaphroditus was within a
hairs breadth of it. But if you ask me what his particular Distemper was, I
must tell you, I know not. The Physician may be will say ( Non erat assuetus
mari ideoque inter navigandum contraxit corporis sui debilitatem. Muscul. in
loc.) that he was Sea-sick: Heming. in Phil. 2.30.
And indeed, as Hemingius observes, that long journey by Sea might be an
occasion of his sickness, and the Apostle seems to insinuate as much, verse. 30.
But what his particular Distemper was, we must be content to be ignorant,
seeing the Holy Ghost does not reveal it. Contenting my self with what the Text
holds forth, that he was sick, yea, nigh unto death; I take up this Point of
Doctrine.

Doct. That the best of God's dear Servants, whether Ministers or others, may
be very sick, or sorely visited with sickness. Hinc liquet vel sanctissimos
adversa affici valetudine. Bulling. in Phil. 2.27.
Epaphroditus was a good Christian as well as a good Minister.

Many are the afflictions of the Righteous, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 34.19.
Diseases, amongst other afflictions, are the portion of God's dearest Children.
Jacob was sick, Genesis 48.1. So was Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.1. So Job was smitten
with a sore Boil, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, Job 2.7,
8. He was so loathsome a Creature none would come near him; he was fain to be
his own Chyrurgeon, and his dressing Instrument was a piece of a broken Pot;
see likewise Job 7.3, 4, 5, 13, 14, 15, 16. So David was sick nigh unto death,
read Psalm. 6. and Psalm. 38. So under the New Testament, we read Dorcas that
Woman full of good Works, and Alms-deeds which she did, fell sick, -- Acts
9.36, 37. So Paul himself says, We had that Sentence of Death in our selves,
etc. 2 Cor. 1.9. He means the great danger he was in by reason of his
Adversaries, or by reason of sickness, or both: Thus he was in deaths often, i.
e. in deadly dangers, 2 Cor. 11.23. So before this you read of some in the
Church of Corinth that were chastned of the Lord by some violent sickness, that
they might not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.30, 32. Timothy had but
bad health, which made the Apostle to give him this advice, To drink no longer
Water, but to use a little Wine for his Stomachs sake, and his often
infirmities, 1 Timothy 5.23. So we read of Trophimus the Ephesian, Paul's Disciple
and Companion in travels, Acts 20.4. and 21.29. left of Paul at This Miletum,
or rather Miletus, Act. 20.17. was a City famous for Wool and Clothing. Nec
Miletus erat vellere digna tuo. Martial.
Miletum sick, 2 Timothy 4.20. But we need not light up a Candle at noonday, and
seek for that which is neither hid nor lost. This truth is confirmed, or
Proposition verified, by daily experience. I therefore pass on to the Reasons
of the Point, which may be taken from three heads.

1. From their natural constitution.
The Godly, though they be the Sons of God by the grace of Adoption, yet they
are the Sons of Adam by natural production: And as the Wood breeds a Worm that
eats it, the Garment a Moth that frets it, and Fruit that which does corrupt
it, so natural bodies produce Diseases to destroy them. The bodies of the best
are earthly houses, 2 Cor. 5.1. which moulder away of themselves. The Apostle
calls the body, even of the best men, a vile body, because (Tot miseriis
obnoxium) subject amongst other miseries to sickness and distempers. Calv: in
Phil. 3.21.
If the humors of the body be but a little stirred, they turn to the nutriment
of a Disease: Our very blood, (as Dr. Tailor says) wherein our life dwells, is
the scene under which nature acts many sharp Fevers and heavy Sicknesses. Many
men, (says another Mr. Byfield, on 1 Pet. 2.24 p. 883.
Divine) that for the present are free from the pains of Diseases, yet have
their enemies in their bodies in diverse parts of them laid, as it were, in
Garrison, which may and will break out upon them at a time they know not.

2. From inherent corruption.
The best besides original corruption, have many actual provocations, 1 King.
8.46. Psalm. 19.12. Psalm. 143.2. Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20. 1 John 1.8. If we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If the best
of us, says he has no sin, he sins in saying so; De vero cultu, lib. 6. c. 13.
for this is sin in the best. ( Nemo esse sine delicto potest quamdiu indumento
carnis oneratus est. Lactant.) Now sin is the procuring cause of sickness. Had
not sin entered into the World, there had been no sickness. Had our first
Parents continued in a state of holiness, they had continued in a state of
health and happiness everlasting; but their eating the forbidden fruit, brought
Diseases upon them and their posterity. It is sin that brings all mankind; even
the best to the Grave, Romans 5.12. And no wonder if it cast them upon a
sickbed. Sin is the Pandora's Box that fills the World with innumerable
diseases and calamities: Like another Jonah it raises storms and aestuations
in the Body, as he did in the Sea, ( Jonah. 1.4, 7. compared) What says David,
Psalm. 31.10. My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: My
strength fails, because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed. It was
sin that weakened him, and brought (as it were) his body into a consumption. So
Psalm. 38.3. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger,
(Agnoscit morbi istius causam esse iram Dei propter selera sua in se accensam.
Muscul. in loc.); neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. So
verse. 5. My Wounds stink, and are corrupt; because of my foolishness. So Psalm.
39.11. God with rebukes does correct man for iniquity. Diseases are properly
the Rod of the Lord, and, the Rod for the fools back, seems to have been a
Proverb amongst the Jews, Prove. 10.13. and 26.3. Hence the Psalmist allusively
tells us, Psalm. 107.17. Fools because of their transgressions, and because of
their iniquities are afflicted. The best of men are no wiser than they should
be; nay, they too often play the fool as David did, 2 Samuel 24.10. and no wonder
if God chastise them with sickness.

3. And lastly, From Divine Ordination, 1 These. 3.3.
The Devil cannot smite us with sores or sickness without God's Commission, or
at least without his Permission, as you may see in the case of Job, Job 2.6.
Whatever may be the instrumental or material cause of any affliction, yet God
himself is the supreme efficient; Job 5.6. as Eliphaz said, Affliction comes
not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground. By this
proverbial Speech, he would have us look higher than to secondary causes, even
to God himself as the Author; for so he is, Isa. 45.7. so Amos 3.6. Shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? It is not to be understood of
the (malum culpae, sed poenae) evil of sin, but of affliction and punishment.
God then sends sickness to his Children, or he is pleased to exercise them with
sickness and such like afflictions for good ends; I Will name two especially.

1. For the purging out, or preventing of sin, Psalm. 119.67, 71. so Isa. 1.25.
and Isa. 27.9. so Heb. 12.10, 11. God sends sickness, as he sent an Angel with
a drawn Sword in his hand to Balaam, Numb. 22.32. to divert us from sinful
courses. God takes away corporal to recover spiritual health; he weakens thee
in body, to weaken the body of sin in thee. If he cast thee into a Fever or
burning Ague, it is to refine thee, and make thee a Vessel unto Honor,
sanctified, and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work, as
expressions be 2 Timothy 2.21. I have somewhere read how Basil the Great, that
holy Man, being much troubled with the Headache, prayed to God to remove it,
and was at length healed of it, but afterward he felt many bad motions and
sinful lusts stirring in him; then he earnestly desired God to return to him
the Headache again, rather than suffer the peace of his Soul to be disquieted
with those lusts. So that you see bodily Pains and Diseases are sent by God to
prevent or purge out sin. But more particularly God sends sickness to prevent
or purge out these following sins; to name a few.

1. Pride.
See 2 Cor. 12.7. Some by the Thorn in the flesh understand some extreme pain,
as the Headache; so Theophilact. Some refer it to the Iliaca Passio, or Wind in
the small Guts; See Mr. Leigh's Annot. on 2 Cor. 12.7.
so Aquinas. Some to the Gout or pain in the Stomach, as Nazianzene and Basil
are said to interpret it. These or the like bodily Distempers may be well
compared to a Thorn in the flesh, because they are as painful to the body, as
if a Thorn or Splinter was thrust into the flesh. This Thorn was sent o let out
the wind of Pride; Lest, says the Apostle, I should be exalted above measure.
Job under his sores and sickness, and other afflictions that God exercised him
with, confessed his vileness, and abhord himself in Dust and Ashes, Job 40.4.
and 42.6.

2. Worldly-mindedness.
God sends sickness to withdraw their heart and affections from things here
below, and to cause them to mount up and aspire more unto Heaven. The best are
apt to fall in love with this wretched world, as Peter said, Luke 9.33. Master,
it is good for us to be here. God in sickness makes his servants willing to
remove: They see Riches and Friends cannot ease them of their pains, and
therefore they desire to be gone, Phil. 1.23. and to be translated into the new
Jerusalem, where no Inhabitant shall say he is sick, Isa. 33.24.

3. Security.
In health and prosperity the best are apt to forget God. As David said, Psalm.
30.6, 7. In his prosperity, I shall never be moved; Lord by thy favor thou
have made my Mountain to stand strong: but when God did hide his face, and left
him to the dangerous assaults of his Enemies, or fury of some sickness, then he
was troubled and cried to the Lord, and pleaded with him in prayer, as you may
read in the following verses, 8, 9, 10, 11. When he casts his people on their
backs in a sickbed, then especially they look upward.

4. Insensibleness of others sufferings under sickness.
Most men are insensible of the sufferings of others, like those voluptuous
Epicures, as if unconcerned in others miseries, they are not affected with
their Brethrens calamities, Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Even the best are too too
stoical herein, whilst in Health, not sufficiently sensible of the miseries
that others lie under by reason of sickness. But when God has visited us with
sickness, then we pity those that lie under the same or the like sufferings.
The Poet Virgil brings in Dido speaking thus.

Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. She being in misery, did pity those
that were in misery. David, whom God had much exercised with sickness, had
learnt to pity others, as, you may see Psalm. 35.13, 14.

5. Unthankfulness.
We do not, whilst we are healthful and strong, rightly prize health, nor are
we duly thankful for so great a mercy. Carendo magis quam fruendo; We know the
worth of things best by the want of them. As God threatened to take away Corn,
and Wine, and Oil from Judah, because she did not know, i. e. thankfully
acknowledge them to be Gods good Gifts, Hos. 2.8, 9. So God many times deprives
his People of health, that they may learn to prize it the more, and to improve
it more to his glory when he sends it again.

6. The sixth and last sin that sickness sent by God is a means to purge out or
prevent, is, Forgetfulness of Death.
Jerusalem in prosperity remembered not her last end, Lam. 1.9. The best of us,
in times of health, too too seldom think of Death, which made Moses cry out,
Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end! God therefore sends sickness, which is, Ante-ambulo
Mortis, the forerunner of Death; to mind them that the King of Terrors is not
far off: they at such a time expect Death, and look upon it as that which will
certainly come. Abel Redivivus in his life.
Bishop Andrews said often in his sickness, It must come once, and why not here?
David in sickness saw the vanity of Man in his best state, Psalm. 39.5. Surely
every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Selah. And verse. 11. he
warbles it over again on his doleful Harp, -- Surely every man is vanity.
Selah. So Moses under God's afflicting hand, Psalm. 90.7. saw the frailty of
Man's life, and therefore prayed, verse. 12. So teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Thus you see God sends sickness for
the purging out or preventing of several sins in his People.

2. The other end that God has in such passages of his providence toward his
Servants, is for the trial and exercise of their Graces.

Affliction is sent to try us, Psalm. 66.10, 11. Jer. 9.7. 1 Pet. 4.12. It is
both the Touchstone and Whet-stone of Grace. A Fever, or some such like
Distemper, is as a fiery Trial to try the truth of God's Graces in us, and to
set them awork; in so much as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12.10. I take pleasure
in infirmities, -- for when I am weak, then am I strong. When he was weak in
Body, he was strong in Grace. But more particularly, God sends sickness to try
and exercise these following Graces.

1. Faith and Hope, (I put them both together, for they are nigh of kin).
The Apostle speaks of God's suffering his People to be in heaviness through
manifold temptations, that is afflictions, for the trial of their Faith, as you
may see 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Job's Faith was seen and set awork under his sufferings.
Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. It is Faith indeed to
trust in that God that seems to frown. So hope is seen and set awork in a
tempest. It is compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6.19. whose use is best seen in a
storm.

2. Patience.
In times of affliction there is matter for patience as well as faith to be
exercised about, Rev. 13.10. so 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. The Apostle says, Tribulation
works Patience, Romans 5.3. He means, It occasions the exercise of Patience.
James 5.11. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, says Saint James: Ye had not
heard so much of his Patience, had it not been for his sickness, and such like
afflictions which God exercised him with. Sickness is the School of Patience.

3. Love to God.
Jer. 2.2. I remember thee, (says the Lord) the kindness of thy youth, the
love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a
Land that was not sown. It is love and kindness indeed to follow God in a
Wilderness of temptations and trials: to love him even when we groan under sad
Distempers, and can feel nothing (as it were) but signs of his displeasure. The
World is apt to think that Believers love God only for what they gain by his
service, as though their love to God was purely mercinary; as the Devil said,
Does Job fear God for naught, etc. Job 1.9, 10, 11. so Job 2.4, 5. The Devil
said, Skin for Skin, yea, all that a man has will he give for his life: but
put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse
thee to thy face. God, as you read afterward, suffered the Devil sorely to
afflict Job, verse. 6, 7, 8. Yea, Job's Wife took the Devils part, as you see
verse. 9. The Devil handed over a temptation to him by his Wife, hoping thereby
to prevail with Job as he did by the Wife prevail with Adam, Genesis 3.6. But the
Devil could not, nor Job's Wife (that crooked Rib, that cross piece) to help
him, cause that good Man to curse his God: See how sharply he rebukes her for
her folly, verse. 10. Thou speak as one of the foolish Women speaks: What,
shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all
this or hitherto did not Job sin with his lips. And though we read afterward
of his cursing the day of his birth, Chap. 3. and of other rash speeches
proceeding from him, Chap. 6. and elsewhere: Yet his resolution was, Not to let
go his integrity so long as he lived, Job 27.5, 6. Here was a full proof of the
sincerity of his love to God, and strength of his Christian courage: For if
thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small, Prove. 24.10.

4. And lastly, Prayer.
Sickness sets Prayer awork like trouble, Psalm. 18.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 88. per
totum. Psalm. 116.3, 4. so Isa. 26.16. Lord, (says the Prophet) in trouble have
they visited thee: they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.
When God visits his People with sickness, or some such like affliction, then
especially they visit him with prayers. Prayers which before did but, as it
were, drop out, now and then a prayer, are in time of trouble frequently and
fervently put up unto God. Christ in his agony prayed more earnestly, Luke
22.44.

Thus when the outward man is ready to perish or decay, through sickness or
some such like affliction, then the inward Man is renewed, i. e. gathers
strength ( Isa. 40.31.) by daily pressures, 2 Cor. 4.16. As the Depressa
resurgit, Ps 92.12.
Palm Tree the more it is drepressed, the more it flourishes. As Jacob said to
Laban, Genesis 30.30. It was but little which thou had before I came: but it is
now increased to a multitude: And the Lord has blessed thee since my coming.
So may sickness say to many a child of God, It was but little (in comparison)
which thou had before my coming, but little Faith, Patience, Love to God,
Devotion, etc. but now it is much increased. Divine Graces, like Torches in a
dark night, shine brightest 'midst manifold afflictions.

Let us now come to Use and Application, which through Gods blessing may be
most profitable.

1. This consideration should be a Cordial to comfort us in sickness.
It should make thee and me patient under sickness, when God is pleased to send
it: Nothing befalls us, but what befalls God's dearest Servants. David, Job,
Hezekiah, Paul, Epaphroditus, and others, (as you have heard) even the
bravest-spirited, the wisest, the holiest have been sorely visited with
sickness. There is no temptation (i. e. affliction) has taken you but what is
humane, (so the word is, (...)) or, as it is rendered, common to Man, 1 Cor.
10.13. Yea, to the best of men, and being thus ordinary, it may be the better
endured.

Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. So then, as the Author to the Hebrews
speaks, Seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses; I
add, with so many examples of good men in sickness, -- Let us run with
patience, Heb. 12.1. As Phocion said to one that was condemned to the same
death with him, Art thou not glad to fare as Phocion does? So shall not we be
glad, or at least be content and patient under sickness, seeing we fare no
worse than God's dearest Servants do. Nay, let us cast our eyes abroad, and we
shall find many our betters by far in Grace far more afflicted than our selves
be with sickness. Our sickness being neither so violent nor so permanent as
theirs. Now shall not we be content to sip of that bitter Cup which they drink
so deeply of? Epaphroditus's sickness, besides the violence thereof, was
clothed with this sad circumstance, that he was Muscul. in loc.
Procul a suis remotus, He was far from home in a strange place: But we at home
amongst friends and acquaintance, who are at hand to give friendly visits, and
to minister to our necessities.

2. This consideration should strike terror into the hearts of impatient
wretches.
If sickness and pain be the condition of Gods dear Servants here, what will be
the portion of the wicked hereafter in the day of their visitation? If they,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. be in such a sick condition that
they know not what to do, which way to turn them for ease; how easeless and
painful will their condition one day be, who are Vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction? Romans 9.22. see 1 Pet. 4.17. For the time is come (it may be
rendered, (...).
according to the Original, that it is the season) that judgment begin at the
House of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall be the end of them that
obey not the Gospel of God? Now in this life judgments ( i. e. chastisements,
Psalm. 7.11.) befall God's dear Servants for their sinful infirmities, who are
here called the House of God, (for they are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 3.16.) and if judgment begin at us first, what shall the end of them be
that obey not the Gospel? However for the present they live, become old, yea
are mighty in power, as Job speaks, Job 21.7. And their Houses are safe from
fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them, verse. 9. Yet their end will be sad,
verse. 30. The wicked is reserved to the day of destruction: They shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath. So the Psalmist (whether Asaph or David it
is uncertain) stumbled at the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.2, 3. He saw
they lived merrily here, and when they died, they died without much pain in
their sickness; for, says he, verse. 4. There are no bonds, that is, See Dr.
Hammond in Psalm. 73.4.
no pangs in their death, q. d. Their death is not caused by those violent and
painful assaults, as other men's frequently are. So verse. 5. They are not in
trouble us other men, neither are they plagued like other men. This stumbled
him, as you may read afterward, but at last he recovers himself, having made
his resort to the Sanctuary of God, verse. 17. He learned out of his Word, that
God governed all things wisely, and had Judgments in store for them, as you may
read verse. 18, 19, 20. God lift them the higher, that their fall might be the
greater.

-- Tolluntur in altum
Ut lapsu graviore ruant. --
So then though wicked men sleep securely in sin, yet their damnation sleeps
not, 2 Pet. 2.3. When they say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travel upon a Woman with Child, (which comes suddenly,
certainly, and painfully) and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.3. The wicked
shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9.17. Jesus Christ will come upon these with a
vengeance, and they shall be punished with everlasting destruction, as you may
read 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. I end this with that of David, Psalm. 11.5, 6. The Lord
tries the Righteous; but the wicked, and him that loves violence, his soul
hates. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their Cup. They shall be
continually drinking the bitter cup of divine fury: There shall be no Lucida
intervalla, no respite, no breathing fits, (as the Righteous have here in their
sickness) but their pains shall be continual, without either intermission or
mitigation.

3. This consideration should keep us from censuring those for the greatest
sinners, that are in this kind the greatest sufferers.
Indeed we live in a censorious Age. The World judges those most wicked, that
are most afflicted; we are apt to conclude, that God hates those most whom he
visits with most sickness. Thus the Barbarians dealt with Paul, who seeing the
venomous Beast hang on his hand, said among themselves, No doubt this Man is a
murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers not to
live, Acts 28.4. Thus David's Enemies, by the sharpness and violence of his
Distemper, concluded God was become his Enemy, Verbum Belial effusum est in
ipso, i. e. punitur divinitus ob scelus aliquod commissum. Muscul. in locum.
Psalm. 41.8. Job's three Friends were to blame to accuse Job for an Hypocrite,
because God had sorely visited him with sickness; he calls them truly, Forgers
of lies, and Physicians of no value, Job 13.4. They forged lies both of God and
Job, and like unskilful Physicians, applied Corrasives instead of Cordials. And
elsewhere he calls them, Miserable Comforters, Job 16.2. They came as
Comforters, freely offering themselves, he sent not for them, Job 2.11. But
they were pitiful ones in that sense, that Job calls them Miserable comforters,
for by their censures and bitter speeches, instead of lessening, they did
increase his burden; instead of easing, they did aggravate his grief. And God
himself was highly displeased with Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, in as much as
by their perverse disputings, and false reasonings, they had wronged even God
himself, Job 42.7, 8, 9. Let us then know that God's dear Children (as
Epaphroditus, a dear Servant of the Lord here did) may lie under great
afflictions and dear affections at the same time. Job 1.8. and 2.3.
Job, even now mentioned, whom God boasts of again and again as a Nonesuch for
piety, was smitten ((...), Job 2.7.) with such an angry burning Boil as God
plagued the Egyptians with, Exodus 9.9, 10. and after threatened to punish a
rebellious people with, Deuteronomy. 28.27. If Job had measured God's displeasure by
the sadness of his Distemper, he might have concluded indeed that God had hated
him and cast him off: but upright Job doubted not of God's favor under his
saddest trials. We read of one Lazarus, the Brother of Mary and Martha, John
11.3. that was in his extreme sickness beloved of Christ. And we read of
another Lazarus, Luke 16.20. who was poor and pitiful, lying at the rich man's
gate full of sores, yet after death carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom,
verse. 22. Let the words of the wise man shut up this, Eccles. 9.1, 2. -- No man
knows either love or hatred by all that is before them: All things come alike
to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, etc.

4. Let this consideration keep us from weeping immoderately when Godly Friends
depart this life.
They are freed from those sicknesses and pains which here they groaned under.
Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, -- for they rest from
their labors, (...), from pain and pains-taking. The World to them is as
Egypt to the Israelites, a place of pains and sorrow, Exodus 3.7. When they
die, God wipes away all tears from their eyes. See Rev. 21.4. There shall be no
more death, neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain;
for the former things (as sin, sickness, etc.) are passed away. If the dead in
the Lord could speak, they would say to surviving Friends that follow them to
the Grave with sorrowful hearts, as Christ did to the Daughters of Jerusalem,
that followed him to his crucifixion sorrowing, Luke 23.28. Weep not for me,
but weep for your selves and for your children. Ye are in the Valley of Tears,
tossed upon the Waves of a troublesome World, subject as to sin so to sickness
and sorrow: But as for us, we are at the Haven of Eternal-rest. Weep not for
us, but weep for your selves and your Children. Indeed did we but seriously
consider the manifold miseries that God's dear Servants are subject unto whilst
in this World, we would give thanks rather then murmer, when God by death sets
them free. The Church in the Funerals of the Dead has taught us as much: We
give thee hearty thanks for that it has pleased thee to deliver this our
Brother (or Sister) out of the miseries of this sinful World.

5. and last Use.
But fifthly and lastly, (for I hasten); This consideration methinks should
put Christians upon sympathizing one with another.
This God calls for, Romans 12.15. 1 Pet. 3.8. see Heb. 13.3. Remember them that
are in bonds as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being
your selves also in the Body. In the Body, that is (say some) as Members of the
same Body, Romans 12.5
(for so believers are, Ephesians. 5.23, 30. so Col. 1.18.) they are Members of
Christ's Mystical and Spiritual Body: And as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 12.25,
26. The Members should have the same care one for another; and if one Member
suffer, all the Members suffer with it: So then if we take it in this sense,
you are members of the same Body, and therefore ought to sympathize one with
another. Others there are that by this expression, being your selves also in
the body, understand it thus, as being your selves living Creatures, 2 Cor.
12.2. Dr. Hammond in Heb. 13.3.
Natures Frame not being as yet dissolved, you are in the same frail humane
estate, subject to all that befalls any man; and therefore you should be
affected toward them, as though you personally shared in their sufferings.

Do not then, Christians, stand as Stoics or stocks, as unconcerned with
others sicknesses and sorrows: Put your selves (as it were) in their condition,
and do as you would be done by; be as pitiful to them, as you would have others
be to you if you were in their case. You know not how soon sickness may befall
you, and so you stand in like need of help. If you stay at home, sickness may
steal upon you: if you travel abroad, it may pursue you, as it did
Epaphroditus, who being far from home fell sick, and his sickness was grievous,
for he was nigh unto death.

Epaphroditus's Recovery. Second Sermon.
PHIL. 2.27. -- but God had mercy on him. --


ON the last Lecture-day I made an entrance upon this Text, and we spoke to
Epaphroditus his sickness; I shall this day (God willing) speak of his
recovery, which the Text clearly holds forth unto us. In which I observe two
parts, which I intend to prosecute as time shall give leave.

1. Epaphroditus's Physician, and that was God. 2. The Cure wrought by him, Had
mercy on him.
The Greek word (...), signifies to pity or have mercy upon; so^ think it has
dependence upon the Hebrew Name of God, Elohim, because it is the property of
God to show mercy.

Now mercy in God may be thus defined; Misericordia est qua propensus est Deus
ad succurrendum suis creaturis in aliqua miseria constitutis, iisque reipsa
succurrit. Wendelin. It is an attribute or property of God whereby he is
inclined to help his creatures in misery, and does really help them. So that
Homo lapsus, Man considered as a sinner and in misery, is the object of it. And
as In Psalm. 6.2.
Musculus says, Misericordia Dei est unicum omnium afflictionum refugium. The
mercy of God is the only refuge for afflicted persons to have recourse unto.

Epaphroditus, this faithful Servant of the Lord, did much partake of God's
mercy, God had been merciful to him with pardoning mercy, sanctifying mercy;
and, had he died, God had crowned him with saving mercy, he had been freed from
Hell, and enstated in everlasting happiness. But the mercy my Text speaks of,
is temporal mercy, God delivering him from the great pain and peril he was in
by reason of sickness. Estius in locum.
Eripiens eum periculo, and sanitati restituens, quod quidem beneficium
misericordia vocatur, quatenus est miseriae cujusdam remotio. And Calvin Calvin
in locum.
says, (Exprimit morbi gravitatem ut clarius eniteret Dei bonitas in reddita
sanitate). Paul first mentioned the grievousness of his sickness, that the
goodness and mercy of God might more perspicuously appear in his recovery. (
Deus misertus est ejus; i. e. misericorditer illum erepit. Misericordiam Dei
pro opere misericordiae Dei ponit, says Musculus. Muscul. in locum.
) It was mercy then in God to preserve his life, and restore him to health.

Hence I take up this point of Doctrine, which being so clearly employed, must
not be passed by without taking notice of, viz.

Doctr. That Life and Health are Mercies.

David in sickness prayed to God for health; Psalm. 6.2. Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, for I am weak. ( Muscul. in Ps. 6.2.
Ergo sentit miserum esse morbo confici). O Lord, heal me, for my bones are
vexed. (Est itaque sanum esse pars faelicitatis ac pro dono Dei habendum.
Muscul.) And Ps. 103.3, 4. we find David there looked upon Gods healing his
bodily diseases, and redeeming his life from destruction, to be a mercy, as
well as pardoning his sin. Job, though sometimes under the raging heat and fury
of his Distemper, cursed the day of his birth, and wished God would cut him
off; yet at other times, when he was more himself, he looked upon life as a
mercy, see Job 10.12. He there asserts his life to be an act of divine favor,
and the preserving his Spirit (viz.) from departing out of his body, to be a
fruit of divine providence, which he calls a Visitation. Jacob prized his life,
as you may gather from Genesis 32.11, etc. fearing his Brother would take revenge
on him, (as he threatened to do, Genesis 27.41.) he prays to God, and uses
lawful policy to save his life. So Mordecai and Esther tendered their lives,
and the lives of the Jews, Esther 4.13, 14. and 7.3. Hezekiah wept sore, when
the Sentence went forth that he should die and not live, Isa. 38.1, 2, 3. And
David cried out, Psalm. 102.24. O my God, Musculus in Psalm. 102.24.
take me not away in the midst of my days. [Naturale est and agnatum omnibus,
ut dierum suorum plenitudinem consequi cupiant, ideoque agree in medio vitae
cursu migrent ex hoc saeculo. Muscul.] The Devil spoke truly in that, (liars
sometimes may speak truth) Job 2.4. Skin for Skin, yea, all that a man has
will he give for his life. Men will part with Money, Cattels, Land, Liberty,
and what not, to preserve life, as they did Genesis 47. Yea men will part with
some members to preserve life.

-- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est ne pars sincera trahatur.
I end this with that of the wise man, Eccles. 11.7. Truly the light is sweet,
and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun.

But some may object and say,

If God send sickness for good ends to his People, as for the preventing and
purging out of sin, and for the trial and exercise of Christian Graces, surely
it was no mercy in God to deliver this good man Epaphroditus from it.

only to such as have a sanctified use of it. It was sanctified indeed to
Epaphroditus, and so wrought for his good, as Physic for the good of the
Patient, Heb. 12.10. but as it brought pain, it was grievous, and so his
deliverance therefrom may be truly called a mercy, Estius in Phil. 2.27.
Quatenus est miseriae remotio; as it removed his pain, and rendered him more
serviceable to the Church.

But how can Epaphroditus 's Recovery here be called a Mercy, when Death is far
better than Life to Gods Children; which made the Apostle himself in the former
Chapter, Phil. 1.23. desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which
(says he) is far better? (...); Multo magis melius; which may be thus rendered
in English; More better by much. Had it not been far better for him to have
been at the Haven of Rest, than to be, as it were, by a cross wind kept back
and tossed upon the Waves of a troublesome World? Is not this World like a round
Ball stuck full of Pins, so that upon what part soever the Godly are cast, they
meet with trouble and misery? According to that of our Savior, John 16.33. In
the World ye shall have tribulation: So that to have his life prolonged, what
was it but a prolongation of his misery, and an adjournment of his happiness?
Tiberius Caesar said to one that requested death rather than long imprisonment,
Sueton.
Nondum tecum redii in gratiam, he told him, He had not such a favor for him.
The like favor God here denies for the present to Epaphroditus; and can this
be truly called a Mercy?

etc. Yea, it brings them to the happy vision and fruition of God, to the
society of blessed Saints and Angels, and puts them into possession of
everlasting happiness. Calvin in Phil. 2.27.
(Longum esset enumerare omnia quae faciunt, ut mors fidelibus potior sit vita
and optabilior). Yet for all this, as that learned Author says, (Vita per se
aestimata est praeclarum Dei beneficium, praesertum qui Christo vivunt, iis
vitam lucro esse dicimus); Life considered in it self is a choice mercy of God,
and advantageous to the Godly: And to glorify God in this bodily life, is, Non
parva dignatio, no little savor which God vouchsafes to us; so Calvin. And
Musculus Muscul. in Phil. 2.27.
says, (Mors ipsa quatenus est peccati stipendium and horribilis naturae in
seipsa, considerata capax est misericordiae tam coram Deo quam coram
hominibus); Death as it is the wages of sin, and terrible to nature, is capable
of mercy both before God and Man. Besides, as the same Author observes, there
were several circumstances which would have rendered his death in a sort
miserable, and no doubt did then trouble his mind, (Desolatio videlicet and
perturbatio Ecclesiae) as the too much dejection of his people at the sad news
of his death, and the desolation that might follow upon it, and withal, the
consideration that he could be no longer serviceable to them, and to the
Apostle in his bonds which he much desired. Besides we may farther add, that
the continuance of a good man's life is a great blessing in this respect, that
the longer he lives, the more good he does, and so his reward will be the
greater; 2 Cor. 9.6. He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. There
are degrees of glory, as may be gathered from 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. 1 Cor. 3.8.
Secundum non propter opera.
The most gracious here, shall be most glorious hereafter. Those that do most
for God here, shall receive most from God hereafter. So that had Epaphroditus
died, he had had his reward the sooner; but living, he makes it the greater.
For those of the longest standing, and greatest proficiency in the School of
Grace here, shall take the greatest degrees of Glory hereafter.

I end this with the words of that truly pious and learned Doctor Hammond in
Phil. 1.22.
Divine, Life in it self, and for the advantages of serving God, and increasing
our Crown, is a desirable thing.

Use and Application.
Manichees, or any others that hold this present life in it self is evil.
Heming. in Phil. 1.17.
Manichei hanc praesentem vitam ut malum per se damnarunt. Heming. Surely God
would never have made prolongation of life a motive to obedience, (as you find
Deuteronomy. 6.2. and 30.16, etc. so Prove. 3.16. and 4.10, 22. and 9.10, 11. and
elsewhere) nor would the Apostle here have reckoned Epaphroditus's recovery
amongst the mercies of God, if this present life had been evil. This is such a
mercy we ought to bless God for: Psalm. 66.8, 9. O bless our God, ye people, and
make the voice of his praise to be heard, who holds our soul in life. Muscul.
in Psalm. 103.3, 4.
-- (Ne umbra quidem corporis nedum vivo ac sano corpore dignus est, etc.) He
is not worthy of the shadow and shape of a body, much less of a living and
healthful body, that does not look upon life and health as mercies.

2. This consideration should make us patient under afflictions that befall us.
So long as we have life and health, we have no cause to complain as though God
dealt hardly with us. We read, Genesis 19. that Lot had most of his Goods (which
he had not time to remove) and his Sons in Law consumed in a fearful fire from
Heaven, and his Wife turned into a Pillar of Salt before his eyes, (a sad
spectacle); yet he counted it a mercy (amidst manifold miseries) that God had
spared his life. Verse. 19. Behold, now thy Servant has found grace in thy
sight, and thou have magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed unto me in
saving my life. -- It is a mercy thou have thy health, but if this be gone
after loss of Goods and Children, as in Job's case, yet it is a mercy thy life
is spared, that thou art on this side the Grave, and a sad eternity; Lam. 3.22,
23. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not: they are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness.
Therefore as he adds, verse. 39. Wherefore does a living man complain? A living
man has cause to be thankful, but none to murmur, life and health being the
choicest of outward mercies.

3. and last Use.
3. And lastly, Let us not, if life and health be such choice mercies, provoke
God to deprive us of them.
Sin (as I told you before) is the procuring cause of sickness, yea, and of
death too, Romans 5.12. so Romans 6.23. Death both Temporal and Eternal, is as due
to sin, as wages to him that earns them. Temporal Death, it is true, sooner or
later will seize on us all; yet many by sinning impair their health, and
shorten their days, as these places show, Job 15.32. Psalm. 94.23. Prove. 10.27.
Eccles. 7.17.

But more particularly I shall name several sins, some of which, in their own
nature, tend to impairing of health, and shortening a man's days; and others of
them God has threatened with destruction: I pray you observe them, and learn to
avoid them, as you love prolongation of health and life.

1. Disobedience to Superiors.
See Exodus 20.12. This fiffh Commandment of honoring thy Father and Mother,
is said to be the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.2. It is the first
Commandment that has this special promise annexed to it, viz. Prolongation of
days. By Father and Mother, we understand Political, Ecclesiastical, and
Natural Parents. Take heed then of an irreverent and disobedient carriage
toward the King, and those that are in authority under him. You read, Numb.
16. of the rebellion of Corah, and how the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed
him up and his Company, verse. 32, 33. So rebellious Absalom came to an untimely
death; and David was much moved with grief in that he died in rebellion, 2 Samuel
18.9, 33, compared. See Prove. 16.14. The wrath of a King is as Messengers of
Death; but a wise man will pacify it: and it follows, verse. 15. In the light
of the Kings countenance is life. Be not disobedient and irreverent in your
carriage toward Ministers which are your Spiritual Parens. You may read, 2
King. 2.23, 24. Two She Bears destroyed forty two Children for mocking the
Prophet. Though Children, yet God would not bear it in them. Possibly (as some
think, because there were so many gathered together) they were set on by their
Idolatrous Parents to do what they did, and therefore God justly punished them
with the loss of their Children. Lastly, Be not disobedient to Natural Parents.
God may justly deprive them of natural life, that are without natural
affection. Prove. 30.17. Prove. 20.20. Mar. 7.20.
The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.
Homer, though commonly reported to be blind, yet saw and observed as much: for
speaking of one that did not relieve his Parents, he tells us, he lived but a
short time.

-- (...),
(...)
(...). -- Iliad. D.
Take heed then of disobedience to Magistrates, Ministers, or Natural Parents,
as you love your lives.

2. Take heed of lustful uncleanness.
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, burnt strongly in lust, Jude 7.
and God sent a strange fire to destroy them from off the face of the Earth,
Genesis 19.24, 25. So God cut off Onan for his filthiness, Genesis 38.9, 10. So 1
Cor. 10.8. you read how that for uncleanness there fell in one day three and
twenty thousand. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c. 53.
Pliny tells us of Cornelius Gallus, and T. Aetherius, two great persons in
Rome, that died in the act of unchastity. The Dog-dayes of lust are very
dangerous. Indeed this sin consumes the radical moisture, and so in its own
nature tends to weakness and sickness, and the shortening of a man's days. The
wise Man tells you, The Harlots house enclineth unto death, and her paths unto
the dead, Prove. 2.18. so likewise Prove. 5.9, 11. and Prove. 6.26, 33, 34, 35.
and Prove. 7.22, 23. and Prove. 31.3. Solomon's Mother there advises him not to
give his strength unto Women.

3. Take heed of intemperance in eating and drinking.
This is as a Knife to cut our own Throats; see Prove. 23.1, 2. When thou
sit to eat with a Ruler, (a Magistrate, or some great Man) consider
diligently what is before thee; and put a Knife to thy Throat, if thou be a man
given to appetite. Some read it, impones cultellum gutturi tuo: and then the
sense is this, thou do as good as put a Knife to thy Throat, if thou be a man
given to appetite, thou may endanger thy life if thou feedest too
plentifully. So verse. 29, 30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has wounds
without cause? who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine. --
Our own luxuries (as one says) fill us full of Diseases, which shorten this
our short day of life, and set our Clock forward, that it strikes dead before
the time of our natural circle is gone about. Deinde cogitemus, says Musculus,
Musculus in Ps. 6.2.
quae sit illorum vaesania, qui per gulam and intemperantiam seipsos done
sanitatis privant, and variis morbis obnoxios reddunt. We may say of fasting
and feasting, as the Wom^n sang of Saul and David, Sam. 18.7. Saul has slain
his thousands, and David his ten thousands: feasting kills more ten to one than
fasting. Poor people who have the shortest meals, have commonly the longest
graces, and the best health. The Glutton digs his Grave with his own teeth; the
Drunkard drinks healths so long to others, that he has none to himself; Non
est in pota vera salute salus. And it is but just with God to strike him dead,
that makes himself dead drunk. Take heed then of this sin, it is good advice at
all times, but most seasonable at this time, which is a time of much feasting.

(...). Pythag. Aurea Carmina. We ought (says an Heathen) to have a care of
our bodily health, and to observe a mean in drinking, diet, and recreation.

4. Take heed of immoderate sorrow.
This like an heavy burden breaks a man, and makes him stoop. Prove. 12.25.
Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop. So Prove. 15.13. A merry heart
makes a cheerful countenance; but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.
David tells us, Psalm. 31.10. My life is spent with grief, and my years with
sighing. And the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 7.10. The sorrow of the World works
death. Immoderate sorrow for loss of worldly things, weakens the body, and
hasteneth death.

5. Take heed of impatience, passion, and discontent.
The murmurring Israelites were destroyed of the destroyer. 1 Cor. 10.10. An
impatient man is, (...), his own scourge. We say truly, the hasty man never
wants woe. Pettish, fretful, passionate persons, like the Demoniack in the
Gospel, Mar. 5.2, 3. wound and cut themselves. Wrath is compared to fire in
Scripture, Genesis 39.19, 20. Esth. 1.12.

-- Est intus flamma medullas. This fire of passion devours and consumes that
which should maintain natural life. The passionate man, like Mount Aetna,
consumes his own bowels with inward burnings. Thus as Eliphas tells Job, Job
5.2. Wrath kills the foolish man. Vexing and fretting under providential
dispensations, spends a man's spirits, and puts him upon taking such unlawful
courses as are oft-times attended with destruction. Prove. 19.19. A man of great
wrath shall suffer punishment; for if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it
again. q. d. A passionate man is no sooner delivered from one danger, but he
brings himself into another.

6. Take heed of Envy.
Job 5.2. Envy slays the silly one. If a man be so silly as to hug this Viper
in his bosom, he does it to his destruction. Envy, like a Moth, does insensibly
consume a man, depriving him of health, and the comforts of this life. Hence
the wise Man calls envy the rottenness of the bones, Prove. 14.30. The envious
man melts away at the prosperity of others, as you may see Psalm. 112.10.

Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. The Dart of Envy is (as a worthy
Divine observes) like that in Homer. Dr. Pierce in Sinner impleaded.


-- (...)
(...). Iliad. g. v. 348.
Reflexa est ei cuspis
Scuto in valido. --
It always recoyls into the breast of him that shot it, and mischieves most at
rebound.

7. Take heed of pride and ambition.
Prove. 16.28. Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a
fall. Aspiring Absalom soon expired; so did ambitious Adonijah. Proud Haman had
a sudden downfall, like the Toad in the Fable, he swelled till he burst. Herod
when he took that glory to himself which was due to God, he was (...), eaten up
of Worms, Acts 12.23.

8. Take heed of bloodshed and murder.
See Psalm. 55.23. Bloody and deceitful men, i. e. say some, deceitful
murderers (that lie in wait privily for blood, see Prove. 1.10, to 20.) that can
speak fair and seek your ruin, these shall not live out half their days, they
shall be suddenly cut off and come to some fearful end: But whether
blood-suckers do it by secret conspiracy, or by open violence, God has
threatened them with death. So Psalm. 140.11. Evil shall hunt the violent man to
overthrow him. So Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed. The Sword of Justice is especially committed to the hand of
Magistrates to cut off such offenders, Romans 13.4. To this Head I may refer your
Duellists, who for trifles challenge the field. If you be assaulted, you may
justly defend your self, but to agree upon a bargain of bloodshed, (to use
Bishop Hall's Bp. Hall in Decad. 2. case 2.
expression) is wicked and damnable: And though both should come fairly off,
yet the very intention to kill, is murder, says that worthy Bishop. To end
this, Prove. 28.17. A man that does violence to the blood of any man, shall flee
to the Pit, let no man stay him, or endeavor his rescue.

9. Take heed of decit and fraud.
See that forementioned place, Prove. 55.23. I think we may safely make them two
distinct Offenders; and deceitful men, as well as the blood-thirsty, shall not
long prosper. The same Greek word (...) that signifies life, signifies likewise
livelihood, (1 John 3.17.) and it is a grievous sin to cheat another out of his
livelihood, as well as to take away another life: 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. That no man go
beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter, because the Lord is the avenger
of all such; as we also have forewarned you, and testified. But the worst piece
of theft or fraud, is that Pia fraus, to take away, or alienate that which is
given to pious uses; as to the relief of Ministers or poor People; Mal. 3.8, 9.
Prove. 20.25. It is a snare, i. e. destruction to the man who devoureth that
which is holy, i. e. Takes that to his own use, which was appointed to God's.
Achans sin in stealing the Babylonish Garment, and the two hundred Shekels of
Silver, and the Wedg of Gold, ( Josh. 7.21.) was sacrilege as well as theft;
for God had reserved the spoils of Jericho for his own Treasury, Josh. 6.18,
19. and you see it cost him his life, Josh. 7.25. You read, Acts 5. beginning,
Ananias there sells a Possession, which he had devouted to the Churches use,
and kept back a part of the price; and in this, as Chrysostom Chrysostom. in
Acts. Hom. 12.
says, he was (...), taken stealing his own Goods; and for this struck dead.
Now if he that takes away from the Church but a little of that which was once
his own, be so severely punished, how severely will divine Justice pursue those
who by fraud and violence take away the possessions wherewith other men have
endowed the Church: So Sapphira his Wife agreeing with him in this ungodly act,
was struck dead immediately after her Husband, as you read verse. 10. These two,
by their lying and fraudulent dealing, are said to tempt the Spirit of the
Lord, verse. 9. You fraudulent Tradesmen, that say your Commodities cost you so
much, and you cannot afford them under such a rate, (and you have your Wives at
your elbows ready to back you in what you say) what do you by thus lying and
sinning against your Consciences, but even presumptuously tempt the Spirit of
the Lord, to try whether he will be just or no? Remember Ananias and Sapphira,
having lied to God, and dealt fraudulently, sunk down, being stark dead. Deal
fairly then above-board (as we say) lest God strike you dead beside the Counter.

10. Take heed of covetousness or worldly-mindedness.
Great and earnest care for the things of this life, is called (...), which
signifies heart-dividing, and heart-distracting care, ( Matthew. 6.25. Phil.
4.6.) excessive care for the things of this life, spends a man's spirits.

Cura facit canos, quamvis homo non habet annos. See 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. The wise
Man tells us, He that hates covetousness, shall prolong his days, Prove.
28.16. but covetousness may provoke God to shorten them. Gehezi by his
covetousness provoked God to plague him with the Leprosy, 2 King. 5.27. Take
heed then, as Christ says, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged, as
with surfeiting and drunkenness, so with the cares of this life, Luke 21.34.

Deluculo surgere saluberrimum est.
11. Take heed of Idleness.
Labor in an honest Calling, provided it be moderate, (Ad ruborem non ad
sudorem) is most healthful. Prove. 10.16. The labor of the Righteous tends to
life. Moderate exercise preserves health, but a sedentary idle life, subjects a
man to diseases. Prove. 21.25. The desire of the sloathful kills him, for his
hands refuse to labor. Otium est vivi hominis sepultura. Sen.
That which the slothful man desires, which is his ease and rest, lays his
soul open to temptations, and his body to diseases; as standing Waters most
putrify. (...). Chrysostom. Of idleness comes no goodness, therefore take heed
of it.

12. Take heed of unworthy receiving the Sacrament.
See 1 Cor. 11.29. For this cause, viz. for want of due preparation when they
came to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, God sent a fearful sickness amongst
them, whereof some were then weak, others sick, and many fallen asleep, that
is, taken away by temporal death. This Sacrament, (which to the worthy
communicant is (...), a wholesome potion of immortality) to the wicked
impenitent wretch (through an ill disposition in him) turns to the bane and
ruin (except speedy repentance step in) both of soul and body. I gave you
notice this morning, that your Minister purposes the next Lord's Day, through
God's assistance, to administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; be exhorted
to fit and prepare your selves, See Exhortation at the Celebration of the
Communion.
else by receiaing the same unworthily, you become guilty of the Body and Blood
of Christ your Savior. You eat and drink your own damnation, not considering
the Lords Body: You kindle Gods wrath against you; you provoke him to plague
you with diverse Diseases, and sundry kinds of death.

13. Take heed of rejoicing at the calamity of others.
Prove. 17.5. He that mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker; and he that is
glad at calamities, shall not go unpunished. So Prove. 24.17, 18. Rejoice not
when thine Enemy falls; and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth,
lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, Job 31.29.
and he turn away his wrath from him, and lay it upon thee. See Obad. 12.13,
14, 15. God there threatens the Edomites for rejoicing at the calamity that
befell the Israelites. This sin called (...), was condemned by the Heathens. It
is most opposite to the rule of charity, which rejoices not in iniquity, 1
Cor. 13.6. It makes not others evil, be it of sin or suffering, matter of
rejoicing.

14. Take heed of innovating in God's Worship.
Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire, by fire from the Lord, as with
lightning, were destroyed, as you may read Levit. 10.1, 2.

15. Take heed of invading the Ministers Office without a Call.
See Numb. 16.35. You read there of two hundred and fifty men that offered
Incense, usurping the Priests Office, were punished by fire, wherein they
offended. So Vzziahs rash adventure to do the like, was punished with the
Leprosy, as you read 2 Chronicles. 26.16, etc.

16. Lastly, Take heed of sins of the tongue, as Lying, Swearing, Forswearing,
Cursing, False-accusing, Backbiting, Brawling, Blasphemy, etc.
See Prove. 17.20. He that has a perverse tongue, falls into mischief. And
Prove. 13.3. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life; but he that opens
wide his lips, shall have destruction. So Prove. 18.21. Death and life are in
the power of the tongue, and they that love it, shall eat the fruit thereof.
The Psalmists words shall shut up this Point; Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14. What man is
he that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good? Keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do
good: seek peace and ensue it.

I might add to these sins which endanger health and life, bold and audacious
attempts, as leaping Hedges, swimming Waters, etc. when there is no necessity
for either. This is called properly a tempting of God, when men, without any
warrant from God's Word, make trial of his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, which
is expressly forbidden, Deuteronomy. 6.16. Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye
tempted him in Massah: whereof you read, Exodus 17.2. where they are said to
tempt God by requiring a miraculus evidence of his presence among them. Our
Savior did beat back the Devil with this Text out of Deuteronomy, when he
would have had him to cast down himself from the Doctor Hammond Annot. on Mat.
4.5.
Pinnacle, i. e. out-wing or battlement of the Temple, Mat. 4.7. If Christ had
cast himself down into a needless danger, God might have justly left him to
destruction, without breach of his Promise. God indeed has promised to keep
us, but it must be in all our ways; Psalm. 91.11. (which necessary part of the
Sentence the Devil left out, Mat. 4.6.) God has promised to keep us in all our
ways, or warrantable courses, but not in our wanderings. The Israelites fell
in the Wilderness when they tempted God, 1 Cor. 10.9.

Are not they that tempt God delivered? Mal. 3.15. Do not we daily see many
wicked men that are disobedient to Superiors, drunkards, lustful, impatient,
envious, ambitious, etc. live, become old, and are mighty in power; yea, and
the Rod of God is not upon them? Job 21.7, 9. Did not the Psalmist see, such
were not in trouble like other men, nor plagued like other men, that made
conscience of their ways? Psalm. 73.5.

a wicked man may prolong his life in his wickedness, Eccles. 7.15. God may
bear long with some such notorious offenders, to show his own patience and long
suffering, to exercise the faith and patience of his Servants. To teach that
there is a day of judgment, wherein he has appointed to judge the World in
Righteousness, Acts 17.31. God may bear with them to leave them inexcusable,
that they may fill up the measure of their sins, and for their greater
damnation at last, Romans 9.22. For these and other reasons best known unto
himself, he may suffer some wicked men to live and prosper: But let not us let
loose the reyns to sin, and make the impunity of some few an encouragement to
wickedness. It is folly and madness to be careless, because some few have
escaped shipwreck. Certainly, as the Apostle says, after he had told us of
several punishments befalling several Offenders for several sins, 1 Cor. 10.11.
Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. And as an Heathen
Author said.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.

Well then, life being so great a mercy, let us avoid all such sins as may be a
means to shorten it; and let us use all lawful means to preserve it, as Food
and Physic which God has appointed. Let us not, through discouragement of
Spirit because of deadly dangers which we meet with in our Christian Callings,
Numb. 10.14, 15.
as weary of life, wish for death, which was an infirmity in that good Man
Elijah, 1 King. 19.4. Much less ought we through discontent (as Jonah did,
Jonah 4.3, 8.) wish for death. But most prodigiously to blame are they that lay
violent hands upon themselves. Man's breath (says a worthy Bishop) is put into
his body as a Tenant at Will into an house, Dr. Abbot on Jonah 4.3, 4. Lect.
26. p. 543.
whereinto it may not enter without the good will of the Landlord; and being
once in, it must keep there and hold the building upright, till it have its
discharge to remove somewhere else.

Yet after all this that I have spoken concerning the care you should have to
maintain health and preserve life: Give me leave to put in a Caveat or
cautionary Proposition to prevent a mistake: And it is this, Caution.
That you ought to hazard health and life for the Churches sake, and for
Christ's sake, (to witness to his Truth) if called to it. 1 John 3.16. -- We
ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. St. Paul was willing to spend and
be spent, 2 Cor. 12.15. for the propogation of the Gospel, and good of God's
Church and People; see Acts 20.24. and 21.13. Truth has been sealed with the
blood of many Martyrs. An Heathen set such a price on Truth, that he thought it
worth our lives.

-- Vitamque impendere vero
Nec propter vitam, vivendi perdere causam.
What says the Apostle of Epaphroditus, see Phil. 2.30. For the work of Christ
he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life to supply your lack of service
toward me. Epaphroditus undertook a great Journey to minister to Paul's
necessity, which is here called the Work of Christ; (for what is done to his
Members, he takes it as done to himself, Mat. 25.40.). This Journey occasioned
his sickness; but Epaphroditus did not regard his life to supply the
Philippians lack of service toward Paul. Heming. in Phil. 2.30.
(...). ((...) significat perperam consulere, uti faciunt qui se in apertum
vitae periculum conjiciunt.) Epaphroditus was willing to hazard health and life
to supply St. Paul's wants. And as Hemingius says, ( Hoc facere in loco pro
Christo non est stultitiae aut imprudentiae sed vere coelestis sapientiae,
etc.) Thus to hazard life is not folly, but true wisdom. And as Musculus says
of Epaphroditus's sickness, Muscul. in Phil. 2.27.
(Id omnium erat optimum quod in tam pio and vere Christiano opere incidit in
hanc morbum: beati sunt qui hoc mortis genere auferuntur ex hoc saeculo.) It
was best of all that he fell sick in so good a work: and happy are all they
that die thus in the Work of the Lord, Rev. 14.13.

I end this point with that of our Savior, John 12.25. He that loves his (
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 66. Luke 14.26
more then is fitting, more then Christ, his Church, or Truth) shall lose it,
(in another World); but he that hates his life in this World, loving it less
(for that is the hatred here meant, Genesis 29.31.) then the Truth and Church of
Christ, shall keep it unto life eternal.

So much for this time.
Epaphroditus's Recovery. Third Sermon.
PHIL: 2.27. -- but God had mercy on him. --


Dearly Beloved,
I Handled in the morning a Doctrine employed, which was this, That life and
health are mercies: And in handling that Point, as a Divine; (though
Theologoru^ minimus) I showed you Viam rectam ad vitam longam, the true way to
health and long life according to the Scriptures. I shall not trouble you with
repetition of what I then delivered, because I have much matter before me, and
I would willingly finish this Text at this time.

I come then to the last and chief Point these words import, which is this,
That God does sometimes graciously recover, or mercifully restore his People,
though they be grievously visited with sickness.

That God that knocked off Peter's Chains, and released him from Prison, brought
forth this Epaphroditus, who like a Prisoner was confined to a sick Bed, with
few Attendants about him. That God that rules the raging of the Sea, Job 38.11.
and stilleth the Waves thereof when they arise, as it is Psalm. 89.9. put a
stop in his due time to the fury of his Distemper. We read of Dr. Willet, that
(...), that in his Journey from London, he was forced to take up his lodging at
Hodsdon in Hertfordshire, having by a fall from his Horse, broken his right
Leg; there being sick, he continued God's Prisoner about nine days together,
and died. It pleased God, (as my Abel Rediviv^^ in life of Dr. Willet.
Author speaks) who has appointed to every man (...), his own proper and
peculiar kind of death, and without whose providence not a Leaf falls from the
Tree, so to dispose of this Godly man's death, that as a Pilgrim here on earth,
he must die in an Inn: He was carried thence by Coach to his Town of Barley,
where he was Preacher, and there buried: He fell sick not far from home, yet
recovered not to go alive thither. But Epaphroditus, who fell sick at Rome
above six hundred miles from Philippi, through God's mercy was restored to
health, and returned to his People, who were not a little comforted at the
sight of him.

Now that God does sometimes deliver his, when nigh unto death, is clear; 1.
From Scripture Texts; see 1 Samuel 2, 6. so Deuteronomy. 32.39. so Job 5.18, 19. Eliphaz
speaking of God, says, He makes sore, and binds up; he wounds, and his
hands make whole. He shall deliver thee in six troubles; yea, in seven there
shall no evil touch thee. So says David, Psalm 34.19. Many are the afflictions
of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all. So Psalm. 68.20.
He that is our God, is the God of Salvation; (...) Ad salutes Bythner.
according to the Original it is Salvations, in the plural Number, because he
delivers several ways, and at several times, and is the God of all manner of
Salvation, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal; and then it follows, (...) Exitus,
i e Domini est educere a morte. Bythner. in locum.
Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death: in most deadly dangers he
oft-times sends in help. 2. The Point is clear by Scripture-Examples. God
recovered Hezekiah who was deadly sick, 1 King. 20.1.5. So he did Job, yea and
David often, insomuch that he describes God by this Periphrasis, Psalm. 9.13. Thou
that liftest me up from the gates of death: That is, from the power of death. (
E portis mortis, i. e. e potestate mortis, sumiter enim porta in Scripturis pro
magistratu and potestate, quod in portis solerent exerceri judicia. Muscul.
Muscul. in Psul. 9.13.
in loc.). So Psalm. 116.6. I was brought low and he helped me. So God delivered
Paul from deadly dangers, as you may gather from 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. Thus it was
with Epaphroditus in my Text, who being sick, nigh unto death, the Lord had
mercy on him. (Significat quod attinebat naturae vires actum fuisse de vita
illius, ideoque quod sanitate restitutus erat, singulari fuisse open ac virtute
Dei factum. Muscul. Muscul. in Phil 2.27. Vbi humanum deficit ibi incipit
divinum auxiliums
) Many thousands in this Nation, who have been sick even unto death, both in
the apprehension of themselves and others, have been raised up again by God, as
so many Acts and Monuments of his mercy.

I therefore cease any farther proof of this known Point, and shall proceed to
give you the reasons of it. And here, for your profit, I will take the
Proposition into two parts, and accordingly to each give in the Reasons of the
Point, and then I shall put them together again, and make application of the
whole.

The first part is this, God is the Deliverer of his People: And the chief
Reasons why he does deliver them, I conceive to be these three.

1. Because he is related to them, and they to him.
He is their Husband, Head, King, Master, Father, etc. and they are his
peculiar People, his Spouse, Members, Subjects, Servants, Children, and what
not, that speak; them a People near and dear unto him. Surely then, as Samuel
said, 1 Samuel 12.22. The Lord will not forsake his People for his great Names
sake; because it has pleased the Lord to make you his People.

2. Because of his Promises of deliverance which he has made to them.
See Psalm. 41.3. Psalm. 50.15. Isa. 41.10. 1 Cor. 10.13. These are precious
Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. which God has given to his People, and in Christ they
are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. that is, They are certain things, and shall be
effected in his due time; if God see that the accomplishment of them make for
his Glory and his Peoples good. Psalm. 84.11. For he is faithful that has
promised, Heb. 10.23.

3. And lastly, Because he would have his People delivered to praise him.
See Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. God delivers them that they might
glorify him with their lips and with their lives. Of which you shall hear more
hereafter.

The second part is this, God suffers his People to be very sick, before he
has mercy on them, or sends in deliverance. And this I conceive he does
likewise for three Reasons.

1. Because God is delighted with his Peoples Prayers, he loves to hear often
from them.
And they pray most frequently and fervently when they are in greatest danger,
and outward means seem to fail. So the Church, Psalm. 108.12. Give us help from
trouble, for vain is the help of man. So the Disciples came to Christ in a
great tempest, and awoke him, saying, Lord save us, we perish, Matthew. 8.24, 25.
So we read, Acts 12.5. how Prayer was made, without ceasing, of the Church unto
God for Peter when in most deadly danger. Christ says to the Spouse, Cant.
2.14. -- Let me hear thy Voice, for sweet is thy Voice. Their Voice is sweet at
all times, but as Music, it is most pleasant, proceeding from persons upon the
Waters of affliction. God loves (as one says) to see his People in a praying
posture, and to hear them in a weeping tune, Jer. 31.9. As therefore we deal
with Musicians, deferring their pay, that they may play the more: So God deals
with his People, (sic parvis componere magna --) deferring their deliverance,
that they may pray the more earnestly unto him.

2. Because by this means deliverance will be more prized when it comes.
We usually say, Lightly come, lighty go, That which is soon got, is soon
forgot, (...) (...), difficilia quae pulchra, Things got with difficulty are
most prized. How welcome was Isaac to Abraham and Sarah! Jacob and Esau, to
Isaac and Rebekah! Joseph to Jacob and Rachel! Samuel to Hannah! How were these
Children prized by their Parents, whom God gave to them after abundance of
prayer and waiting? How welcome was the Dove to Noah when she returned with an
Olive Leaf in her mouth, in token that the Waters were abated, which thing he
desired to see, Genesis 8.8, 11. So David said of the Sword of Goliath, 1 Samuel
21.9. There is none like that, because it was got with difficulty, and might
serve to mind him of God's gracious assistance, and to encourage his Faith in
the like future dangers. So Psalm. 126. we find the Church joyfully celebrating
their incredible return out of captivity. This deliverance out of sickness is
most prized, when it is a fruit of Prayer, and unexpectedly comes in when all
hopes of recovery seem to fail.

3. And lastly, Because by this means God gets most glory.
Zelatur Deus propter gloriam; God will not part with his Glory, This he will
not give to another. He therefore helps not many times till persons be deadly
sick, that so they might see, Digitum Dei, the Finger of God in their
deliverance, and give him the sole praise of all; As Christ said of Lazarus's
sickness, It was for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby, John 11.4. As Aquinas Aquin. in Phil. 2.27.
said here of Epaphroditus's sickness, Erat supra judicium medicorum, non autem
supra providentiam divinam, sed ad honorem Dei. Gods glory appears in
recovering him, whom Physicians and Friends have given over for a dead man. God
at such a time of extremity has an opportunity of showing forth those three
great Attributes, (which are as Pearls of his Crown) Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness. It is called the Veil of Christ's flesh, Heb. 10.20. For as the Veil
of the Temple did hide the Holy of Holies, so Christ's humane Nature did hide
and obscure the Glory of the Divine, so that but little in comparison appeared.
Truly my Beloved, in a deliverance where there is much of flesh or humane
assistance, there is but little Divine Glory taken notice of: but when humane
helps fail, then God's Glory is most seen in a deliverance.

To shut up this, as the Limner lays the Foundation of every curious Picture
in dark Groundwork to set it off: So God lays the Groundwork of a merciful
deliverance in sad distresses, that his glory may the more appear.

Having thus taken the parts asunder, I should put them together again
(according to my promise) and make some application of the whole: which I
intend to do, but give me leave first to answer a Scruple or Question which may
hence arise, and here most fitly receive an answer.

Quest. Why did not the Apostle cure Epaphroditus, seeing he had the gift of
Miracles as well as others? Mat. 10.8. Do we not read how he cured a Cripple
from his Mothers Womb, Acts 14.8. How he cast out a spirit of Divination, Acts
16.16. How he restored to life Eutychus, who falling asleep, as Paul was long
preaching, fell down dead from the third Loft, (which Example should awaken all
Church-sleepers): So we read he cured the Father of Publius, who lay sick of a
Fever and Bloody Flux; and many that were in the Island came and were healed
by him, Acts 28.8, 9. Why did he not then cure Epaphroditus, whom he so dearly
affected, and whose recovery he so much desired?

Piscator Piscat. in Phil. 2.27.
says, Propria virtute ac pro suo arbitrio) by their own power, and at their
own pleasure: but only when there was a necessity for Conversion or Conviction
of Unbelievers, then only the Holy Ghost enabled them to do it, see Acts 3.12.
so Acts 9.41, 42. Act. 4.4.
Peter's restoring Dorcas to life, (as well as healing the Cripple) converted
many to the Faith. Paul though sometimes he wrought Miracles, yet he was not
the Author, but Instrument in the Miracles he wrought, acting only when, how,
where, and on whom the Spirit of God pleased. Paul could not cure Epaphroditus,
no nor Trophimus, 2 Timothy 4.20. nor Timothy neither; but only Consilio
medicinae, says Aquinas, Aquinas in 1 Timothy 5.23.
per quod datur intelligi quod non ad omnes utebatur miraculis sed quando
expediebat propter fidem. The reason then why the Apostle did not miraculously
cure his beloved Epaphroditus, was because he could not, the Holy Ghost not
exciting him thereto.

Use and Application.
1. By way of comfort.
This Text affords abundance of comfort to several persons in several cases.

1. This Consideration affords comfort to God's Servants under sickness and
deadly dangers. See that former-quoted place, Psalm. 68.20. He that is our God,
is the God of Salvation; and to God the Lord belongs the issues from death.
This God, whom the Righteous are related to, and have an interest in, can help
in greatest straits, and send in deliverance when they are nigh unto death, and
stand in most need of help. That God that kept Moses's Bush burning, yet it was
not consumed, Exodus 3.2. and preserved Noah's Ark upon the Waters from
perishing in the Waters, This God can preserve his People under sickness and
their saddest trials, and in his due time give them an happy issue out of all
afflictions. See what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart
fails; but God is the strength of my heart, (or according to Orig. The Rock
of my heart; or according to Septuag. (...), The God of mine heart) and my
portion for ever. When the Godly Man's flesh fails, health declines, strength
is weakened, then is God ready to support him under sickness, and to ease him of
his pains, either by restoring him to health, or by taking him out of the
miseries of this sinful World by death. So that if we belong to God, as
Bullinger Bulling in phil. 2.27.
says, (Optime nobiscum agitur, sive revalescamus sive moriamur) it will go
well with us, whether we live or die.

2. This Consideration affords comfort, not only to believers 'midst personal
sickness, but likewise to God's Church 'midst national calamities. Though
Church and State lie as it were bedridden, languishing unto Death under Schism
and Division, Sin and Error, and other national Calamities: Yet let us not
despair of help, for he that cured Epaphroditus here, who was sick nigh unto
death, can help us even in this extremity. See Ezekiel. 37.11, 12, 13. God like a
skilful Bone-setter or Chyrurgeon can bind up the breach of his People, and
heal the stroke of their Wound, as the expression is, Isa. 30.26. God has
promised to heal, in case we return unto him by prayer and unfeigned
repentance, Isa. 19.22. so Jer. 33.6. None indeed can heal us but he, Hos.
5.13. All others, except God be of the Quorum, are Physicians of no value; Let
us then, as it is Hos. 6.1. Come and return unto the Lord, for he has torn,
and he will heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

Una eademque manus vulnus opemque feret. 3. This consideration may afford
comfort to such as are spiritually sick, and in their apprehensions nigh unto
eternal death and destruction. That God that raised Epaphroditus, who was
deadly sick in body, can cure thy Soul mortally wounded with sin: Let such as
are wounded in conscience, consider this, Though your wounds have been grievous
and of a long standing, yet they exceed not the skill and power of God, the
spiritual Physician. God can, yea and will cure you, if you turn to him and
rely upon him, Take my word for it. Nay it is not only mine but God's Word, or
I should be loath to speak it in this place. See Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, Ezekiel. 18.27.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. So
Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me (says Christ) all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Come to Christ and welcome; he keeps open
house to all comers.

4. And lastly, Gods dear People that by their sinning have blurred their
evidences for Heaven, and fallen from some degrees of Grace and Spiritual
Comfort, as David did, Psalm. 51.8, 12. Let them not despair of recovery. That
God that restored Epaphroditus's sick body to its pristine health, Ps. 147.3.
can restore thy soul to spiritual health, peace, and comfort. Thus he dealt by
David, Psalm. 23.3. He restores my soul. He is the Creator of Peace and
Comfort, Isa. 45.7. so Isa. 57.17, 18, 19. and has promised in his due time,
to speak peace unto his People, and to his Saints, but let them not turn again
to folly, Psalm. 85.8. I end this with that of the Evangelical Prophet, Isa.
50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
Servant, that walks in darkness and has no light? (a Child of light it seems
may walk in darkness, i. e. have little or no comfort for the present, yet) let
him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Let him still wait on
God prayingly, believingly, obediently, etc. in God's due time, which is ever
best, comfort will come.

And so much for this Use by way of comfort.

2. By way of instruction.
We learn, if God cure the body of sickness as he did Epaphroditus here, surely
it is he that cures the Soul of sin, which is a far harder work. God upon the
account of Christ, (who as at this time came into the World to undertake for
us) heals our souls of sin, by applying Christ's perfect Righteousness to the
soul, he removes the guilt; and by his blessed Spirit implanting in the soul
the Seeds of Divine Grace, he heals it of the filth of sin. Psalm. 103.3. Who
pardons all thine Iniquities; who heals all thy Diseases. God alone, that
cures the body of its distempers, heals the soul of its spiritual maladies. The
Scribes and Pharisees acknowledged as much, Luke 5.21. The Pope cannot pardon
sins. The Ministers of the Church of England absolve no otherwise then
(declarative) as the Ambassadors of Christ. God does it (autoritative) the
authority is wholly his. We do but pronounce the Pardon, which before we speak,
is really done in Heaven to sincere Penitents.

3. And lastly, By way of Exhortation.
1. To all in general; Let us be exhorted to go to God for help in time of
sickness. It was he that cured Epaphroditus when sick nigh unto death. Too too
blame are they who in sickness and such like straits consult Astrologers,
Witches, Devils, and I know not whom for help. It was an inexcusable sin in
Ahaziah King of Israel, who in his sickness sought to Baalzebub the Godd of
Ekron for recovery of his health; and for so doing, God threatened him (and
accordingly brought it to pass) that he should not come down from his sickbed,
but should surely die. Read the passage in 2 King. 1.2, etc. What good got Saul
by consulting the Witch of Endor? Surely the Wounds of God are rather to be
chosen than the Devils Plasters. Indeed their best cures are deadly wounds:
For if the mortal body should be restored by such unlawful means; yet the
immortal soul, which is the far better part, is thereby much endangered. Habes
hoc loco qui omnes depollit morbos. Bull in Phil. 2.27.
O do not go about indirectly to wind your selves out of trouble: you have a
God to repair unto, who can help at all straits, and at every turn; your head
cannot ache without his leave, nor leave aching without his help.

Quest. But what, would you have us to use no outward means, to take no
Medicines, to consult no Physicians?



Ovid. Principiis obsta.
Pharmaca nascenti sunt adhibenda malo. Our Savior says, Mat. 9.12. The whole
need not the Physician, but they that are sick. The sick then do need him, and
ought to seek unto him. So we read Luke 8.43. of a woman that had an issue of
blood twelve years, and had spent all her Living upon Physicians, neither could
be healed of any. Yet our Savior did not blame her for seeking to them for
help, nor the Physicians for taking their Fees, though they did her no good,
for she rather grew worse, says another Evangelist, Mark 5.26. Yet considering
that life is so great a mercy (as you heard in the morning) methinks Physicians
should not be too exacting, but do something for the poorer sort of people for
charity-sake, and for conscience sake. (I hope Physicians will pardon me this
short digression, for I am pleading for them). Asa is not blamed for seeking
unto Physicians, but because he sought to them chiefly* neglecting God, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. And in the very next verse you read of his death, verse. 13. Means
never help without God, Jer. 46.11. nor does God now-adayes usually help
without means. God requires we should use means, as a learned Mr. Corbet in
Sermon. on 1 Cor. 1.27.
Divine says, Ex indulgentia non ex indigentia, To honor us, not to help him.
The same reasons which moved God to make the Creatures, move him still to use
them; not necessity and want of power, but love and goodness.

If God have decreed I shall recover, I shall recover, though I use no means.

Non sequitur. It does not follow, that if God have decreed you shall recover,
you shall recover without using means. You may as well say, If God have decreed
I shall have a Crop of Corn this ensuing year, I shall have it without
Ploughing and Sowing; If God have decreed I shall come to my journeys end, I
shall come thither, though I sit still, or walk a contrary way. It is a known
rule, Praedestinatus ad finem, ad media etiam praedestinatus; God has
appointed means in order to the end; and what God has joined together, let no
man put asunder: He may justly lose the fruit of an happy end, that neglects
the use of lawful means. God had promised to add fifteen years to Hezekiah's
life, Isa. 38. and Hezekiah was assured of it by a certain sign from the Lord,
yet he must take a lump of Figs and lay it for a Plaster upon the Bile, verse.
21. God assured Paul in that great tempest, that there should be no loss of any
man's life among them, but of the Ship, Acts 27.22, 23, 24. and St. Paul himself
believed as much, verse. 25. yet tells them, verse. 31. Except these abide in the
Ship, ye cannot be saved.

But cannot God cure, if he will, without means, or by weak and improbable
means?

Moses and Elias forty days without food; he made Clay and Spittle, which one
would think should put out sight, a means to recover it, John 9.6, 7. He so
wrought that the very shadow of Peter should heal multitudes of all Diseases,
Acts 5.15. God's hand is not now shortened: nor does the ancient of days, like
an old man, grow weak and infirm in the latter end of the World. What he has
done he can still do, if it please him, Psalm. 115.3. But we are not to expect,
now-adayes, God's miraculous working. A potentia Dei ad actum non valet
consequentia nisi etiam accedat voluntas Dei. God commonly sets down a course
of means which he will not alter; and then (as one says) it concerns us to
answer providence with industry, and to put forth our strength, and use such
means as God vouchsafes. We are now to expect a concourse of second causes,
which in their Sphere may derive to every effect a proper virtue, through God's
ordinary blessing.

Best Physicians kill more than they cure. Turba medicorum Cesarem perdidit.



-- Sero Medicina paratur. Hopes of outwrestling the Distemper, fear of
expenses, or some prejudice against Physicians, make many people to delay
making application to them. Or it may be they have been tampering with some
Quacksalvers or Mountebanks, for cheapness, (and indeed these may afford their
Physic for little, for it is little worth, and their knowledge cost them
little, having never seen the Universities, except in some journey) who not
understanding the nature of the Distemper, apply wrong means, so that the
Patients growing worse, betake themselves to a more learned man; but it is too
late for him to cure them, so that men dying in his hand, he shall be sure to
have his back sadled with illfavoured language, though he deserves it not. Have
recourse then betimes to learned and experienced Doctors in that Art for the
cure of your Distempers: Thousands in this Nation, as well as my self, can tell
you experimentally of the good service done this way.



Isaac said, I know not the day of my death, Genesis 27.2. Christ told the
Apostles, Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which
the Father has put in his own power. God makes none of his Privy Council
herein. What says Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things (such as this is) belong
unto the Lord our God; but revealed things to us, etc. Let us do our duty in
consulting Physicians, and then let God do his pleasure. Let us use means, and
leave the success to God.

Means then are to be used, Physicians to be consulted, but God is principally
to be eyed as the best Physician, for so indeed he is. And that you may find
him ready to help you in your sickness, put these following Directions into
practice.

1. Pray, and get others to pray for thee.
Thus did David in sickness and the like straits, as you may see Psalm. 6.2, 3,
4, 5. so Psalm. 25. 16, 17, 18. so Psalm. 39.10. The Title of the 142 Psalm is,
Maschil of David; a Prayer when he was in the Cave. When thou art pursued with
some violent Distemper, and confined to a sickbed, as to a Cave, then make thy
supplication unto God, as David did. I doubt not, as Musculus Musculus in Ps.
6.2.
says, but David in sickness made use of Medicines, but he prays to God to
bless those outward means, as knowing (Nihil est omnis Medicorum ars and opera,
cura and diligentia nisi Deus virtute sua det sanandi efficaciam) that the
Prescriptions and diligence of best Physicians, are of no worth and efficacy
without God. David thus praying unto God, was healed by him, Psalm. 30.2, 3. O
Lord my God, I cried unto thee and thou have healed me. So Psalm. 116.3, 4, 6,
8. compared. So Hezekiah by prayer unto God, had his deadly sickness removed,
and life prolonged, Isa. 38.2. Hezekiah having received a message of death,
turned his face toward the Wall and prayed to the Lord. But why toward the
Wall? either because by this means he withdrew himself from company, and his
eyes from such objects as might distract and disturb his devotions; or as
others say, Because there was but one single Wall between the Bed of the Kings
of Judea and the Altar of God, See Caussin's Holy Court, p. 1
(Juxta parietum Templi Solomon extruxit palatium) and they used to pray with
their faces toward the Temple, (1 King. 8.35, 48. Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 5.6.).
Hezekiah thus turning himself toward the Wall over against the Temple, and
praying fervently to God, was healed, as you may see verse. 5. Prayer is that
which God directs his People unto in sickness and such like straits. Psalm.
50.15: Call upon me in time of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Job 33.26. He
shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him. So Jam. 5.13. Is any
man afflicted? let him pray.

Quest. But if God send sickness, and for good ends unto his Children, is it
not a sin in them to pray God to remove it, and to heal their bodily Distempers?

(Deus hoc carni naturaliter dedit ut sanitatem, Musculus in Ps. 6.2. ubi plura.
i. e. conservationem sui cupide petat. -- Piis hanc naturam fides, non adimit
sed dirigit.) So then God allows us to pray to him for health, so we do it with
submission to the good Will of God, (as Christ prayed three times to his Father
in his agony, Mat. 26.39. O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass
from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will) and with a resolution
to serve him better if he spare us. Pray then that God would be pleased to have
mercy upon you in your sickness, and to ease you of your pains, and restore you
to health, and bless the means you use in order thereunto, if it be his blessed
will. And as you ought to pray your selves, so you should get others (Ministers
and good People) to pray for you, see James 5.14, 15, 16. God hears the prayers
of his People, and oft-times for their sakes lengtheneth the life and outward
prosperity of the wicked. God spared Zoar at the request of Lot, Genesis 19.20,
21, 22. Those that sailed with St. Paul in the Ship, had their lives spared for
his sake, see Acts 27.24. for says the Angel of God to Paul, Lo, God has
given thee all them that sail with thee, (Orig. (...), will give thee as a
favor) no less then two hundred threescore and fifteen Souls, verse. 37. were
saved in extremity of danger for Paul's sake, and at his request. Get then
others, especially the Godly, who are God's Favorites to pray for thee. No
doubt but Paul was a constant Solicitor at the Throne of Grace in the behalf
of Epaphroditus, who lay sick nigh unto death, and God had mercy on him.

2. Rely confidently upon God.
Though we make use of the Physicians Directions, yet we must not trust in them
but in God: for means and second causes work by his continual influences, and
receive their ends from his eternal order. As the Psalmist says, Psalm. 127.1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. So except
the Lord cooperate, means and second causes, which receive their being and
efficacy from God, are vain and ineffectual. Faith was required in all those
under the Gospel whom Christ cured, Mat. 9.2. Luke 8 48. As we must not neglect
means, so neither must we trust in them, nor rely upon them; which if we do,
it is the ready way to render them useless, see Jer. 17.5, 6, 7, 8. He that
puts his trust in the Lord, says the wise Man, Prove. 28.25. shall be made fat,
q. d. shall be lusty and well. Rely then upon God's mercy for deliverance. He
that highly esteems of God, is high in Gods esteem.

3. Be merciful your selves to others in misery, if you would find mercy from
God when you are in misery.
Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. Blessed is the man that considers the poor; the Lord will
deliver him in time of trouble: the Lord will preserve him and keep him alive.
-- The Lord will strengthen him on the bed of languishing; thou will make all
his bed in his sickness. Prove. 11.25.
See likewise Isa. 58.6, 7, 8. After he had spoken of works of charity, he
adds, Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall
spring forth speedily. So Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy. Epaphroditus went a long and perilous voyage to minister to the
Apostles wants, Phil. 2.25, 30. and when he was sick, nigh unto death, God had
mercy on him.

4. Lastly, Be deeply humbled for your sins.
This humiliation consists in confessing your sins with grief of heart, and
putting away the sins you have lamented; and if we do thus, we shall find mercy
in sickness. David in sickness confessed and lamented his sins with a sorrowful
heart, as you may read Psalm. 32.4, 5. and 38.3, 4, 5, 18. so Psalm. 41.4. Heal
my Soul, says David under sickness, for I have sinned against thee. What a
plea is this? Heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee. Does God delight in
men's sins? Is he thereby allured to do them good? One would think as Musculus
Muscul. in Psalm. 41.4.
says, Magis faceret ad impedimentum quam ad causam impetrandae sanitatis;
this should be rather an hindrance then furtherance to his cure: But the truth
is, God, who loves not sin, yet loves to see sinners confess and bewail their
sins; and if we do so, and withal forsake them, we shall find mercy in
sickness as David did; for Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sin shall not
prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. If sickness
be epidemical, Exodus 23.25. Deuteronomy. 7.12, 15.
a general humiliation is a means to remove it, Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. so 2 Chronicles. 3.14. God sends sickness for sin; if sin be removed, he will remove his
stroke: but he will not take off the Plaster (so careful he is) till the Wound
be thoroughly cured, and corruption purged out. Sins are as so many Scotches in
the way that hinder the Chariot Wheels of a Deliverance from moving swiftly
toward us; if these sins were removed, deliverance would come on apace. When
God then casts thee upon a sickbed, commune with thine own heart, and let thy
spirit make diligent search, Psalm. 77.6. Conscience at such a time, that bosom
Preacher (if God in justice has not silenced it for willful disobedience) will
preach to thee thy particular sins. Affliction oft-times awakens a drowsy
Conscience. Particular straits many times bring particular sins to remembrance,
which have been long forgotten, as you may see Genesis 42.21. so Job 36.8, 9, 10.
Hearken then to the voice of Conscience, which may bring to mind thy particular
sins, and seriously meditate upon the forementioned sins that tend to the
impairing of health; and with Job, in sickness and sores, pray to God to show
thee wherefore he contendeth with thee, Job 10.2. And again says he, Job
13.23. Make me to know my transgression and my sin. And as Elibu speaks, Job
34.31. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do
no more. Having thus found out thy sins, confess them with grief of heart, and
deal with them, (as the Mariners dealt by Jonah, Jon. 1.15.) cast them
overboard, forsake them utterly so the storm may cease. If we thus humble our
selves under the mighty hand of God, he will exalt us in due time, 1 Pet. 5.6.
and raise us up from beds of languishment, (if he see it best for us) as he did
Epaphroditus here, who was sick, nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him.

And so much for the first branch of this Use of Exhortation. I come now to the
second branch, and it is a word of Exhortation to such as have been sick, and
God in mercy has restored to health. Let them be exhorted to take forth these
following Lessons.

1. Live in constant expectation of death, and preparation for death. Many are
too too confident of health after sickness, whereas it is ordinary for poor man
to recover of one Distemper, and fall irrecoverably into the same again, or
some other. Non est sic illius misertus Deus ut ab hoc mortis debito in
posterum prorsus esset liberatus. Muscul. Muscul. in Phil. 2.27:
God was not so merciful unto Epaphroditus as that he should never die. The
best of men, one time or other, how soon God knows, must pay the debt to
extorting Nature, Ps. 89.48. The Apostle speaks of the dissolution of the
earthly house of this Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1. ((...) de re peritura) as of a
thing that will shortly perish. So speaks St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.14. I must
shortly put off this my Tabernacle. And truly after sickness we may rationally
conclude, That the house cannot stand long that has been so terribly shaken.
Let us then, though reprieved for the present, expect death, and speedily
prepare our selves for it: Eccl. 9.10. Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it
with all thy might. Let us bring our selves daily to a strict scrutiny, set
soul and house in order, and speedily dress our selves for immortality; for we
see, when sickness comes, we have work enough to wrestle with the Distemper. Oh
my beloved, Put not off soul-concerns till old age or sickness; this is to lay
the greatest burden upon the weakest horse. Repentance is too great a task to
be rightly performed upon a sickbed, and usually like the party, it is at best
but weak and sickly. Do not we who have been sick know by experience how unfit
we are for any work at such a time, especially for this great work of
repentance, which indeed should be an entire act of the whole life? And
therefore,

2. Live circumspectly. Most men in sickness are seemingly devout, and
therefore the Holy Ghost sets a brand upon Ahaz, who in the time of distress
did trespass yet more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This is that King Ahaz;
he points at him as a monster of mankind: for men usually, during the
continuance of distress, do seek unto the Lord, Hos. 5.15. and bewail their
sins and promise fair, as Pharaoh, Ahab, and others; but when the force of his
hand is removed, they return again to their old bias, they are as bad, if not
worse then ever; like a dunghill, the more the Sun of Mercy shines upon them,
the more they stink and putrify in all sin. See an unworthy carriage in
Hezekiah, though for the main a good man, 2 Chronicles. 32.24. there you read of his
recovery from deadly sickness; and verse. 25. But Hezekiah rendered not again
according to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up. His heart
was not lift up in the ways of God (as it is said of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles.
17.6.) but in sinful ways, as pride, self-conceit, etc. Therefore there was
wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem; and this wrath had broken forth
upon them, had they not humbled themselves, and with tears of contrition
quenched those flames, as you read v. 26. The Devil himself (as the story goes)
when he was sick would be holy and turn Monk, but when he was recovered, he was
as much a Devil as before.

Dr. Vanes Wisdom and Innocence; p. 119.
Aegrotat Demon, Monachus tunc esse volebat;
Convaluit Demon, Demon ut ante fuit.
The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be;
The Devil was well, the Devil a Monk was he.
But, O my Friends, let us labor to preserve that gracious frame that was in
us in our sickness. If we be not careful, either wicked Company, or the cares
of this World, will soon make us lukewarm or key-cold. Methinks the mercy of
God in recovering us, should mightily affect us. We read 1 Samuel 24.16, 17, 18.
how David got Saul at an advantage, and spared him when he had (...).
power to destroy him, whereupon Saul lift up his voice and wept; God that cast
us on a sickbed, might justly have cast us thence into Hell. He spared us when
he might have destroyed us; O let it grieve us at the heart that ever we
offended so good a God: And as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 6.15. Shall I take
the Members of Christ, and make them Members of an Harlot? God forbid. So let
every one which God has raised up again, say, Shall I take the members of my
body, which God has delivered from grievous pains, and employ them in sin and
wickedness? God forbid I should be so vile a wretch. Methinks the remembrance
of the great pain that we underwent in sickness, should humble us for our
miscarriages all the days of our life after; Lam. 3.19, 20. Remembering my
affliction and my misery, the Wormwood and the Gall; my soul has them still in
remembrance, and is humbled in me. Besides, are not the vows of God upon us, as
David speaks Psalm. 56.12? Sacramental Vows, Personal Vows; Did we not promise
and vow, That if God restored us, we would be more holy and strict then ever?
It is best for us to pay our Vows, Deuteronomy. 23.21. Eccl. 5.4, 5. we are perjured
persons and truce breakers if we do not. Defer not to put into action what
God's Spirit in sickness put into intention. Do as David did, when he was
brought low God helped him, Psalm. 116.6. God delivered his soul from death, v.
8. See his resolution, v. 9. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the
living. He devoted himself to God's Service, v. 16. Truly, O Lord, I am thy
Servant, I am thy Servant: And he likewise resolved to pay his Vows, v. 14. so
v. 18. so likewise Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will go into thine house with
burnt-offerings: I will pay thee my Vows, which my lips have uttered, and my
mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble. Let health, strength, life, soul, and
body, the products of Gods mercy be presented to his service, Romans 12.1. I end
this with that advice which Christ gave to one whom he cured, John 5.14.
Behold, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

3. Apply your selves to God in future straits; pray unto him, trust in him.
Thus did David, Psalm. 116.2. Because he has inclined his ear unto me,
therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. So v. 17. I will call upon
the Name of the Lord. So Ps. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I will put my trust
in thee; for v. 13. Thou have delivered my soul from death. -- So Ps. 63.7.
Thou have been my help; therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.
See 1 Samuel 17.37. so 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. We had the sentence of death (says the
Apostle) in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God
which raised the dead; who delivered us from so great a death, and does
deliver; in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. It is good
Scripture-logick (as Mr. Reyners Praecepts, p. 266.
one says) to draw conclusions of confidence from premises of experience. Such
then whom God has restored to health, when God casts them again into the
Prison of a sickbed, let them be still Prisoners of Hope, as the expression
is, Zach. 9.12. Suffer not Faith to flag, and Hope to hang wing. Lam. 3.26. It
is good that a man should both hope and patiently wait for the salvation of the
Lord.

4. Sympathize with others that are in misery. If God have had mercy on thee,
go thou and have mercy on others. Be not straightened in your bowels, as some in
the Church of Corinth were, 2 Cor. 6.12. Oh pity and pray for such as are in
sickness and misery, and do them all offices of love and kindness that may be.
Not only God calls for this, but the Law of friendship calls for it; Job 6.14.
To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend. But yet Job's
friends dealt very unfriendly with him, as you may see v. 15. whom he compares
to a Brook, which in open weather, when people have least need of water,
promises refreshment, but in cold weather is frozen up, and in hot weather is
become dry; so that the weary Travelers fall short of their expectation: So
you may find him complaining how he was forsaken of all Relations, Job 19.2,
etc. insomuch that he begs their pity upon the account of friendship, v. 21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the hand of God has
touched me: here is another Argument, for if you touch or strike upon the
string of an Instrument, other strings move too: When God strikes another with
sickness, we our selves should be moved with compassion toward them; the
sicknesses and miseries of others call for your help; Jos. 10.6. Acts 16.9. As
the Father said of Lazarus's sores, Quot ulcera tot ora, so many sores, so many
mouths calling for the rich man's help. Yea, though they be their enemies, you
should pity them as David did, Psalm. 35.11, 12, 13, 14. Though compassion begin
at the heart, yet it should proceed to the hand and mouth; help them with your
counsels and prayers, and purses too. Sic men's per compassionem doleat ut larga
manus affectum doloris ostendat. What the good Samaritan did, Luke 10.30, etc.
By which passage our Savior would teach us to have pity on those, whether
friends or enemies, acquaintance or strangers that stand in need of our help,
v. 37. Go thou and do likewise. The Greek word (...), that signifies Alms,
comes from (...), that signifies Pity: Alms should be a fruit of pity, 1 John
3.17. If you who have known what it is to lie under sickness do not pity such
folk, who should? if you do not, who will?

5. Lastly, Give God the sole praise of all; let him have the glory of the
cure, for to him it belongs, and it is a piece of sacrilege to rob God of his
due. We should not give, nor should any man take to himself the glory of a
cure. Neither Peter nor John, Act. 3.12. Paul nor Barnabas, Act. 14.11, etc.
durst take to themselves the glory of a cure. Every Physician should say as the
King of Israel in another case said to the Woman crying out to him for help, 2
King. 6.26, 27. If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? The
best Physicians can do nothing without Gods assistance: Simples are but simple
things without the blessing of God upon them. Who put medicinal qualities into
Drugs, but the God of Nature? Whence had the Physician his skill to find out
the quality of the Distemper, and apply suitable means but from the God of
Wisdom, Jam. 1.5? Christ said, Mat. 4.4. Man lives not by bread alone, etc. Nor
is man recovered by Physic alone without Gods blessing. Ps. 107.18, 19, 20.
Their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they draw near to the gates of
death: then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he saves them out of
their distress: he sent his Word and healed them, and delivered them from their
destructions. It follows, v. 21. O that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!

Quest. But may we not thank our Physician?

Genesis 40.23. compared with Genesis 41.9. It is one of the sins that makes the last
times so perilous, 2 Timothy 3.2. The Heathen thought you could not give a man a
more odious title then to call him ungrateful, (Ingratum si dixeris omnia) as
though it was a compendium of all vices; and indeed it is a decompounded sin.
Ahasuerus was too blame to forget loyal-hearted Mordecai so long, (who had been
a means to save his life) till it was almost too late to remember him; He was
to be commended for conferring civil dignities upon him afterward, as you read
he did Esth. 6. Let such as are unthankful to Physicians, and to such as are a
means to save their lives from destruction, go to School to those Barbarians,
Acts 28.8, 9, 10. from whom they may learn lessons of Civility; They honored
Saint Paul (who healed many amongst them of many Diseases) with many honors;
and when he with the rest of his company departed, they laded them with such
things as were necessary. Well then, you may and ought to thank them as
Instruments, but remember that God is the supreme efficient. They are to be
rewarded and respected for their pains and care with us, but God alone is to be
praised for the Cure wrought upon us: God is the Fountain, they are but as
Pipes to convey God's mercies to us. Let us then give God the praise of all, as
the Angels sung, Gloria in Excelsis, Glory be to God on high, Luke 2.14. And as
Christ has taught us, Mat. 6.13. For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and
the Glory, for ever, Amen. That Woman in the Gospel cured of the Distemper,
called by the Greeks (...), Glorified God, as you may read Luke 13.13. There
were ten Lepers that lift up their voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy
on us, Luke 17.13. Yet being cleansed, there was but one of them that turned
back, and with a loud voice glorified God, verse. 15. But Christ took notice of
their ingratitude, v. 17, 18. There was but one of ten that returned to give
thanks. It Is ten to one if God cure us but we prove ungrateful. Oh let us not
in sickness pray for mercy, and in health forget to return thanks for the
receipt of mercy. Non sonet illud tantum miserere Deus, sed sonet etiam laus and
gratianum actio pro accepta illius misericordia. Muscul. in Phil. 2.27.
David was much in praising God for delivering him from deadly dangers, as the
Psalms testify, Psalm. 30.1, 3, 4. and 86.12, 13. and 103.3. and 104.33. and
116.6, 12, 17. and 118.14. and 146. v. 1, 2. So Hezekiah being recovered, pens
a Song of Thanksgiving, Isa. 38.9, etc. Oh my beloved extraordinary mercies
call for more then ordinary thanks, Exodus 12.42. Communicate your experiences,
Psalm 66.16. Tell others of the cures God has wrought, Joh. 5.15. Mar. 5.19.
The tongue is called our glory, Psalm. 16.9. Let your glory sing praise to God,
and not be silent, Psalm. 30.12. Wherein is your tongue a glory, if not in
setting forth the glory of God? I end all with that Doxology of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God,
be honor and glory for ever and ever* Amen.

(...). FINIS.

