AN ABSTRACT OF SEVERAL LETTERS from Hull, York, and Beverly, of his MAJESTY'S
proceedings.

As also the carriage and behavior of the Cavaliers, with the number of those
that were slain and taken prisoners by Sir John Hotham.

Whereunto is added, A true Relation of the provision in HULL.

LONDON: Printed for Ben. Allen in Pope's Head Alley. August the second. 1642.

An Abtract of several Letters from Hull, York, and Beverly.
SIR,
MY love and respect unto you. I have collected some material passages as I
have writ you before, Captain Piggot has redeemed his credit, and took a Bark
with 3 great guns, also many Musketeers which fled ashore; and now the said
Captain and 2 other ships lies upon Linconshire shore side, so that no
Fortifications can be made there as has been attempted, to hinder passage up
to Hull. And as I have writ you, we have taken many Cavaliers and brave horses,
and some money, we took one horse worth an 100. l. Our townsmen stand all
bravely to their business; and those that were malignants before, are now
cured, and see their former error, and now strive who should be most forwards
and valiant: at first these things were something troublesome unto us, and most
to our women, but now God be praised, we have better spirits, and the truth is,
if Sir John would give way, we would sallie forth upon them, and (my life for
it) we remove the siege, for the Country have no mind to fight against us, and
the peoples hearts of the Country do much incline to us, and diverse would come
into our town to help us, if they could come safely; but if any come, they
sease upon their means. We have information of their proceedings every night;
they have robbed Mr Leggeds house, and taken away all he has; and they have
robbed Mr Hothams house, and have taken a brave horse from him which he is
troubled for, but he has a brave horse in liew of him* they have robbed Sir
John Hothams house which is about eight miles from our Town.

The Country people complain miserably that they enjoy nothing that they have,
that Candebed men and Cotingham men and Newland men they say they dare not be
seen to read a good book, but he that does not banish God and good men, he is
no company for the Cavaliers.

Not to omit the Cavaliers have planted 3 pieces of Ordnance at Hassel to
hinder any passage by water, and a Keel coming toward us, the principal
gunner shot at her and missed, he swore God damn him if he did not sink her
the next shot: and the Piece brake in pieces and killed the Gunner and some
others.

They have of late sent to Sir John for the horse and men he had taken, but he
returned answer that upon good and fair terms he would deliver them, that was
horse for horse, and man for man; and to begin, if they would be pleased to
send the horse that was taken from his son, he would send any horse for him.
And so Mr Hothams horse was sent him, and the brave horse I writ you of, was
sent in exchange.

There has since a Knight been sent from the King to Sir John, that offers a
general pardon if he will deliver the Town* But Sir John says he will not
betray the trust reposed in him: if the Parliament order him to deliver up the
Town he will deliver, otherwise he cannot.

We manned out of our Town some firelocks and some small Barks with 150
Musketeers, and they went to visit the Cavaliers at Berton, and at the landing
of our men the watch fled away, so they took away all the boats out of Harbor,
and what else was there, and came away.

Beverly, the 29 July. 1642.
Sir,
YOu being so affectionately compassionate with our friends in Hull, I could
not but ^cquaint with my first intelligence of their good success. This last
week they issued out upon their besiegers about some 500. which when they saw
they began to prepare themselves for an encounter, exhorting each other to
stand to it and look to themselves; The Country people bid the Cavaliers look
to themselves, these (say they) are our friends will not hurt us: which so
amazed the Cavaliers and desperadoes, that they thought their best weapons were
their heels, and fairly run away to Beverly. But for all their have, Sir John
took 30. and killed two. The King presently called a Council of War to treat
that he would pursue no further: who gave him answer he must do as he saw
convenient: then the King and Cavalry laying the fault upon the unskilfulnesse
of the Country Captains, thought to remedy the business by sending an Irish
old Captain to command them, who coming to the Soldiers with the Kings
pleasure that he should lead them, they asked whether he were a Yorkshire man,
and he saying no; they asked him what he had to do to command them, so beat him
and sent him back again. I should have writ you that in this skirmish they took
Captain Dacucoms Colors from him, and set them upon a Turret in the Town. This
is all, I rest,

Your affectionate friend.

WE have no good news save only good help comes from you: since a few men
came from London, Sir John has sent the Kings Army a Message that caused the
most of the Leaguer to run away, at least 21. slain, and 15. taken prisoners.
The Kings Magazine was fired at the same broyl, at a part of the Leaguer called
Ayuelebie, within 3. miles of Hull. This disaster happened to the great
amazement of the Cavaliers: yea they who were so confident of their victory
against Hull, who most bitterly cursed Sir John Hotham, and in conceit would
cut him in sippits, within 3. days these brave or rather base spirits are now
forced to say, that Sir John is worthy commendations for his fidelity.

York 29 July. 1642.
Postscript.
The King has beat up his Drums but none comes in here, he beats his Drums,
but not a man: and of late the King has sent for to view our Army, and that he
may have 80. Musketeers to guard his person, but it was answered they could
not go out of the City. You shall have enclosed the note of the provision in
Hull.

York 29. of July. 1642.
YOur Letter I received and books, for which I thank you: news here upon
Wednesday at night last, Sir John Hotham sent out 300. foot Soldiers and some
60. horse unto a place called Aulbe 3. miles of Hull, where Captain Dunkam, lay
with his Company, where Sir John Hothams men set on fire a barn wherein was
some gunpowder and other materials: this day Sir Henry Slingsbe took the view
of our Arms in the City both common and private, and desires 80. Musketeers
for the Kings guard: this night the Earl of Leister is come to Town with a
great Company, we live in great fears: and in this City many are grown
careless in the worship and service of God. The Lord in mercy think thoughs of
mercy to our Kingdom. The next Thursday the Gentry is to come in, and the
Papists to bring in their horses: but not to find themselves as is said. So
desiring to be remembered of you as is our duty one for another, will rest yours.

A true relation of that Provision in Hull most necessary.
Rye 14 thousand quarters, besides private provision.

Wheat 500. quarters, besides the Kings and private provision.

Beans, 7000. quarters at least, besides private provision.

Oats 7000. quarters, besides private.

Malt 200. quarters besides private provision.

Oatmeal 80. quarters, besides private.

Fish as much as will serve this seven years.

Wine 1000. Tun. Bear provision for 12. Months.

Water as much as is needful, one Well in twelve hours time sprung ten foot
water; also diverse Wels discovered that has not been used this 39. years, so
that there is no want of fresh water, not has there been the least complaint
as yet of one poor man, woman or child in the Town for want of provision; God
has miraculously provided store of fresh water (besides the Wels in the Town,
and the fresh River at low water) especially in a place within their outworks,
without the walls, so that there is a place called Bush-dike being sixty yards
in length, and ten yards broad, the which has in one night sprung a foot
plumme height, and was never known to spring before.

This is a true Relation.

FINIS.

