THE PERIOD OF THE GRAND CONSPIRACY.

Delivered in Two SERMONS.

The Desire of Nations, Preached on the Fast Day, April 6. 1660.

The Second, The Joy of Nations, Preached on the Thanksgiving Day, June 29.
1660.

By JOHN ALLINGTON, Author of the Grand Conspiracy.

Omne sub regno graviore regnum est res Deus nostras celeri citatus turbine
versat.

Senec. LONDON: Printed by J. Grismond. 1663.

Sit haec Periodus. Fiat Desiderium and Exultatio. ut sit and fiat. Fiat
Impressio.

November. 6. 1662.

M. Franck S. T. P. R. in Chrsto Patri. D. Ep. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

coat of arms or blazon

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS TREVOR, Knight and Baronet, and one of the
Honorable Order of the Bath.
SIR,
FOr a deed which I might have chosen whether or no I would have done, it seems
somewhat uncouth to make any manner of Apology, for I might have saved both
labors; and therefore I shall not make use of that Hackny Stale (which has
not been wanting) Importunity of Friends; Nor shall I color my Design with any
pretext of more Consequence, than the thing is.

The naked truth, or reason then, why these two Sermons see the light, it is a
desire I had (which Nature it self prompts every Agent to) opus perficere, to
finish what I had begun, and indeed to bless God who before my own, has
brought, A Period to the Grand Conspiracy.

It was (I profess) a great Alleviation of my sufferings, to meditate the
Parallel between my Savior and my Sovereign; His great Example silenced all
murmurs! and since it has pleased God to restore him in the greatest, and
nighest capacity this State affords; since we enjoy him in his Lively Image;
since there sits upon the Throne, Carolus nulli nisi Patri secundus,

A second to that glorious Martyr, Quis tam ferreus ut teneat se? who can be so
Stoical as not to rejoice, and be exceeding glad? And indeed I never hope to
see a gladder land, then I saw upon this account!

Nor truly did I only stand by, and observe, but even then as early as any,
these two Sermons, even as they are now presented, were then preached; But I
conceived the Music was too loud then, for a plain song to be heard in, and
the tinkling of a Cymbal is best spared, when Trumpets, Shaumes, and Sackbuts
sound up their stronger Elegancies; for which cause I have chosen a stiller
hour, and indeed therefore a longer day, that I might take due measure of my
own affections, and make some trial, whether my hopes or my Sovereign, were the
bottom of my joy. And,

Right Worshipful, it was meet, yea very meet, that I should delay, and
proportion my intentions even to your leisure; it was meet I should give you
the full liberty of that general Triumph, before any thing of mine should call
you off: For next to the happy arrival of our Gracious Sovereign Lord the King,
I am bound to bless God for you; for you, whose Bounty did surprise my hopes;
for you, who gilded my blacker letters, and feared not to be an Obadiah to the
Prophets of the Lord, in the saddest times.

Ever must my prayers be, Good luck have thou with thine Honor, even with that
Honor, which was the undoubted evidence of more Loyalty, than Ambition, when
your noble Choice was, rather in a minorated degree of Honor to Attend, then
to be only a thrifty Spectator at the Coronation of your Sovereign.

The Grand Conspiracy, and the Continuation of it, when they durst not see
light, they had the light of your Countenance; and therefore, I doubt not but
this Happy Period it shall be received by you, as the first Fruits of his
Gratitude, who is bound to proclaim himself,

From your bounty and my Vicarige of Lemmington Hastings' Jan. 30. 1661. Your
most obliged kinsman and Chaplain, in all Holy Duties, ready at your Service,
Joh. Allington.

2 Samuel 19. v. 9, 10. And all the people were at strife through all the Tribes
of Israel, saying, The King saved us out of the hands of our enemies; and out
of the hands of the Philistines, and now is fled out of the land for Absolon.

And Absolon whom we anointed over us is dead in battle, and therefore why
speak ye not a word of bringing the King back!


FAsts and Feasts abstractedly considered, they are but ciphers upon Gods
account, not are they ever more then what their real end and design can make
them. For to Fast for strife and debate; To Fast to smite with the fist of Isay
^8.
wickedness, that is to carry on an usurped Interest, this God disclaims, ye
shall not so fast!

Those who have no Law but their fists, nor no evidence but their swords! Those
whose hands are full of Blood! such, they cannot lift up pure hands, such are
in no tune to find, though they pretend to seek the Lord, their unjust fullness
spoils and pollutes all Fastings.

But the same God who disclaims such a Fast, professes a Fast there may be,
which he will own; He will own that Fast, which is, To loose the Isay 58. 6.
Bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and that ye break every yoke. Now truly our Day of Humiliation seems
clearly to aim at these ends For to disband an Army that eats up and oppress a
Country, comes very nigh to loosing of the Bands of wickedness! To take off
Decimations, Sequestrations, all illegal Impositions, this comes very nigh, to
undoing of the heavy burdens! to release those, who without hearing, have
endured many years imprisonment; to release those who have been secured, only
for Conscience; and a good Cause, what is this, but to let the oppressed go
free and to reconcile dissenting Partie^ to make up Breaches, and to unite us
Brethren, What is this but to break every yoke?

So that Fasting and Prayer aiming at these ends, are such, as we need not fear
the All-seeing Eye! To Fast and Pray for such purposes, it is (God himself the
witness) a Fast which he has chosen! to Fast and Pray for the settlement (not
of cracked and usurped Titles, but) of a Nation! to Fast and Pray that Glory may
dwell in our Land, that Mercy and Truth may Psalm. 65. 9, 10.
meet, and Righteousness and Peace may kiss! this is the Fast which God has
chosen.

Now, though Fasting and Prayer are excellent motives, and Disposes for Gods
blessing, and for Gods assistance; yet unless we also Act, as well as Fast, and
do as well as pray, the ends we fast and pray for, will never come unto us.

Whereas then the great end, that all good Men aim at, is the settlement of
Peace and Government, not upon the sandy Bottoms of Faction and Selfishness,
but the Rocky Base of Truth and Righteousness; I know no better expedient, then
to set before you a people in a like Condition, A people, whose good King was
fain to fly, and fly out of the land too; And that for fear of an usurper, for
fear of one who had a potent Army on foot against him! For the Text says, The
King is fled out of the land for Absolon!

Now whilst it was thus in Israel, though Absalons party had the Royal City in
theit possession, had Amaza and an Army on foot, yet they conceived a Scepter
was blunter then a Sword, and a King (though out of the Land) more to be
embraced then a General in the City, and therefore upon debate, consultation,
and sending throughout all the Tribes, the result was, And all the people were
at strife, through all the Tribes of Israel, saying, the King saved us out of
the hands of our enemies, and out of the hands of the Philistines, and now is
fled out of the land for Absolon. And Absolon whom we anointed over us, is dead
in battle; and therefore, why speak ye not a word of bringing back the King?

Now these words, with the Consequents upon them, cannot well be understood,
without we briefly relate the story, what it was occasioned, and what it was
that brought David into all these troubles: Now to that end know we must, David
walking upon the roof of the Kings house, had the unhappy sight of a beautiful
2 Samuel 11.
Woman, lying too naked to his view, Bathsheba with bathing her body, enflamed
his, and indeed so lustfully and wretchedly sired his soul, that as if the eyes
of him, who made the eye, had been blinded in the clouds, He sends messengers,
and takes to his bed, even the Darling of another bosom, the wife of Uriah the
Hittite.

Upon this she conceives with child, and upon this conception, his soul soul,
travelleth with fresh mischief, conceives sorrow, and brings forth a more sad
ungodliness, Verse 6.
for he sends for the Husband to conceal the shame, sends for Uriah, that lying
with his wife, the adultry might be smothered. But his better soul (to the
shame of thousands of Christians at this day) was so affected with the public
calamity, both of Church and State, that he would by no means be solicited to
private contentments, and personal joys; for he said unto David, The Ark, and
Israel and Judah abide in Tents; And my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Verse
11.
Lord are encamped in the open fields shall I then go into my own house to eat
and to drink and to lie with my wife As thou live, and as thy soul lives,
will not do this thing.

In these days of ours, few (I doubt very few such Uriahs are to be found few
who prefer a public to a private interest! Most men now adays s^ studying, and
minding their own, tha^ so that be safe, let the Ark be where it will; let
Israel and Judah sink o^ swim, if they can eat and drink, an enjoy their
Bathshebas, all is we with them; so that all that most me care, or seek after,
it is their ow^ selves!

Now well had it been with David had Vriah been of such a tempe^ for then he
had had a Father to h^ Bastard, and a cloak for his Adultery but this Religious
soul, could not sport himself, in time of a public calamity, could not endure
to solace himself at home, whilst Church and State were languishing, and
oppressed in the fields: And therefore David (now forgetting that God had eyes)
he proceeds from adultery to murder, and being Uriah would not go and lie with
his Wife, he writes to Joab to cause him to lie by the cold walls of Rabbah.

But the just God, whose eyes are in 2 Samuel 12.
every place, beholding both the evil and the good; He so severely beheld, and
looked upon this evil, that by his Prophet Nathan he sends him word, he should
smart for it even to a circumstance! For,

Being he had dared to take to his ^ed the wife of another man, the Prophet
plainly tells him, another should go to bed to his wives; Being ^e, a public
person, had secretly done ^o foul an act, the prophet tells him Verse 11.
^is wives should be adulterated open^^, 12.
before all Israel, and even in the ^^ght of the Sun! yea, whereas he had ^ared
by an unjust sword to slay a Subject, God sends him word, The sword shall never
depart from thy house! And Verfe 10.
indeed all this was verified in his rebellious Darling, in his lovely son, his
son Absolon. For first, having made the Royal City too hot for him, when
himself came thither (as if Incest had been an high piece of Gallantry) a tent
was spread on the top of 2 Samuel 16. 22.
the house, there went he in to his Fathers Concubines, and that in the sight
of the Sun and Israel.

An Observation that seems to me to give a great check, and restraint to all
Rebellion; for what need the Subject to wrest the Sword out of a Kings hand,
when you see both the eye, and hand of God is severely upon an oppressing King!
Why should there be in the soul any rebellious machinations against a
Sovereign, when God is so great a Patron of the Subjects interest, that he
spares not a King after his own heart, if his heart shall dare to do thus?

Ahab, He by the instigation of a lewd Queen, did once invade the Interrest of
a Subject, poor Naboths vineyard! But he and his whole line was 1 Kin. 21. 11.
accursed for it! Be hold I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
1 Kin. 21. 21.
posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall.
David, a better King, for daring to adulterate one wife, had no less then ten
of his 2 Samuel 11. 16.
own prostituted! and for daring to murder a subject by the sword of the
children of Amnon; he had a Son murdered, and that by a Son too! Amnon was
slain by Absolon! Yea being 2 Samuel 13. 18.
he dealt treacherously with Vriah, God permits his own Son, the Son of his
Love, his Fondling, his Absolon to deal so traitorously, that as the Text
speaks, David was glad to fly out of the land for Absolon! Thus exact is God in
beholding, and in avenging what Kings un kingly, or unjustly do unto their
Subjects! David, who whilst yet a stripling slew the Formidable Goliath! David,
who most successfully fought the Lords Battles! David, whom the men of Israel,
in the Text, profess, saved them out of the hands of their enemies, and out of
the hands of the Philistines! even he, when God would avenge the injury of a
subject, durst not hold out his Royal City against a Rebel, durst not hold up
his hand against a puny! for Now he is fled out of the land for Absolon. And so
we are brought to the very Text it self, to consider, how the Israelites
wanted, and how they valued a King in exile; even so much, that All the people
were at strife, throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king saved us,
etc.

In these words there are of distinct Consideration, 1. People. 2. David. 3.
Absolon.


The People must have a double Consideration:

1. As a misinformed people. And that implied in these words, Absolon whom we
anointed.

2. As transformed, and become new men, And so all the people were at strife,
through all the tribes of Israel.

3. What they strove for: the restitution of their injured and banished
Sovereign; for that is clear in these words, Therefore why speak ye not a word
of bringing the King back!

4. The Motives and Inducements, and that is insinuated in the comparison of
David with Absolon, his Victories with the others Rebellion, The King saved us
out of the hand of the Philistines. And shall we suffer him to be exiled for
Absolon, to be fled out of the land, or kept out of the land for Absolon?

First, Let us look upon the People as misinformed, which they indeed most
foully were, or they would never have said what here they confess, Absolon whom
we anointed.

God, who is the God of Order, and who indeed by the power of order keeps all
together, in order to the preservation of the great Bodies of Church and State,
he has placed every Man, as he has every Member in the Body Natural, that is,
not all to the same, but every one to its proper office. For, as he has not
made the Foot to be the Head, nor the Ear to be the Eye, nor the Eye to be the
Hand; even so in the mystical, or the politic Body, God has not made every
man for every employment; for he has made some high, and some low, some to
obey, and some to rule, some to be public, and some to be private persons!
some to be Magistrates, some to be Ministers.

Yea, of public persons he has so ordered it, that a man may be public to
one, and yet but a private person to another Function. As for instance; under
the Law Aaron the Priest of God, as to sacrifice, atonements and holy Duties,
he was a public person; but in point of Government, and secular affairs, there
no such, nor more then a private person.

Uzziah, because a King, in order to politic, and secular affairs, he was a
public person, but in order to Sacrifice and temple-Duties, there no such man;
even so at this day, a Magistrate, as to things of secular and legal
consequence, he is a public person, but to Ministerial and holy Duties, he is
nothing so; for, he who may make a mittimus, cannot give an^ obsolution, and he
who may administer Justice, has no power to administer a Sacrament.

Now if it be so that the God of Order, has not confusedly given unto all men,
the power of all Actions, consider then we mast, to whom God gave the power of
anointing princes: If to the people, then they might well say, Absolon whom we
anointed. But if never so! if the people had no more power to anoint, then the
Priest had in kingly offices, or the Magistrate in the Ministry, then these
words Absolon whom we anointed, it must needs be the voice of a deluded,
usurping, and misinformed people.

Psalm. 82. 6. I have said ye are gods. If the power of anointing Kings were in
the people, then it should have been said, Not I, But we have said, ye are
gods. And if Kings were the extracts of the people, then it could not be, as in
that verse it follows, And all of you are children of the most high. But all
of you are of our creation, all of you are Filii terrae, children of the earth,
of the vulgar and most low. But God who but knows, he is so declarative upon
this account, that he says, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no
harm. Kings (says Psalm. 105. 15.
God) they are mine anointed; If now Kings be Gods anointed, certainly then the
power of anointing Kings, is only in their hands to whom God committed it; and
that you shall find it has ever been to Priests and Prophets.

The first King that ever God owned, it was Saul, and we find Samuel the
priest of the Lord took a vial of oil, and 1 Sa. 10. 1.
poured it upon his head, and kissed him: whence it appears Samuel, and not the
people, anointed Saul.

The second King, he was the person in my Text, and of him we find it thus
written, I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I Psalm 85. 20.
anointed him. Now God (we know) did not pour out oil upon him, God did not
come down from heaven, and personally appear for to anoint him, but God
commanded Samuel, and Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the
midst of his brethren. 1 Samuel 16. 13.


Now what Samuel did to Saul, and David, the like did other Prophets and
Priests to succeeding Kings.

1 Kings 1. 39. Zadock the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle
and anointed Solomon, and they blew the trumpet, and all the people said, God
save the king.

2 Kings 9. Elisha sends a young Prophet with Commission to take a box of oil,
and pour it on the head of Jehu, and say, Thus says the Lord, Verse 3.
I have anointed thee king over Israel.

And 2 Chronicles. 33. when Jehoiada the high Priest had set things in order to it,
He and his sons anointed Josiah, and said, God save the king. And indeed in
ordinary phrase, and account of Scripture, Kings are called the Lords anointed;
but never the anointed of the people. Whereas then the people in the text say,
Absolon whom we anointed over us is dead! That the people should presume to
anoint a Sovereign; it was (you see) an invasion upon Gods Ordinance, an
entrenchment upon the divine Prerogative! For only Priests and Prophets were
deputed to that honor, only Priests and Prophets might pour oil out upon the
Lords anointed!

Whereas then the great desire of our Nation is, Peace and Settlement;
certainly there can be no one greater endeavor to ward it, then a resolute
confining all Men to their Proper Callings. 1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 11. Study to be
quiet, and to do your own business. Nothing makes more unquietness, then
meddling where men have nothing to do! The people has nothing to do with the
Scepter! The Miter has no dispose of the Crown! The Priest has nothing to do
with the sword! The Soldier has nothing to do with Law-making! Nor may any
that will, as in Jeroboams days, take upon him a Priestly office! Kings are to
be reverenced and obeyed, not to be made, or anointed by the People! For,
Absolon to the worlds end will stand upon Record, a Rebel, for all the people
in my text say, Absolon whom we anointed over us.

2 Samuel 15. If we look upon the beginning of Absolons Rebellion, we shall
find, Absolon made such a religious pretense of going unto Hebron, that those
who attended on him, they thought they had gone to have done God service!

For, Absolon thus tells his Father, Thy servant vowed a vow whilst I abode
Verse 8.
at Geshur in Syriah, saying, I the Lord shall bring me again indeed to
Jerusalem, then will I serve the Lord Verse 7.
and pay my vows in Hebron.

In Hebron (as old Lyra observes) Adam In loc.
and Eve, Abraham and Sara, Isaac and Rebecca; Jacob and Leah; all lie interred.
And therefore in an honorable remembrance of those precious Relics, Hebron in
the days of David, it was accounted an holy, a religious place; and therefore
Absolon pretending to be full of Holy thankfulness, for being recalled from his
exile, restored to Jerusalem, and reconciled to his Father, he must needs to
Hebron, that there, where his Father was first declared King, he might make
public manifestation of his holy rejoicing: And so, with this specious
pretense and show of piety, he drew out of Jerusalem two hundred followers, of
whom it is thus written, They went in their simplicity, and knew Verse 11.
not any thing: So that I might very well say, those who said, Absolon whom we
anointed over us, they were a misinformed people.

They went not out with any rebellious intent, or purpose, they went not out to
head an Army, but out they went upon the score of Religion; out they went in
their simplicity, and to do they knew not what: But, when engaged and drawn in
by the crafty, then they were fain to do as they did, and to say as they said,
when Absolon and Achitophel had wound them into their guilt, then there was no
way but to strengthen his hands, and (now his was their interest) to anoint
Absolon.

It is traditionally delivered, that 2 Chr. 33. 6.
whilst in the wicked reign of Manasseh, the children passed through the fire
in the valley of the son of Hinnom there was a delicate harmony made of
Sackbuts, Cornets, Dulcimers and all loud music; And the reason was, that this
melody might drown and conceal the sad, and dismal shriecks, that the frying
children^ made in that cursed fire: Even so^ here, that the people which wen^
out with Absolon, might not drea^ of raising a war, or sending for a general to
head them, whilst the messenger was dispatched away to fetc^ Achitophel, whilst
yet the leaven o^ conspiracy was but newly working 1 Samuel 15. 12.
Absolon falls to his pretended business, pays his vows, and offers sacrifices,
whilst Achitophel, and the design was not yet ready, Absolon talks of nothing,
but Reformation, Religion, Vows and Sacrifices, seeking God: But when
Achitophel was come, when the close Committee had got together, and (as the
Text says) the conspiracy grew strong; when the Vows, and Covenants had done,
what they were intended for, then they were like an Almanac out of date, laid
aside, and a march commanded toward the Royal City; for though Absolon
pretended Hebron, it was Jerusalem that he aimed; the first of the rebellion,
was to drive the King from the City.

Whereas then the great desire of all good people is, to have a settlement upon
the foundations of Truth and Righteousness. Pray we must, that we have not such
as was Absolon to be our leaders; such as shall pretend piety and reformation,
when they no more intend it, then did he in Hebron: The Crown and Dignity, the
Palace and the kingly Revenue: this was all that Absolon thought to compass;
when in simplicity of heart, and under pious pretenses, he drew a many, even of
the Kings loyal subjects into Hebron.

Acts 3. Saint Paul exhorting the Jews, who had persecuted and crucified their
King, to become Converts and Loyal for the future, uses this argument, And now
brethren I Verse 17.
wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers. Those who
through ignorance, misinformation, and simplicity of heart, have conspired
either against David, or the son of David; such the Apostle infers they have a
very pardonable plea, and indeed so pardonable, that we read not that David put
any mothers son to death upon that great rebellion; yea, albeit he returned
upon his own terms, returned in conquest, returned with the sword in his hand;
yet so merciful is a good King, that he gives an Act of Indemnity unto all, and
spares even that rebel, who insulted upon a weeping King, The King said, and
swear unto Shimei, thou shall not dye. And Verse 23.
truly there was a great deal of Reason for abundant mercy; for they who had
been a misinformed, became now a reformed people; they who in simplicity of
heart went out against him, they, and thousands more with integrity of heart
flocked, and came in unto him, for even All the people were at strife, through
all the tribes of Israel, saying, The King saved us out of the hands of our
enemies, and he delivered us out of the hands of the Philistines.

All the people they now seemed to strive who should commend the King most, who
should be forwardest in bringing him back to his royal City. And that is our
next considerable.

II. Israel, or all the people under this notion, a transformed people,
transformed, I dare not say reformed; for so ill an use even in our memories
has been made of Reformation, that till reformation it self shall be reformed,
it will be Mali nominis, of an ill report.

For in the days of Hen. 8. when a Reformation only was pretended, what did
the Reformation of a Monastery signify, but pull it down, and alienate the
Revenue, convert that to common, which was given for holy use, convert that to
the service of men, which was given for the service of God: so that to reform a
Religious House, signified in those days a taking from them, whose designed
life was Fasting and Prayer; and a giving it unto those, who would spend it in
chambering and wantonness; a taking the maintenance from Devotion and Piety, to
give it unto such, who would spend it in Gallantry, Rioting, Drunkenness, and
to put to any, rather then that use which the Revenue was given for, V. 2.
Holy, Charitable, Religious.

In these days of ours, what has Reformation signified, but either
Extirpation, or Deformation? For, to reform Episcopacy, what was it, but decry
the function, and sell their land? to reform Liturgy, and the worship of God?
what was it but a suppression of that Form, which was confirmd by the blood of
martyrs, and to set up, what will never get into form, extemporary rapsodies,
and abominable effusions? To reform Innovations, what has it signified but the
introduction of a new Doctrine, a new Discipline, a new every thing? To reform
Taxes, Burdens, and Impositions, what has it signified but the
multiplication, and and the most heavy aggravation of them? And as for the
reformation of Religion, what has that signified, but an open toleration of
all but the true reformed Religion? and therefore where reformation is grown
scandalous, and ambiguous, I choose rather to say, a transformed, then a
reformed people, proportionable to that of Saint Paul, Be ye not conformed Rom
12. 2.
to the world, but transformed in the renewing of the minds: And thus were
this people; for it was the renewing and the change of mind that begat this
Loyal strife, which in these words we are to speak on, All the people were at
strife, through all the tribes of Israel.

It has been said of old, Vox populi, vox Dei, the voice of the people is the
voice of God, and indeed when God is the ultimate design in it, it is so. Now
to make a voice to be the voice of the people, and that voice of the people to
be the voice of God, there must be a concurrence of these three:

1. Generality, 2. Unanimity, 3. Gods glory.

First, where there is not a general vogue, it may be the voice of a party, but
cannot be the voice of the people.

When our late King of blessed Memory was brought to the Bar, The Charge was
laid in the name of the people: But a wise and resolute Christian Lady plainly
told them, it was nothing so, saying at those words, Not half the people: A
packt party might, but the voice of the people never brought him thither; for
(God knows) thousands of his people were upon their knees to God for him, when
these unrighteous Judges did dare to lift up their hands against him; so that
what they deludingly called Vox populi, the voice of the people, it was at most
but Vox partium, the voice of a party.

But here in my Text we seem to have a better account; for it is not only said,
all the people, but all the people, throughout all their tribes were at strife:
As if we should say, all the people in all the Shires of England, and Wales;
that is the greatest part in all these places, say so, or so: And this is
generally enough to make it vox populi, the voice of the people.

Secondly, As there must be Generality, even so there must be Unanimity, that
is, they must speak one and the same thing.

Acts 19. We read of a great multitude, and a numerous assembly at Ephesus,
but some cried one thing, and some another: So that though there 32.
was Generality, there wanted Unanimity: and therefore (as before) this could
not be Vox populi sed partium, not the voice of people, but of parties.

Here in my Text we find no variety, all the people in all the tribes, all
strove for one and the same thing, all sang the same tune, all issued out this
harmony, Why speak ye not a word of bringing the King back?

But, though Generality and Unanimity may make a voice to be Vox populi, the
voice of the people; yet there must go more then so to make that Vox Dei, the
voice of God; for the unanimous voice of some people, has rather been Vox
Diaboli, then Vox Dei, rather the voice of the Devil, then the voice of God:
For,

Exodus 32. 1. When the people saw that Moses delayed his coming down out of
the Mount, The people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto
him, Up, make us gods.

Here is Vox populi, the voice of the people; but that voice which calls for
artificial gods, Up, make us gods, that cannot be Vox Dei, the voice of God.

Matthew. 27. At the arraignment of the best of Kings, even our blessed Lord and
Savior, it is written, Then answered all the people, and said, his blood be
upon us, and upon us, and 25.
upon our children.

Here was Generality, and here was Unanimity, all the people said, his blood be
upon us, and upon our children; And yet this was not Vox Dei, this was not the
voice of God; for the curse of that blood sticks to this day, to them and their
children.

Thirdly, therefore to make that voice, which undoubtedly is Vox populi, the
voice of the people; the voice of God, it must have a sincere intention, and a
direct aim at Gods glory. For, the death and passion of our Savior, it was
without doubt the will of God; he became incarnate, and came into the world for
that very end: And yet their voice who cried out, Crucifige, crucifige; their
voice who said, Let his blood be upon us, and upon our children, it was not
(though agreeable to his will) Vox Dei, the voice of God.

For, they did not intend Gods glory, but their own ends; they did not intend
the salvation of mankind, but the destruction of a man; they voted what was
Gods will, but it was more then they knew, and more then they regarded.

Whereas then it is said in the text, All the people were at strife through all
the tribes of Israel, and that not for a private, but for a public interest,
for the reducing and bringing back their most injuriously exiled King: I see no
reason why I may not here say, this Vox populi, it was Vox Dei, this voice of
the people, it was the voice of God: For it was generally all, throughout all
the tribes; Unanimously all, all called for the same thing: And to Gods glory
all, for all were for the restitution of his anointed; all said, Why speak ye
not a word of bringing back the King?

The Use I shall make of this point, is, That we may all grow unanimous, Applic.
vote and pray for one and the same thing, and that not a private, but a
public interest; an interest in which (God the searcher of hearts may see) we
more prefer his glory, then personal accommodations.

The day of Humiliation lately kept throughout this Nation, what was it for,
but only to make Vox populi, vox Dei? to make the voice of the people to
become the voice of God; for an united devotion, and an unanimous prayer, in a
public and a pious interest, draws nighest to the voice of God of any we can
imagine.

In my text it is said, All the people were at strife: and indeed to such a
loyal, and conscionable strife as this, I could exhort all people, I wish there
were an holy striving in every breast, which should get fastest to God for the
obtaining of so great a blessing, as is the settlement of peace and government,
upon the foundations of truth and righteousness.

1 Cor. 11. Saint Paul there reprehendeth the Corinthians, that when they
should have met together upon a public interest, Every one betaketh to himself
his own supper. At such a 21.
time as this (when the very foundations are out of course) to pray for a
settlement no otherwise, then may stand with a peculiar interest; this is as at
a public communion, To take before us our own suppers; not to care for the
public, so we may save our selves, nor no otherwise to desire the bringing
back the King, then as may conduce to personal advantages; this is neither Vox
populi, nor Vox Dei, neither the voice of the people, nor the voice of God:
thus only to speak of bringing back the King, is only to throw the Crown upon
our own ends, and indeed in a court phrase to speak our selves.

The men of Israel (whose example I am now considering) in a public calamity,
they talk of nothing but a public remedy, and that we shall consider on in
these words:

III. Why speak ye not a word of bringing the King? which is our third
particular; the thing they strove for.

In three English Translations, we have these three readings:

1. Why are ye so still, that ye bring not the King back?

2. Why are ye so slow to bring the King again?

3. Why speak ye not a word of bringing back the King?

From which variety I shall press this only lesson, That good resolutions
ought not to be delaid, for the not pursuing whom God calls, do many times
move God to make choice of other instruments.

Hester 4. When Mordecai writ to Hester, about rescuing the Jews out of the
hands of Haman, he sent her this admonition, If thou altogether 14.
hold thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance
arise to the Jews from another place.

We have seen in these days of ours, those who sometime were as Hester, those
who having power and opportunity, to have settled our Nations upon the bottom of
truth and righteousness, neglected and despised the time God gave them; For as
much as in that their day, they saw not what belonged to their peace,
preferring a private to a public interest; we have lived to see such laid
aside, and may live to see deliverance arise to the oppressed from another way.

Yea, these very people in my text, The Israelites, though they were early in
their intentions, and the very first discoursers of the business; yet for as
much as they did not pursue their timely resolutions, they lost the glory and
the blessing of this so great a work; for not the Rebellious but the Royal, not
Israel but Judah had the honor of doing indeed, what all Israel only talked
on; for, The men ^f Judah not only talked on it, but, they sent this word unto
the King, return thou and all thy servants: so the King returned, and came to
Jordan, and Judah came to Gilgal to go mte^ the King, and to conduct the King
over J dan.

All the men of Israel strove, but it seems no man stirred, they were in this so
excellent a purpose, so still and slow, that nothing was indeed done, till
Judah went to the water side, and brought the King back. And so I will pass
from their delay, to their debate.

4. The Motives and Inducements that moved them to think on David, and to
solicit his return, and those we shall find insinuated in this comparison
between David and Absolon, The King saved us out of the hands of our enemies,
and out of the hands of the Philistines, and now is fled out of the land for
Absolon, and Absolon (also) is dead in battle therefore, (...), Why are ye so
hard of hearing? why so deaf? why so slow in bringing back the King?

In which words there are clearly two Reasons:

1. The usurper is taken away, Absolon is dead.

2. The advantages of their old Kings reign; He saved us, he delivered us, and
shall we not recall him again?

First of the first, the usurper, Absolon is dead; therefore all Israel, as
convinced, seem to say, Better call home the undoubted owner, then set up
another rebel.

A King it seems is one of those good things, whose want does best commend
them; for, whilst David was at home, and in the City, the Citizens would not
strengthen his hands, would not stand to him, for he was fain to fly: But now
when out of the land, then they begin to consider, the feeling and sensible
distance, between an Usurper, and a Father, between an Absolon and a David: And
then they find there was as much difference between the King, and his Usurper,
as is between an Husband, and an Adulterer: for, as the one takes a woman for
his love, and the other for his lust; even so do they take Crowns, the King to
promote, the Usurper to make a prey on it; the King he loves, the Usurper he
lusts; the King studieth the advance, peace, and improvement of his people,
David saved us from all our enemies, David delivered us out of the hands of the
Philistines: But the Usurper, he studieth how to advance himself, how to build
up his house, and to make all enemies that are not his friends; so that indeed
as a young man, who weddeth an old rich widow, marries her estate, and not her;
even so Usurpers they take the power of Dominion, and Government over Nations,
not out of any affection, or indulgence to the people, but only that they may
command what they have, and riot in the expense of their sweat and blood: and
therefore all the people having now their eyes open, they cry for a King, they
will have their old David, rather then any fresh Absolon.

Prove. 28. 2. For the transgression of a land, many are the princes thereof.
Many Princes, they too too often prove to the body politic (as the fresh
horse-leeches in the Fable) extreme suckers: and therefore Solomon the wise, as
to the happiness of a people, he opposes one to many, even as a blessing to a
curse: For thus he writes, For the transgression, or punishment, of a land,
many are the princes, but by a man (a single person) of understanding and
knowledge, the state thereof shall be prolonged. One may establish what many
cannot! And therefore the men of Sichem; they Judge. 9. 5, 6.
choose rather to have one Abimelech (and he naught too!) then threescore and
ten to rule over them.

And indeed Absolon being now dead, they lay at the mercy of the General; they
lay at Amasa's dispose to have what Government he pleased; and therefore if
they consulted no further then their own welfare, they could not say less, when
Absolon was now dead, then strive to bring David home again; for, they know
his, they feared what a new Form might bring, Absolon whom we anointed over us
is dead in battle, therefore usquequo si letis, as the vulgar Latin, Why so
silent, why so backward in bringing back the King?

Secondly, The other Reason is drawn from the excellent times they had under
David's government, The King saved us from out of the hands of our enemies; but
Absolon he has made us enemies to the King, the King delivered us from the
Philistines, but Absolon he has made us as Philistines, Rebels against the
Lords anointed! David, he smote the Moabites, he smote the Syrians, he smote
the Ammonites, he brought all Edom under his subjection! In the days of David
he so smote the Philistines, that the men of Israel feared them not; in the
days of David, Israel and Judah were a renowned people, feared abroad, in
security at home: but in the days of Absolon, Israel was as odious as the
uncircumcised: In the days of David, The Lord had given them rest 2 Samuel 7. 1.
round about, from all their enemies: In the days of Absolon, all were enemies
that were round about them; yea, in the days of David, the Ark was 2 Samuel 6. 12.
brought into the City of David. The glory of Israel, the Ark of God, the holy
Testimony of his presence, it was by David brought into the City of David.

And yet for all this, so ungrateful had they been to David, that to promote a
Rebel, they exiled a King; against David undoubtedly the Lords anointed, they
anoint Absolon his ungracious son to rule over them: Absolon was brought to the
royal City, and David for Absolon fled out of the land.

But Israel now (now Absolon was dead) bethinking what they had done, and what
they had to do; How they must either live in a perpetual war, or call back
their King: How if they set up another instead of Absolon, they must keep an
Army on foot, to maintain the usurpation.

Josephus relating the story, tells us they thus concluded, That it behoved
them, since he was dead, whom they had chosen, to make their supplication and
submission unto David, that dismissing his wrath, he would receive the people
into his favor; and according as before time, so now also he would vouchsafe
them his pardon and protection.

And indeed (as before I intimated) the King was so gracious, that not so much
as Shimei (who reviled, cursed, and threw stones at him) suffered upon that
account.

Now if the desires of Israel was as the desires of England, To settle Peace
and Government, upon foundations of Truth and Righteousness; they could then
pitched upon no better course then indeed was done, which was the bringing back
of David to Jerusalem; the King to the City: For, a righteous Foundation builds
upon this score, That every man may have his right; and that made David himself
to say unto his God, Thou have maintained my Right, and my Cause; Thou Psalm. 9.
4.
satest in the throne judging right.

Now the men, both of Judah and Israel, they were all convinced; they all very
well knew, that the seat of the Kingdom was David's; knew Absolon to have no
Title, but what the sword made him; knew the right of the Throne belonged to
him who was fled, to him who was out of the land: And therefore, if they would
have peace and government built upon the foundation of Righteousness, they
could not but conclude, the King himself must have his right; He who was
unjustly banished, must in Righteousness be called home; He who was unjustly
driven from his Royal City, must in all right and reason be reduced and brought
back again.

For, if there were all the right and reason in the world, that Ahab who
unjustly got possession, should restore Naboths vineyard, certainly then there
is no less righteousness, that all the people of Israel should restore David to
his own, when themselves very well knew, there was nothing but Rebellion and
Treason, that drove him out; so that either righteousness and right dealings
must be confined to the subject, or else David the King must have his right;
and of this doubtless all the people of Israel were then convinced, when they
thus said, Why speak ye not a word of bringing the King back?

Again, as Righteousness, even so Truth requires it: For if you will run
through the whole book of Kings, you shall find that true Religion, it always
adhered to the Kings party: during the rebellion of Absolon, Zadock, and
Abiathar, and all the Levites 2 Samuel 15. 29.
they were of David's side; they went out with him, they carried the Ark with
him, they returned it to Jerusalem upon command from him; yea, when after
Solomon's days there was a division made between the house of Judah, and the
house of Israel; when there was Kings of Israel, and Kings of Judah: In Judah
still was the Lord known; in the City of David was the Temple, the Sacrifice,
and the undoubted Priests of God.

1 Kings 12. 28. When Jeroboam had exalted himself to be King of Israel, you
shall find one of the first things he fate in Council on, it was Religion:
And, because he knew the true Religion, and his false Title could not do
together, he made two Calves of Gold, and said to the people, It is too much
for you to go up to Jerusalem, Behold thy gods oh Israel, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt.

They who will live under an usurped Title, they must never hope to live under
a true Religion; for Usurpers, they will have such Worship, such Priests, and
such Confessions, as may serve their turns: And therefore had the men of
Israel, only upon the account of Truth and Religion considered, and consulted,
they could not have found a better expedient for the enjoying of it, then by
moving as they did, to bring back their King again. For to David, and his line,
adhered the profession of the true Religion.

In a word, to settle Peace and Government upon those two immovable Pillars,
Truth and Righteousness, cannot possibly be effected, unless we be true to this
common principle, Suum cuique, To give every one his own. Now,

Matthew. 22. 21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are Gods, says the Savior of the world, the Prince of Peace.
Whence it appears, that both God and King have their interests, and their
properties; Caesar has, and God has his Rights.

Now if God and Caesar have a right, how can we expect that God should bless us
with the blessing of peace, unless we give both to him and his anointed what is
their rights.

Suppose Absolon, Achitophel, Amasa, or all Israel (whilst the power was in
their hands) had sold the Tabernacle, which David pitched to 2 Samuel 6. 17.
put the Ark in, or had they made sale, or given away the Kings Cedar 2 Samuel 7.
house, that was in Jerusalem ^ Could the Government of Israel have been
settled upon Truth and Righteousness, till God had had his Tabernacle, and the
King his palace? certainly Restitution is as great a part of Righteousness, as
Preservation; and God and Caesar, as considerable to their dues, as any persons
in the world.

Truly among us Christians it is a great defect, that we are quick and highly
sensible of every trespass, of every wrong, of every encroachment that is
personal, and done to us; but what is done to others, the s^questrations,
deprivations, wrongs, and ejectments of any but our own relations, those, as
nothing at all to us, we scarce lend an ear to, so we escape, all is well. And
hence it comes to pass, what is done to God, or what is done to Caesar, we make
no account, no reckoning on.

Now sure I am, God Almighty was very ill pleased with them, who in their
fullness did not think of them that wanted; who drank wine in Bowls, anointed
themselves with the chief ointments, but grieved not for the affliction of
Joseph.

Now certainly if the afflictions of Joseph, the troubles of David should be
remembered; and indeed with what face can we desire our God to settle us in
peace, if we have no Bowels for our Brethren? nor melting hearts for the Father
of our Country? certainly, we are not worthy to sit in peace under our own
Vines, if we will not endeavor to bring the Lord of our Vineyards to his own
possessions.

To the people of Israel (whilst they understood themselves) nothing was so
dear, as the Ark and the King: But neither the Ark without the King, nor the
King without the Ark, could make a settlement.

A time there was, when Jerusalem had their King, but the Ark was 2 Samuel 6. 1
at Kiriath-jearim, and whilst so, David. Sermon. 7.
himself could be contented; and therefore that the Ark of God might be brought
home, like the Ark of God, with Honor and Solemnity, David gathered together
all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand men Verse 1.
.

A time there also was, that Jerusalem had the Ark, but they wanted their King,
for the ark was at Jerusalem, even all the while that the King was fled out of
the land for Absolon: But the ark without the King, the worship of God, without
the great Patron and Observer of it; this could not make Jerusalem at unity
within it self: And so Judah went Verse 15.
out to Gilgal to meet the King, as then it was the Kings zeal to fetch home
the ark; even so it was Isreal's loyalty to bring back their King: both had been
taken away, that both might be better valued.

And so Lord grant it may be in this Land of ours; restore thy worship, restore
thine anointed, and so unite Israel and Judah; that now Absolon is dead, all
animosities may be buried in his grave.

Now Absolon is dead, O let our David live, and let the ark and him rest in a
lasting peace, which we beg of thee, the God of peace, even for his sake who is
the Prince of peace, Jesus Christ the Righteous, to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

The Joy of Nations, PREACHED On the Thanksgiving Day, FOR THE HAPPY RETURN Of
our Gracious Sovereign CHARLES II.

June 29. 1660.

LONDON: Printed by J. Grismond. 1663.

Psalm 118. 22, 23. The Stone which the Builders refused, is become the Head
stone of the Corner.

This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.


IN the Eighty second Psalm, at the fifth Verse, there is a sad complaint, that
All the foundations of the earth are out of course: Yea, there is not a
complaint only, as to matter of fact that it was so, but there is an assertion
of the cause, and reason that of necessity it must so be; for the Verse thus
begins, They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness.

When the present Power, and chief Rulers of the Commonwealth of Israel, were
so blinded with interest, that They walked in darkness: When they were so bent
upon cruelties, oppression, and injustice, that they would not understand; when
those who had the high and honorable appellative of gods, acted rather as
Ministers Verse 1.
of Satan, accepting the persons of the ungodly, and afflicting the poor and
fatherless: whilst it thus went in Israel, all the foundations must needs be
out of course.

Now have not we of this Nation been a very late parallel to this sad
condition? Have not all our foundations been out of course? Have not such who
were called, The house of gods, Such, who themselves pretended as saints to
judge the earth, have not even they bound our Kings in chains, and our Nobles
in fetters? have not our Fundamental Laws, and our deepest bottoms been dug
up? The square Stone of our Law it has been removed, and a round Arbitrary
pebble placed in the room of it: The Marble Charte^ of our Nation, and the
glorious Pillars of three Kingdoms they have been ground to powder; and that
powder laid as the Sandy Base of a Rebellious, Sacrilegious, and
Fanatick-Commonwealth: Yea, whereas it is observed of Rome, that beside the
material foundation of seven Hills, she was bottomed upon seven Governments:
First, Kings, secondly, Consuls, thirdly, Decemviri, fourthly, Tribunes,
fifthly, Dictators, sixthly, Emperors, and lastly, Popes.

Since our Foundations have been out of course, attempt has been made of as
many, if not more Foundations: But, as Boys often by experience find, when the
Right shell is wanting, among ten thousand more, one poor Cockle cannot be
matched, completed, or made up again; even so, though we have had ten thousand
Builders, some Hewing, some Canting, some Levelling, some trying this stone,
and some that; No stone could do the the work, till the providence of the chief
Builder so ordered it, that The stone which the builders refused, became the
head stone of the corner.

These words upon their very reading, appear to be an Allegory, a Figurative
expression, in which of necessity there must be some hidden, or latent meaning:
For, the stone which the Builders refused, does not imply the act of a Mason,
or the rejection of a stone, but the contempt of a person; so that the person
couched under this stone, and the builders intended by this Metaphor, must be
our first enquiry.

Now by Stone in the Text there is generally meant, either David, or the Son of
David, the King, or the Kings Son; a person exalted above ordinary men, a
person exalted above all his brethren.

Whence my first Observation shall be, The great distance between man as man,
and man as King, upon the account of this present Metaphor.

When the Scripture speaks of man as man, the Spirit puts a very low value and
esteem upon him, calling him, Dust, Grass, Esaias 46. yea, Vanity. Eccles. 3. 20.


But, when he speaks of Man as a King; when he speaks of a Man, made the
Lords anointed, and exalted Psalm. 39. 11.
to regal Dignity, then you shall find the style rises: For, old Jacob
drawing to his Dust, when in blessing his children, he came to speak of a royal
Emanation out of Joseph, the Spirit of God taught him thus, From thence is the
Shepherd, Genesis 49. 24.
the stone of Israel: Under the notion Shepherd, Expositors doubt not, is
meant the Kingly office; now, he who was to bear that, he is not as a mortal,
or a man called Dust, or Grass, or Vanity, But the stone of Israel.

Nor is a King decyphered at large by any sort of Stone: for if, Ex quovis
ligno non fit Mercurius, If every block is not fit to make a Statue, every
Stone is not fit to represent a King; and therefore the spirit of God is choice
even upon this account: For the Kingly person decyphered, he is set forth, not
simply by a stone, but by a tried stone, a precious stone, a Esaias 28. 16.
corner stone; yea, in my Text, there is yet a gradation higher, for, not only
a stone, and a corner stone, but Caput Anguli, the Headstone in the corner.

Look then how far a stone transcendeth Dust, a precious stone excels grass;
The Head stone in the choysest structure surpasses vanity, such is the
proportion, such the distance between man as man, and man as King: As men we
are but dust, and grass, and vanity; but he who is our King, he is (...), the
stone of our Israel, the corner stone, yea, the Head stone of the corner.

Now truly this I had not observed but to check such (if such yet there be) who
think themselves as good as a King, and a King to be no more then one of us.

1 Samuel 10. We read that men (as I may phrase it) upon the Coronation day, even
upon that day when it is written, All people shouted and said, Verse 25.
God save the King; even then some contemptibly said, How shall this man save
us? even very then some despised him: And,

2 Samuel 20. When God beyond all expectation had removed the usurpation, and
brought that King, who was fled out of the land, to his royal City, even then
Sheba, the son of Bichri, Verse 1.
blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we
inheritance in the son of Iesse: every man to his tents O Israel.

The Son of Bichri, in behalf of himself and his party, professed, unless they
might have inheritances out of the son of Iesse, unless they might have the
Crown land, they were rather for a war, then a settlement, rather for
confusion, then a King: they valued a King at no more then what was their own
interest, and their own advantage.

Now truly thus to do, is not with the Spirit of God, to deem a King a stone, a
Corner stone, a Head stone: but a stepping stone, a stirrup stone, a stone laid
only for advance to private interests, and to raise and get up to personal
advantages; But, they who so did, the Spirit of God puts an eternal brand upon
them, calling them, Children of Belial: A man of Belial; yea, between the Loyal
and the Seditious, 1 Samuel 10. 27:
the Spirit of God most remarkably 2 Samuel 10. 1.
distinguishes: for, they who adhered and went with the King, they are said to
be such, Whose hearts God had touched; but those 1 Samuel 10. 26.
who despised, and brought him no presents; they who looked upon him, but as
one of them, they are such, Whose hearts Satan governed, men of Belial.

Those whose hearts God had touched, they owned, and joyed, and triumphed in
their King; they shouted and said, not God save Saul, as a man, But God save
the King; God grant he may live, not as a man, but a King, in Glory and
Majesty, in Power and Greatness.

But the children of Belial, they hung down their heads like a Bulrush, and had
rather see a Kings head on a block, then to be, as God would have it, the head
stone of the corner; But in despite of all, who devised how to put him by whom
God would exalt, the Lord would, and has compassed his own design: For,

The stone which the Builders refused, is become the head stone of the corner:
This is the Lords doing, and marvelous in our eyes, etc.

In the words we may for methods sake observe these two Generals.

First, Matter of fact: Secondly, The manner of doing.

In the matter of fact two Considerabl^*

1. A Reprobation, a Stone Refused. 2. A Reparation, Exalted.

The stone which the Builders refused, is become the Head, etc.

In the second General, in the manner of doing, two Particulars;

1. Gods extraordinary efficiency, The Lords doing.

2. Man's duty, and regard in these words, Marvelous in our eyes.

First, of the matter of fact; The stone which the Builders refused, is become
the Head stone of the corner.

Now for as much as Expositors of great note, attribute the prime sense to
David, and the principal to the Son of David, I shall follow their steps, and
indeed shall consider this matter of fact upon three accounts:

1. David's Reprobation and Reparation; how he was the stone, both refused and
exalted.

2. The Son of David, Christ our Lord, his Reprobation and Reparation, how the
Builders refused him, who became the Head.

3. Lastly, how far by way of Analogy, or resemblance our David, and our David's
Son, our late King, and the Son of this King may be here concerned, whether he
who is become the Head of the corner, has not been a stone reprobated, and
refused.

First, That David was a rejected stone, the History of his life will easily
evince; For, if we look upon him upon the account of Nature, we find him the
youngest (not the seventh, but) the eighth Son; yea, we find seven at home, or
about home; but he, as a neglected Pebble in the Fields keeping sheep, when
Samuel came to look him up, 1 Samuel 15. 11.

Yea, afeter this, when Samuel by anointing, had made him a precious stone,
Eliab his eldest brother (even then, when he came by Gods appointment, to work
a mighty deliverance) accused him of pride, and naughtiness of heart, 1 Samuel
17. 28.

Saul, he adopts him for a Son, gives him a daughter, but hurls him off as a
stone, and persecutes him as a Partridge upon the Mountains. Yea,

1 Samuel 26. 19. David himself complains, saying, They have driven me out this
day, from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve strange
gods. So that he was now become a very rolling stone; a stone (one would think)
neither fit to Bed nor Head.

Yea, when he was in the land of strangers, even there (and that by those who
pretended of loyalty to follow him) when a cross accident befell them, They
began to speak of stoning of him, 1 Samuel 30. 6. So that a poor King had need be
a stone, a well weathered stone; for storms and cross winds will soon crack,
break, and crumble him to dust else.

Now who would think, that a poor shepherd Boy, persecuted by a King, driven
out of the Land of his Nativity, despised by his brethren, ready to be stoned
by his followers, opposed by a General; who would think that that stone, which
such Master Builders did set at naught; should become the Head of the corner,
and the Glory of his people? And yet such was his Reparation; for, 2 Samuel 2. 4.
The men of Judah anointed him King in Hebron. And the tribes of Israel, seven
years and six months after, 2 Samuel 5.
came and made him King over all Israel. So that albeit Judah and Israel were
not two Nations, nor two Kingdoms, yet they were two high parties, malignant,
and well-affected, loyal, and rebellious, for the King, and against the King:
But, when the rejected stone was put in, where it ought to be, when the
Builders wearied with war, and perverseness, put him in his right place, and
made him the Head of the corner: This union made up the breach, and that Head
so closed the joints, that Israel and Judah, the rebellious, and the loyal, all
David's days lived as brethren: So that to this change and reparation of King
David, we may well say, This is the Lords doing, and marvelous in our eyes.

Secondly, let us consider this stone as relating to the son of David, and
Christ.
truly we shall find him a stone refused, and set at naught indeed.

In every Erection, there are diverse sorts of Builders; some plot, some work,
some serve! The Master Builders are for plotting, the Masons for raising, the
laborers for serving; Now by every of these, was the stone in the Text refused.

Psalm 2. 2. The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers took counsel
together against the Lord, and against his anointed. Against the Kings son,
against the son of David, there was a combination of Princes, the very
Master Builders took counsel, and plotted against him, they would not have this
stone to head them!

The Pharisees, Scribes and Elders, those whom I may call the Masons, in this
spiritual edifice, they would none of this stone, for their voice is, No King
but Caesar: They who put him to death, for fear the Romans should come; yet when
design led them to it, they cry up even the Roman party, We have no King but
Caesar; Joh. 8. 15.
None but a General, none but an Usurper should head them, Nolumus hunc, come
what will of it, we will not have this stone, We will not Luke 19. 14.
have this man to reign over us.

And hence it came, that the very laboureres, or under-builders of all, they
are taught to cry out against this stone, as the very rubbish of the work,
preferring a piece of course clay, to a royal Marble: Non hunc sed Barabbam,
not him but Joh. 18. 40.
Barabbas! Any Usurper; any Villain; any Form, rather than the right King! any
Boodstone, rather then Christ the Living-stone, any petra scandali, any Rock
of offense, rather then caput Anguli, the corner stone.

Matthew. 27. 22. When Pilate saw there was such an hellish despite against this
stone, Pilate said unto them, what shall I do then with Jesus, which is called
Christ? As if he had said, if ye will not have him for your King, nor allow him
to be an Head stone, what place shall I assign him? what shall I do with him?
They all said, Let him be crucified, that is, let him be destroyed: And indeed
in this they were right; for a King can be safe in none, but in his own place;
lessen him, and like a loose stone he drops out; the corner stone will fit no
where, but at the Head only.

And this Rebel, and Usurpers too well know; for when the Husbandmen in the
Gospel had a will to be Lords, and to take the Sons Inheritance Luke 10. 15.
into their own Hands, to make sure work, They cast him out of the vineyard,
and killed him; not only cast him out, but killed the Heir.

Rebels are the greatest cowards in the world; if the Corner stone be but above
ground, they fear it will heave, and heave, and do what they can, become the
Head of the corner: And therefore when Pilate said, What shall I do with Jesus,
which is called Christ, they cried make him away, make him away, let him be
crucified, torn to pieces, beat to powder, make him incapable and useless, and
all is well enough: And what did they omit to do it? look upon his passion, and
you shall find, that if he had been a stone indeed; they stamped, and trampled
on him, head, hands, feet, and side, found not so much pity from these
Builders, as the very stones afforded; for whereas the Builders tear and rend
the stones themselves, they rent; for no sooner was (the most Holy Priest of
his living Temple) his Soul separate from the Body, but the vail of the Matthew.
27.
temple rent in twain, even from top to bottom. When the King, the Corner
stone, was thrown down, the Temple by a kind of sympathy rends also, but the
Builders they were as merry, as if his sighs had been pleasant tunes, and his
exquisite sorrow the joy of their hearts; for even in the anguish and
bitterness of death They mocked and derided him: so Matthew. 17.
that indeed never was any stone more contemptuously disallowed, and rejected,
then was the son of David, so that never could any so rightly apply that of
this Psalm, as he did, for he, even he was that stone which the Builders
refused! He that stone, who after the most sad refusal that could be made,
Became for all that Caput Anguli, The head of the corner.

Lament. 1. 12. Behold and see if there be any sorrow, like to my sorrow! As
there was no sorrow like to our Saviors sorrow, even so no rejection, no
reprobation like to his! no stone brought to a more unlikeliness of a raising,
then he was! for, who could think that that stone, which was hid, and buried in
infimas parts terrae, in Ephesians. 4. 9.
the lower parts of the earth; who could think that stone which was closed
within a Rock, and the mouth Matthew. 27. 60.
of that secured with a mighty stone; yea, who could have thought, that that
Body which was as dead as a stone, that person whom shame, and sorrows, weight,
and pain had bruised to pieces; who could have thought, that such a stone
should be so cemented, and again so perfected, as to become the beauty of the
Building, and to be made even the Head stone of the corner! Yet this was done,
and this was the Lords doing.

Ephesians. 4. 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended: Yea, and if
we make due observation of it, we shall find that his reparation, it was
proporionable to his reprobation! For he who descended low, he ascended high,
he who was humbled to the lower parts of the earth, He was exalted far above
all heavens; He who was thrown off as a stone, only meet to advance the
rubbidge, he was advanced to the height that a stone is capable, even the Head
of the building! for, He is the Head of the Body, the Church! and (2 Coll. 10.)
The Head of all Principality and Col. 1. 18.
Power! yea higher yet, for he is the Head of the corner! Corner it implies
more then Building, for corner is a place where at least two walls meet, so
that to be the Head of the corner, implies Union, as well as Dignity: and in
this respect there was never such an Head stone, as the Kings stone, never such
a corner stone, as was this Head stone of the corner! For,

Ephesians. 2. 14. He is our peace who has made both one: Whether we respect Jew or
Gentile, Male or Female, quick or dead, Heaven and Earth, this stone is the
Head to every corner; for to him was given, All power both in heaven and earth.
Matthew. 28. 18.
And therefore was the rejected stone repaired, and the disallowed stone
advanced, That he might be Lord both of the dead and the living; so Romans 14. 9.
that to this we may very meetly add the words following, and say, This is the
Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

Thirdly, or lastly, by way of Analogy, and to enforce the better sense of our
present Blessing, let us see how far our David's Son, or the Son Charl. II.
of our late King may be here concerned.

I shall now show unto you, that in diverse choice Particulars he very meetly
resembles both David, and the Son of David: For, 1. Infamy. 2. Breeding in the
same 1. alike for infamy:
School. 3 Exile both from the Land of his Nativity. Religion of his God.
4. Time. 5. For The persons persecuting. His Restitution.



First, that He has been a stone rejected, and refused: This is as clear as
the noon day, yea this very day of the Thanksgiving had never been else.

Now in the time of his Reprobation, the good King David thus complains, The
very abjects gathered themselves Psalm 35: 15.
against me! yea, The very drunkards made songs of me! Those who had not a
stone in their houses, could find a stone to throw at a distressed King.

And has not even this been the case of the Kings Son? The abjects of our
times, State-lecturers, Newsmongers, Mercenary pens, and Tongues, they have
made it their work to tumble down, and degrade this stone: for as some out of
superstitious fear rob Gods Saints of their honor, calling Saint Paul, Paul,
and Saint Peter, Peter; even so, those who to the rebellious cry, your
Excellency, your Honor, your Lordship, call the corner stone, even below
Common enemy.
a Gentleman, Charles Stuart, Tarquin, one of the cursed Family! A stone fitter
for a threshold, then a Throne!

But what these did, may seem no more then the fabulous Cocks, preferring a
Barly-corn, to a Jewel! For they were no Builders, and therefore knew not when
they saw a stone for building: But when professed Builders, when those who
would behold the Council of a Nation, and the Master Builders of a Kingdom;
when they shall disallow, or refuse a stone, when they shall vote the Head to
the feet, and the chief stone to be incapable; this is a considerable
reprobation, and such, as might seem to put a stone out, either of heart, or
hope of getting any higher: And has not the Kings Son been thus dealt withal?
Have not Builders, and prime Builders too, even by a solemn act disallowed
this stone? Did not the successors to such who killed the Heir, enacted a
Disinherison of all the Royal Family? As the Jews by a stone and a seal,
thought to have kept the Son of David from ever rising, to sit upon the Throne
of his Father; even so, so for ever did many Master Builders repudiate, and
disallow this quarry, that they thought never any stone of it, should become,
Caput, or Caput Anguli, the Head, or Head of the corner. And yet blessed be
God, I may now, in relation to our Kings Son say, The stone which the Builders
refused, is become the Head stone of the corner.

Secondly, We read not of any King but only one, who is graced 2. For breeding
in the same School. 1 Samuel 13. 14.
with this high Eulogy, or Character, A man after Gods own Heart. Now this
King, this King whom God declared should act, according to his own Heart! God
so provided, that he should be humbled before he was exalted, that he should be
a Rejected, before he was an Elected stone! First, a vilified and refused, and
then the Head stone of the corner!

Now as was David, even so the son of our David, he has been bred up in the
Schools of affliction, he has had the experience of many, many various
troubles! He has been rolled like a stone, from City to Country, and from one
Kingdom to another! Being then God has so bred our King, as he did the King
after his own heart, in trouble, persecution, exile! Being, as was David, he
has been a stone refused, we have very great hopes, that now becoming as was
David, The Head of the corner, we shall find that God has prepared him, as he
did David, for a flourishing Kingdom.

Thirdly, David, whilst yet he was a refused stone, complains, 1 Samuel 26. 19.
They have 3. For exile both from the land of his Nativity, and the Religion of
his God.
driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go
serve strange gods.

The Builders so furiously rejected this anointed stone, that they would not
suffer it lie, or abide in the Land of his Nativity: they have driven me out,
says David, From abiding in the inheritance of the Lord: Where the best
Religion and worship of God was, they would not suffer this stone to be! they
drive him out saying, Go serve strange gods: They hoped in an Idolatrous
Country, necessity, assistance, or something might turn this stone into an
unholy altar; so that if once they could bring him under the just infamy of
serving strange gods, they might then as well before God, as good men, make him
a refused stone for ever.

But, the stone whom wicked men refused, he would never refuse his maker, he
was resolved to be a stone for Gods Altar, in what posture so ever providence
should cast him.

Now has not the stone of our David, our Kings Person even been just thus
served? we all know he has; we all know, driven he has been from abiding
within the inheritance of his Fathers, yea, they who drove him, seemed to say,
Go and serve strange gods: Glad would some of our late Builders have been, to
have had him the stone of a Popish Altar.

But as David, when God from a refused stone, called him to take his place, and
to be Head of the corner, came like gold out of the fire, pure and undefiled;
Even so the Kings Son, or Son of our David, he comes with the same impress of
Religion, that he carried forth; no more corrupred by the King of Spain, then
was David by the King of Gath: Education like a tool in Marble, it has made a
durable impression, as it was with David, even so we believe it is with him;
whether a refused stone, or a corner stone, whether at home, or abroad, he
serves the same God, and the same way.

Fourthly, As David was a refused, 4. For duration of time.
before he was an approved stone; even so it is very considerable, how long God
did exercise the patience of his servant, how long he suffered him to be a
rejected, before he came to be the corner stone: Now 2 Samuel 5. 4. it is
written, David was thirty years old when he began to reign.

The King by whom God resolved to do great things, he wonted him to troubles,
he experienced him with tentations, till he was Thirty years of age, he began
not to reign, he was Thirty years old, before he sat upon the throne, Thirty
years old, before he became the Head stone in the corner.

Now if we look upon our Kings Son, and if we compute his age, we shall find
just David's year, the first year of his actual reign, the first year of his
being in his own place, the first day of his entrance into his Royal City, it
was the day of his Nativity, and the Head of the corner, just as was David the
thirtieth year.

Lastly, Being our King, is not only a King, but a Kings son; let us take 5.
For those who persecuted.
one parallel, between him and the Son of David;

In the Rejection. Reparation.


Psalm 69. 8. I am become a stranger to my brethren, and an alien to my mothers
children. The son of David complains he was a stone rejected by his own
brethren; I became a stranger to them! yea, his very mothers children looked
strangely on him, I was an alien to my mothers children.

And was not this the very case of the son of our David? Has not he been, even
from his Childhood up, a stranger to his brethren, and an alien to his
mother-City? yea, when he was fain to fly out of the Land, as the son of David
(a Babe did) from him that sought his life? The Lilly had no pity, the Lilly
was not candid to the Rose, his kindred stood a far off, and he was an alien to
his mothers children! yea, he was upon this account; a stone more refused, then
the son of David: For,

Cant. 1. 6. He only thus complains, My mothers children were angry with me:
But for all that, they make me the keeper of the vineyards; when the case was
so with him, that as it is in that verse, Mine own vineyard have I not kept,
yet even then they made him the keeper of their vineyards.

But when it so was, that our Heir could not keep his vineyard, his mothers
children were so angry, that as a stone they threw him out of their vineyards,
they would neither let him keep their vineyards, nor shelter him under their
vines: As the Judges 9.
men of Shechem preferred a shurb, a bramble, a base fellow, before the Olive,
the Fig Tree, or the better family of Jerubbaal! Even so, his mothers children,
not in an heat, passion, or upon anger, but which is a sadder rejection, upon
counsel, deliberation, treaty! When this stone was in balance with the very
dross of a Nation, when their flesh and blood, the undoubted Head of the
corner, was in competition with a Rebel, a Traitor, a man of blood! yea, one
who had washed his hands in Royal blood! even then they preferred this son of
Belial, as the Jews did Barabbas, before their own flesh, before their own
blood: The son of Nobles, yea, the son of their own Nobility was made a
stranger to his brethren, an alien, yea, an exile to his mothers children.

And yet for all this, in his state of Reparation, behold he comes, as rose the
Son of Righteousness, with healing on his wings, merciful, and gracious as the
son of David,

Our blessed Lord and Master, though he was a refused and a rejected stone, and
that by his own too; yet we find after his resurrection, he was exalted, and
became such a stone, that it is written, On whomsoever it should fall, it would
grind him to powder: Luke 10. 18.
Yet even then, so full was he of grace and mercy, that he was content his
Rebels, and his refusers, should become stones in his building; yea, living
stones under the protection of him their Head, only the condition 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Acts 1. 38.
is, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ.

All that the stone so refused, after his exaltation, requires of his rebels
is, that they list themselves anew, that they fight under his Banner, that they
repent and be obedient.

Now the Son of our late King, our long refused and despised stone, he sent his
Heralds, and prepared his way, by messengers of peace; proclaims a general
pardon, upon the same terms that did the son of David, repentance, loyalty, and
obedience for the future; and indeed the God of peace himself will not give
pardon upon other terms: For,

Psalm 68. 21. God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of
such an one, as goes on still in his wickedness. He that has rebelled, he may
be pardoned, but he that goes on, he that after declaration of pardon, upon
gracious terms will not come in, see what the Savior of the world, and the
once rejected stone professes, These mine enemies Luke 14. 27.
that would not I should reign over them, bring them hither, and stay them
before me. He who has abundant mercy for a returning, has none for an
obstinate and persisting rebel.

1 Pet. 2. 7. We thus read, Unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the
Builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner. Unto them that be
disobedient, unto them that would not, the rejected stone is become their King!
unto them which be disobedient, the same is made the head of the corner; so
that one of these two are inevitable, either they must become obedient, and lay
hold of his pardon, or this stone must fall upon them, and then remember it is
written, On whomsoever it shall fall, Luke 20. 18.
it shall grind to powder. And therefore kiss the son, lest he be angry; let
us revere and reverence him whom God has exalted, for every King
proportionably is, what the King of the Jews was, Caput Anguli, the head of the
corner.

Yea, that this Metaphor, the Head of the corner, has a meet proportion even
to all Kings; Saint Peter seems to me in this Chapter to insinuate; for, from
his discourse of the chief precious, living, and elect corner stone, Verse 6.
he presently falls to treat of Christians duty to their Kings, saying, Submit
Verse 13.
your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord sake; whether it be to the
King as supreme: and Fear God, honor the King; and indeed if Verse 17.
we observe it, we shall find their persons, and their obedience are very nigh
together: For,

The son of David, he who sits at the right hand of God, and is immediately
next to God, he is a King! the highest exaltation of humanity, it is in the
person of a King: And as in Heaven, even so in Scripture, God and the King are
next neighbors: Honor the King stands so nigh to fear God, that he cannot be
a good Christian, who will not be a good subject, specially to such a King
whose Throne is sensibly of Gods erection, and whose restitution is so signal a
testimony, that the very enemy cannot but say, This is the Lords doing, and it
is marvelous in our eyes. And so from the matter of fact to,

II. The manner of doing. This is the Lords doing.

Psalm 78. 19. They speak against God, and said, can God furnish a Table in the
wilderness? The Jews did never think it more impossible for God to send them
Quails, to fill them with flesh, and to furnish them with a table in the
wilderness, then thousands in this our Nation thought it was for God (to do as
he has done) to bring back the banished, and to set him, who was fled out of
the Land, upon the Throne of his Fathers: But as Quails came to them, even so
came a King to us, upon the wings of the wind, yea and an East wind too; only
with this great difference, Quails were the fruit of their murmur, but a King
the return of our prayers; Quails were given upon displeasure, but a King in
loving kindness; Quails were brought in with blood, but the coming Verse 31.
in of the King was much like the Israelites going out, of which it is written,
Not a dog moved his tongue against it; yea, what is written of God, the Exodus
11. 7.
great King of the earth, the same is applicable to the King we joy under, God
is gone up with a merry noise, and Psalm 47. 2.
the Lord with the sound of the trumpet. So came in our King, and that he who
so lately was petra scandali, the rock of offense, should now on a sudden
become desideratus genuium, the desire of Nations, that he should so come in,
Hoc factum Domini, This is the Lords doings, and that it is so,

Behold in this doing the Goodness, Wisdom, II.
Power of God.


First then, This is the Lords doing, for it was of his great Grace and
Goodness, that this was done: For,

The whole Land, that is all the Honorable, all the Loyal, and (upon the
account of Religion in 1641. protested to) all the Religious, lay as the
chidren of Israel in Egypt, under severe Taskmasters: For, as the Israelites
for crying, Let us go and sacrifice Exodus 5 8, 9.
to our God, had the heavier load, and imposition laid upon them: Even so, to
worship God after the way of our Fathers, to worship the known God by a known
way; this was enough to take our straw, nay more then so, our very bricks, and
our very livelihood away; so that to Fear God, and Honor the King, it was
malignancy enough to undo any man.

Now as it was the mere goodness of God, that moved him to have compassion on
his rebellious people; even so, so ill under the rod had most of us carried,
and demeaned our selves, that we were unworthy of a favor, unworthy to know
any but oppressors, and Usurpers to be Lords over us: For so loud were the
Oaths, so abominable the debauchery, so unclean the lives, and so fierce the
uncharitableness of too too many of us; that all the taxes and Taskmasters,
all the vexations and sufferings groaned under, they were but our just
deservings: And therefore that God should be so good, as to send redemption to
such a people, so gracious as to raise up a mighty salvation to the house of
our David, so merciful as to vouchsafe us a King, whose very approach seems to
put a period to the calamities of three Kingdoms: This can have no such motive
as his own goodness, nor could this have been any, but only his own doings, so
that we may here very well take up that of the Psalmist, Thou, O God, of thy
goodness have prepared Psalm 68. 50.
for the poor. It is of thy goodness, O Lord, that the stone which was refused,
is become the Head of the corner; and therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto
us, but unto thy Name we give the glory, it was thy goodness, it was thy doing.

Secondly, As it was thy goodness, even so it was thy wisdom: To keep the
rejected Stone from being Head of the corner, there has been as great
plottings, as the wit of man quickened by coveteousness, malice, and ambition
could invent: To repair this stone, and to raise it to be Head of the corner,
there has been as great contrivances, as prudence, highthned by love and
loyalty could imagine; but neither could effect their purposes, it was the
wisdom of God that did the work.

Psalm. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King, upon my holy hill of Sion: Though the
Kings of the earth set themselves against it, though the Rulers took counsel
together, and cried, Let us break their Bands in sunder, yet (says the Lord
for all this) I have set up my King upon my hill.

As then Balaam told Balak, There Numb. 23. 23:
was no divination against Jacob, nor no enchantment against Israel; even so
there is no counsel against the only wise, nor no instruments of government,
no humble advice that can check his providence: For when his time is, as holy
Job speaks, To set up on high those that be low, that those which Job 5. 11,
mourn may be exalted to safety: (The very condition of the royal Family) see
his method, He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their 12.
hands cannot perform their enterprise: As Dagon fell before the Ark, even so
must and shall all parles and counsels before Gods wisdom: And for instance, we
shall no further then the duty of the day; for, against our gracious Sovereign,
against this stone which the Builders refused, there was as great provision
made as humane wisdom could imagine; Oaths, engagements, establishments were
made against it: and that by such who were cried up for the Saints of the
earth, men full of holy pretenses, pretended revelations, Sabbatarian zeal, and
extraordinary impulses of the spirit; yea, enacted it was that none should be a
Builder, that did not disavow this stone; none should bear office, handle the
sword, or have benefit of Law, that did not engage against King and Lords; yea,
it was defined treason, and made death by pretense of Law, so much as to pray
for the Head of the corner; and yet for all this, he who sits in heaven has
laughed them to scorn; he whose wisdom will admit no defeat, he has broke
their bands in sunder, and maugre all Conspiracies and devices of Usurpers,
Traitors and Tyrants; The stone which was thus refused, is become the Head of
the corner, and it is the Lords doing, his counsel, his wisdom did it.

Lastly, it is the Lords doing, for not only his goodness, and his wisdom, but
his power is eminently seen in it.

It is well known, to keep our Sovereign from being what he is, to keep the
refused stone from being Head, there was as great a power, as flesh and blood
could well raise: there was formidable, and whole armies, armies that feared
not to fight, men victorious enough, and expert in war; so that indeed the
Kings friends, and such as would have raised up this despised stone, they were
like Israel under the Philistin tyranny, They had nor sword nor spear, they had
not so much 1 Samuel 13. 19.
as a leaver left them, all the power was in the enemies hand; and when so,
then it appears was Gods hour (to use an abused phrase) to bare his arm, and to
show his power: For,

Hosea 1. 7. It is is thus written, I will have mercy upon the house of Judah,
and will save them; but observe how, not by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle,
by horses, or horsemen, but I will save them by the Lord their God.

The mercy which we this day bless God for, it is a mercy done to the house of
Judah, and done (blessed be his name for it) neither by bow, nor by sword, nor
by battle, by horses, or horsemen, but even by the Lord their God.

The Lord our God he has showed his power, not by breaking the bow, or
snapping the spear in sunder; but which is a much more admirable efficacy, by
turning the hearts of his people, by bowing the hearts of thousands, and ten
thousands, as the heart of one man; to call for that stone which they had
refused, and to place it, where in all right and justice it ought to be, Caput
Anguli, the Head of the corner.

Amongst us men, such is our power that we can fetter the feet, bind the hands,
and bridle all outward violence, (for when a stronger comes, the armed man is
conquered) but a power over the heart, that we have not, the power of hearts it
is in his hands only, who made the heart; and therefore I conceive, that that
is much more the Lords doing, which is done by hearts, then that which is done
by hands.

The Prophet Daniel mystically presenting Dan. 2. 34.
the stone in my Text, he calls it, A stone cut out without hands.

Albeit the blessed Virgin was instrumental to the conception, breeding, and
bearing the King of the Jews; yet being the Holy ghost was the only active and
prime principle, he is called to Gods glory, a stone cut out without hands.

Even so albeit toward the restitution of our Sovereign, there have been
glorious and honorable instruments; yet there has been so much more of heart,
over there has been of hands, so much more of God, over there has been of
men, that we may well to the glory of Gods power say, Our rejected stone was
set in his place, our refused stone he was made Head of the corner, even as the
stone which was cut out of the mountain, sine manibus, without hands; and
therefore it must needs be the Lords doing!

Psalm 74. The prophet sadly complains, that at the destruction of the Temple,
The enemies roared in the midst of it, they cast fire into the sanctuary, Verse
4,
yea, they broke down the carved works thereof with axes and hammers: 7.
But at the erection and building 6.
of it, There was neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the 1
King. 6. 7.
house, while it was in building.

Now this is just the emblem of our sad, and our glad condition; for when our
Caput Anguli, when our Corner stone was rejected, despised, and taken down,
then the enemies roared, fire and sword, axes and hammers, even went through
the land.

But the Kings son (though glad to fly out of the land, not having in three
Kingdoms where with safety to lay his Head) when he was exalted, and made Head
of the corner, his raising it was just like Solomon's Temple; no hammer, no ax,
nor any tool of iron; no bow, no sword, no noise, but as Balaam told Balak, The
joyful Numb. 23, 21.
shout of a King is amongst them: And who could do this but the overruling
power of heaven? who could compass this, but God only, It is the Lords doings;
and which is the last Considerable, It is marvelous in eyes.

And this comprehends man's duty, for this his thus doing, Mirabile in oculis
III.
nostris, marvelous in our eyes: a marvelous work, a marvelous blessing in our
eyes.

A marvelous work: For that, that stone which the Master Builders had voted
rather dirt, then stone; that that stone voted by them no more like to the Head
of the corner, then is a Traitor to a King, or a Rebel to a Sovereign; that
that stone, to the which every helping hand was voted treasonable, and every
friendly Builder a Rebel, and a Traitor; that that stone, which Ministers were
forbid, either directly or indirectly for to pray for; that that stone, to
which it was treason to make an approach, or an address, should find Builders
to advance, and raise it up, Hoc factum mirabile, this is a work marvelous in
our eyes.

A marvelous blessing too: For, Blessed Eccles. 10. 17.
art thou, O land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy princes eat in
due season for strength, and not for drunkenness.

Now if it be so, that descent and temperance in a King, makes a Land blessed,
we have then in our King a marvelous blessing; for, He is the son of Nobles.

That daring and unimitable president! that Son of blood, who feared not to
unhead our corner, and throw down the most precious stone, that ever did Head
our Buildings; even he (to the eternal aggravation of his insolence) professed,
even that King was the offspring of many Kings, the 109th of his Nation; so
that the son of such a King, he must needs be the son of Nobles.

We find in the History of Kings it never went well, either with Church or
State, when the lowest of the people were made Priests, or when God permitted a
Jeroboam, a servant, to sit upon the Throne of his Sovereign: And we have
experimented this sad truth, we have tasted, yea, we were almost at the dregs
of that bitter cup: But, which is a marvelous blessing in our eyes, the
proposterous Letters are set right, and we have a King which is the son of
Nobles. R. C. C. R.


And as we have a King the son of Nobles, even so we have a King, Who eats in
due season for strength, and not for drunkenness: A King, whose first public
act of regality his Kingdom was acquainted with, it was a Proclamation against
the debaucht and swearing, professing with what parts so ever, they may be
otherwise qualified and endowed, they shall for them be as reprobate stones in
his account; so that the heading of our corner with such a stone, is, not only
a marvelous work, but a marvelous blessing in our eyes.

Now without doubt a marvelous work, and a marvelous blessing, is not laid
before our eyes, that we should shut our eyes upon them, or that we should make
no reflection, no use of them; for there is nothing marvelous, but it carries
the power of an Ecce in it, and calls upon us for to behold it.

Certainly then this work which is the Lords doing, and marvelous in our eyes,
it calls upon us:

1. To rejoice, 2. To be thankful, 3. To be obedient.

First, To rejoice; For if these words relate either to David's exaltation to
his Throne (as some) or to the son of David, our Saviors resurrection from the
grave; or as we at this time apply them, to our present Sovereigns most happy
restitution; upon all accounts, the eye may see, what did, and what may joy the
heart.

In relation to the two former Senses it is most clear, that this marvelous
work, and this Lords doing, it is a matter of high rejoicing; for the very next
verse to my Text is, This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice
and be glad in it.

David, and all that loved him, rejoiced to see his day, for it is written, All
Israel gathered themselves unto David in Hebron; they came as one man to anoint
David, and to rejoice with him, I Chron. II. v. I, 3.

The son of David (the most certain designed by this stone) he was depressed
and exalted; a stone rejected, and a stone advanced even for our sakes: he
died, and was despised Romans 4. 25.
for our sins, he was raised and made Head of the corner for our justification:
And therefore the memorial of this marveil; the marvelous things done by God
for our redemption, may very well create a Festival, and give Christians (at
least at the Feast of Easter, for) to say, This is the day which the Lord has
made, we will reloyce and be glad in it.

And as for David, and the son of David; even so, for the son of our David, for
the marvelous things done by God for our King, and in him for us, even for
these we ought for to rejoice.

It is an old tradition among the Jews, that there was at the building of the
second Temple, a peculiar stone which in the building was often handed, and as
often thrown out of hand again: But at length when they came either to complete
the work, or to leave it a rude and imperfect lump; there was no stone that
could do the work, no stone that could fit the corner, and close up the joints,
but that only.

Now woeful experience has taught our Builders, that such a stone was our Royal
Sovereign, Charles the Second; like this Emphatical stone of the second Temple,
was the only Caput Anguli, the only Head stone that could close our breaches:
And therefore that God of his most gracious providence, would be pleased so to
fit us, that through Gods blessing in him we may become an united people: This
is matter of rejoicing, and rejoicing in the Lord too; for though it is our
comfort, it was the Lords doings, and Mirabile in oculis nostris, marvelous in
our eyes.

Secondly, Whereas worldly interest, II.
and present content is a natural motive to stir us up to joy, and rejoicing:
This marvelous work requires more than so; not only joy in our hearts, but
thankfulness to God; for as all along we must confess it was his doings! it is
the Lord who has done great things for us! it is the Lord who has turned our
captivity! yea, so has the Lord exalted our rejected stone, that we who see it
done, may for ever sit amazed, and be even like to them that dream: And
therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thee we give the praise, to
thee the thanks, to thee the glory.

1 Samuel 12. When Samuel had presented their desired King unto his people,
Samuel tells, them the consideration of the great things which God has done,
it should work in them such a thankfulness, as should evidence it self in godly
fear, and holy services: For,

Samuel having said, I will teach you the good, and the right way; immediately
23.
adds, Only fear the Lord, and 24.
serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider how great things the Lord
has done for you.

The things that are marvelous in our eyes; this marvelous blessing of enjoying
without blood, an exiled King; this marvelous work, of so setting up the Head
of the corner, it should teach us to be thankful to our God, and to express
that thankfulness, not only as Samuel, but so also as our Sovereign has
required, By cordially renouncing all licentiousness, and profaneness, and by
becoming examples of sobriety, and virtue: and indeed unless we all so do, we
shall all be found reprobate stones, and very cast-aways in the last day.

Lastly, Is the restitution of our Sovereign, and the making him, who was so
sadly rejected the, Head of the corner, the Lords doing, and marvelous in our
eyes?

Truly, this should teach every of us our bounden duty to our King, and that is
to love, honor, and obey him for the Lords sake, not daring by thought, word,
or deed to lessen, or degrade him, whom the Lord has made Caput Anguli, the
only Supreme, the Highest, the Head of the corner.

Col. 3. If you observe there the commands of obedience, which St. Paul gives,
to wives, children, and servants, you shall find the Lord is made a motive to
them all, for speaking to wives he says, As it is Verse, 8,
fit in the Lord; speaking to children he says, This is well pleasing to the
20,
Lord; and speaking to servents, Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to 23.
the Lord.

Whence there appears to me a very signal difference between Christian, and
between Moral obedience: For, the Wives of Jews, the Children of Turks, the
Servants of Pagans; these all respectively may give as great obedience, as we
can; and yet because it is not done upon a Christian motive, because it is not
done for the Lords sake; all this obedience as to Gods acceptance, and as to
Heaven, is of no value: But the same obedience done upon the Lords account, the
same obedience done by us Christians upon the account of Faith, it may bring
unto us an everlasting recompense.

Whereas then that our despised is become the Head of the corner, is the Lords
doings, and marvelous in our eyes; our bounden duty is, not as do Pagons, or
Turks, to honor our King for fear, to love him for his bounty, or to obey him
upon constraint: But being it was the Lords doing, so marvelously (almost
miraculously) to invest him in the Throne of his Father! Being it was the Lords
doing to quell the mighty, and the Lords doing to set him in his own place; let
our obedience be for the Lords sake, let our obedience have more of the Gospel,
then the Law in it, let our allegiance have more of the Christian, then the
Subject in it;

Yea, that there may be a perfect period to the Grand Conspiracy, both against
the Lord anointed, and the Lords anointed, let our conversation be such as
become Christians, and our loyalty such as become Christian subjects: Let us
kiss the Son lest he be angry, and let us honor the King, because God harh
honored him: for to Gods glory, and our comfort, we cannot confess in any
better Form, then the words of my Text, ever blessed be the name of God for it;

The stone which the Builders refused, is become the Head stone of the corner:
This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

Soli Deo gloria.

Collecta.
WE return unto thee, O God, as our bounden duty, the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, for all thy blessings from time to time conferred upon us,
beseeching thee of all, and every one of them to make us more sensible, that we
may become more thankful: but more especial we praise thee for the blessings of
thy day, and in particular for thy Son, and for our King.

We praise, bless, and glorify thy name, blessed Jesus, that thou would be
pleased to become as a stone, despised, and despicable for our sakes, that thou
would though so many despights, and scorns, purchase what was to thy eternal
person no advantage, thee being Head of the corner, head to thine own
creatures, Head of Men and Angels: O Lord, this was thy great goodness, and is
our greatest comforts, that we are members of that body, and stones of that
building, whereof thy own Son is the Head corner stone.

And as for thy Son, even so we desire to praise thee for our King to, that
thou have been pleased of a stone so rejected, and so despised of men, to raise
him up, and place him in his own place, to set him upon the Throne of his
Father, and in him to give praise, and joy, and comfort to three torn and
afflicted Nations.

O Lord, give us grace to remember how for the transgressions of a land, many
are the Princes thereof; give us grace to remember, if we shall gill do
wickedly, as thy servant Samuel told Israel, we may yet be consumed both we and
our King.

And therefore, that we and our King may persevere and continue in thy favor,
Lord give grace both to King and people, to fear thee, and serve thee in truth,
even with all our hearts.

O Lord confirm his Throne, and establish it in righteousness, make his
Scepter like a rod of Iron, that may early destroy all the wicked out of the
land; breaking in pieces like a potters vessel, all the profane and debaucht,
all such who go on in their wickedness, all such who neither fear their God,
nor their King; make us all according to thy word, obedient to thee, and to
thine anointed, that so peace and truth, love and plenty may dwell amongst us,
and descend from us, even to succeeding generations; all which we beg for his
sake, who is the Head of the corner, Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor and
glory now and for ever.

FINIS.

