An Abstract OF SOME LETTERS SENT FROM DORCHESTER, To some friends in LONDON,
Dated the 3. of Septem. 1642. CONTAINING A True Relation of the late
proceedings of Marquess Hartford and the Cavaliers, at Sherbon Castle, with
the opposition of that and other adjacent Counties to those Proceedings.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Ally, 1642.

AN ABSTRACT Of some Letters sent from Dorchester to some friends in London:
dated the third of September, 1642.
THe last week I wrote you of the progress that Marquess Hartford and the
Cavaliers had made, in the carrying on of their design in these parts, and how
they have intrencht themselves in Sherbone Castle; and likewise of the daily
increase of their Company, both Horse and Foot; they continue still in the use
of all means whereby to make themselves secure, and the place strong where
they are; and the truth is, that its much to be feared, that this County is
intended for the Seat of War, it being a Champion place, fit for the purpose,
and the rottenness of the Gentry in these parts (we doubt) will be a strong
inducement to draw all the Cavaliers with their Forces hither: Many places have
been attempted for this purpose, but it seems the design would not take in
other Counties, doubtless every Bush must be beaten before they will give up
the Game.

The Marquess having received a Commission this last week to put in execution
the Array, he sent Letters to the Town and County of Poole, to show them that
he had authority to preserve that Town in peace and safety, and thereupon
required them to stand upon their Guard, and to oppose all others that should
come by any authority whatsoever, to Array and Muster them; and in case they
were unable of themselves, he would send them a hundred men: These Letters
being received, two of the chief men in the Town brought them to Dorchester,
and presented them to Sir Walter Earl, and the rest of the Lieutenants, who
immediately furnished these men with fifty pounds, and ordered them to get such
men into the Town as they might repose trust in, and by their help to make
the place strong; and withal to apprehend one Mr. Antill (sometimes Minister
of that Town) who brought these Letters to them, and to send him up to the
Parliament: Also the Marquess sent Mr. Lawrence the High-Sheriffes Son of
this county unto Wareham (which is a considerable Port Town, and will easily
be made strong) with a commission to press a hundred men, and to billet them
in the same place, and this Mr. Lawrence to be the captain over them:
whereupon the Townsmen laid hold of him, and put him into custody whilst they
sent hither to the Deputy Lieutenants: but before the Messengers returned he
had made an escape; however moneys were suddenly dispatched hence, that
Soldiers might be entertained into pay for the safety of the Town; so that
now both Poole and Wareham are well fortified, and provided, the Soldiers come
in cheerfully, under the command of our Captains. Captain Gould has twenty
men of his Bond that came riding to his house last week, and told him, that they
had each of them a hundred pound a piece that they would spend in the cause.
All our best justices of the Peace, are put out of their places, as Mr. Hollis,
Sir Thomas Trenchard, Sir Wal^er Earl and his Son, and Mr. Savage, and Mr.
John Brown, etc. which were all right and good, and what they are which
succeeded them, you may judge. Our Grand Jury are likewise put out, and others
put in, which are men desperately enraged against the Parliament. The Marquess
sent lately for all our Justices, (such as they are) to come to Sherbone, where
he showed them his Commission, and feasted them (as we are informed) they are
men of malignant spirits, and cannot endure this word Reformation: Well, from
thence they came to Dorchester to treat with the Deputy Lieutenants,
concerning the Marquess his quiet departure from Sherbone, which he is
contented to do if they would undertake to secure his passage; Answer was made
by Sir Walter Earl and the rest, that it was more then they could grant, but
in case he would put himself into their custody, he should be safely conveyed
to the Parliament, and there be brought to an Honorable Trial.

The next monday the Lord Bedfords forces and ours meet at Sherbone, the Lord
Bedford brings 20000. with him, and eight or ten pieces of Ordnance: there is
1000. men will be with us this night out of Devonshire, and we have here two
thousand to join with them, and four good pieces of ordnance. The Marquess
has not with him above 500 horse, most of them base ones, as base as their
masters, and betwixt three or four hundred foot, many of them being lousy
fellows, that instead of fighting, will find enough to scratch, some among
them (which are got in by compulsion) are of good rank: The town of
Dorchester continues constant in their resolutions for King and Parliament, and
to defend themselves and Magazine, if assaulted, and to that end continue their
watching and fortifying daily, you know willing minds and stout hearts pass
through all difficulties and expense, for they all contribute in pains and
purse, according to their abilities, excepting one Mr. I. G. a man that you
well know.

The Cavaliers that are with the Marquess commit many outrages daily in these
parts, the last wedensday as we are credibly informed, two of them met a maid
and ravished her, and then tied her to a tree stark naked, and stopped her mouth,
but an honest man coming presently by, and seeing her, untyed her, and took
the cloth out of her mouth, and then she told him that they were two Horsemen
that used her so cruelly, who told her they would go to such a place hard by to
drink, who indeed did so and were there taken and apprehended and sent to
Illchester Goal.

Three or 4 of them were coming through a little village nere Sherbone, called
Marston, and having bin at an Alehouse by, and there heard of an honest man
living in that parish, inquired for his house, and when they found it, asked for
him, but the door they found fast shut, whereupon these rogues called out often
to him by the simple name of Roundhead, and he coming not sorth to them, they
shot three or four times through his door and so departed; they also rob many
men and women, that Country people dare scarce stir forth near Sherbone.

Last thursday one of the Cavaliers killed a poor harmless man in the Market at
Sherbone (being about his business) and without any the least occasion ran to
him and struck him first with his stick, and then with his own sword into the
skull. I hope we shall not be long troubled with them, had our Country bin as
others are, and our Gentlemen not so bad, we had bin rid of them ere this, our
fears lie chiefly now at Weymouth, (a considerable port Town) which has it
it nigh upon twenty demi Culverins and above 40. Sakers and Minyon, the
Townsmen are so malignant, that they will not admit of any strength to be sent
in out of the Country: we offered them 150. men of a train bond, near them,
being men they well know, and would have paid them 7. s. a week each man, but
this offer was refused: you must pray for a good success to this Weeks work,
for it will be of much consequence.

September 3. 1642.
SInce my last, you may please to understand that the Marquess with his
company remains here still at Sherbone, and to outward appearance, intend to
try their strength in this place, the truth is, they are necessitated thereunto
by reason of the strictnes of these forces in these parts, that have surrounded
him. They have not above one thousand of horse and foot at this day. This day
the Marquess summoned all Blackmore to appear before him upon pain of death,
but there was but ten that manifested their obedience to those summons. The new
high Sheriff of Somerset could not get above twelve men to assist the
Marquess, notwithstanding his zealous endeavors for this week together. The
Marquess his men begin to come from him already, some of his company have bin
lately taken by our party. Yesterday about eleven of the clock, the Lord of
Bedford marched from Yeavell to Sherbon with twenty eight ensigns, most
companies having above two hundred men in them, he has left a double number
behind him, which will be ready upon all occasions; but I hope the design
will not require it, he brought now 8. pieces of Ordnance along with him.
About two of the clock yesterday the Dorchester men, with those that came out
of Devon, being 19. Companies, marched toward Sherbone with two Troops of
horse, and 4 great pieces of Ordnance, containing about 32. c. a peace. I am
now riding to the Camp, and will write you further by the next. The Lord of
Bedford has 700 good horse there already, so that I hope these Achans will not
escape Him.

FINIS.

