AN ABSTRACT OF Some few of those Barbarous, Cruel Massacres and Murders, of
the Protestants, and ENGLISH, in some parts OF IRELAND Committed since the 23,
of October. 1641.

Together with the Rise of the Rebellion.

COLLECTED Out of the Examinations taken upon Oath by Persons of Trust, in the
beginning of the REBELLION.

Which Particulars are singled out of a multitude of others of like nature.
With the persons that acted those Murders, and Massacres, with time, place,
and other circumstances, are contained in the said Examinations, yet extant.

LONDON, Printed for the Author.

AN Abstract of some few of those Barbarous cruel Massacres and Murders of
the Protestants, and English, in some parts of IRELAND.
In the County of KILKENNY.
ABout the twentyeth day of December One thousand six hundred forty two, the
Protestants were stripped naked at Kilkenny, and whereas some of those stripped
people with ropes of straw covered some part of their nakedness, the Rebels set
the straw on fire, thereby burning and grievously scorching them: six Soldiers
and two boys having quarter given them, were nevertheless hanged at Kilkenny,

A young Girl stripped about Enster one thousand six hundred forty two in the
City of Kilkenny by a Butcher: her belly ripped up that her intrails fell out;
where the Mayor (upon complaint of the mother) bad, away with her, and dispatch
her, whereupon the Mother received seventeen or eighteen wounds, and her other
child was also extremely wounded, and all forced out of the City by men, women
and boys throwing stones and dirt at them; So as the two children died in a
ditch. The Aldermen of Kilkenny petitioned their Council, That Philip Purcel
Esquire might be punished for relieving of Protestants.

A woman and two children in the City of Kilkenny was by the Inhabitants
hunted, baited, torn with Dogs, stabbed with skeenes, one of her childrens outs
being pulled our.

At Kilkenny seven Englishmen hanged, and one Irishman because he was taken
in their company.

Twelve murdered at Greige, one of them (being a woman great with child) had
her belly ripped up, the child falling out alive, and a child of a year and
half old hanged, another of them named Robert Pine (being twice hanged up) was
cast into his grave, where he sat up saying, Christ receive my soul, and so
was buried quick.

An old man hanged, afterward dragged up and down till his bowels fell out.

Christopher Morley, and two English-boyes of Castle Comer hanged; one other
English-boy (eight or nine years old) had his head cleft, and before he was
dead hanged on his fathers Tenterhooks.

About threescore men, women and children murdered at the Graige, many of them
buried alive.

County of Caterlough.
Richard Lake hanged at Leiglinbridge, sixteen more hanged near that place, two
more murdered near Caterlagh, two women hung up by the hair of their heads all
night, the next day (being found still alive) they were murdered.

At or near Leighlin, bridge, three men with their Wives, and Children
murdered. A woman newly delivered of two children, the one of them had his
brains beaten out against the stones, and after thrown into the River Barrow.
One woman and her daughter murdered. About forty English murdered thereabout.
Almost all the English about Gowran, and Wells hanged and murdered.

County of Kildare.
Ralph Heyward (having turned to Mass) was murdered, his wife and two children
hanged, the one at her neck, the other at her girdle, a Dog, and a Cat hanged
with them.

Robert Woods shot to death.

John Morley and his wife and five children, and one John Pliny (after they
were turned to Mass) murdered.

County of Dublin.
About 28. December. 1641. The wife of Joseph Smithson Minister, was carried from
Deane Grange near Dublin, to Stillorgan from thence to Powers court, and there
she, and her Servant hanged.

At Balcothery, William Rimmer (a Packet Poast) and Mr. Pardoe a Minister
murdered, Mr. Pardoe being after cast upon a Dunghill had his head eaten with
Swine.

A foul murder committed on 'Dirrick Hubbert of Holme-Patrick, in the County
of Dublin, Esquire; the second of December. anno Dom. 1641.

County of Mead
Near Navan, the son of James Wignal murdered about the last of November, 1641.

Mris. Heiglin, her daughter, and two children murdered by two men hired
thereunto, for two barrels of Wheat.

Four more hanged, and murdered, at the Navan.

Kings County.
Mris. June Addis of Kilcoursie (after their going to Mass murdered at her
house in Popes-country, having a child not a quarter old, the murderers
putting the dead mothers breast into the childs mouth, bad it suck English
Bastard, and so left it.

Arthur Scot murdered at Disloony having twenty wounds given him, Another
Englishman hanged at the same place.

Henry Bigland, and eleven more hanged and murdered about Knocknemeis.

A woman (aged 80 years) stripped naked in frost and snow by two daughters of
Rory Coghlan of Fercalward, before whose door she dyed.

John Lorcan murdered and chopped to pecces.

Twenty two Widows, and several others stripped naked, and covering themselves
in a house with straw, the Rebels lighted straw, and strew amongst them to burn
them, and they had been burned, had they not been rescued by others, who turned
them out naked in frost and snow, so as many dyed; the children dying in their
mothers arms.

Queens County.
John Nicholson and his Wife murdered by Florence Fitz Patrick and his
servants. Mris. Fitz Patrick blaming the Murderers because they brought not
Mris. Nicholsons fat or grease wherewith she might have made candles.

Tho. Keys Esquire; a Justice of the Peace of the said County (66. years old) and
Tho. Dubleday both hanged near Burrowes Castle, and Dubleday shot as he was
hanging; both being first stripped naked, and gored and pricked in several
parts of their bodies.

Amy Manphins. Husband murdered, and she compelled to stand in his blood; and
she being stripped naked, was drawn by the hair through Thorns, and after sent
away.

An English Girl half hanged, and buried quick.

Six English hanged up by Florence Fitz Patrick (after quarter promised) about
23 January 1641.

Near Kilfeckell in the Queens County, an Englishman with his Wife, and four
or five Children hanged, by command of Sir Morgan Cavenagh, and Mr. Robert
Harpols, all afterward cast into one hole, and buried quick.

County of Wicklow.
At K^^^krath Park Edward Snape, and two others hanged about 20 Nov. 1641.

John the son of William Leeson stripped, and hanged at Baligarny, about 25 Nov.
1641.

A young child (a year and a quarter old) taken from the mothers back, thrown
down and trod upon, that it died: the mother and three other children stripped
naked, so as the said three children died.

County West Mead.
In Kolbeggan, a boy and two women hanged; one of them having a sucking child,
desired it might be buried with her, knowing it would suffer afterward, but it
was cast out, and starved to death.

William Sibthorpe (Parish Clerk of Mullingar) hanged.

Edmund Dalton and Mr. Moor^heads son murdered.

County of Galway.
Mr. Adam Nowell and six more hanged, and murdered, by the Lord of Clanmorris.

Hugh Langridge murdered near Loughreagh, having received 16 wounds, and his
son having nine wounds, and left for dead, yet recovered.

Mr. Corbet an old Minister had his head cut off by two young Cowheards near
Loughreagh.

The son of an Englishman murdered: a child so beaten that it died within
three days.

Threescore and five Protostants (some say eighty, some ninety) many of them
Ministers (and amongst them the Bishop of Killalagh) for the most part all
murdered at the Bridge of Shreel, very few escaping.

County of Longford.
Mary-ornelly murdered in Longford, after quarter promised.

William Steel and four others hanged at a Windmill which is near unto
Rackleen.

The wife of Henry Mead hanged, the said Henry himself, being placed in a ring
amongst the Rebels each stabbing of him, as he was forced to flee from side,
to side; and so continued until his Shoulder, and Breast were cut in two, with
a Bill-hook.

George Foster with his Wife and Child, and the Wife of John Bizell murdered
at Ballinecor. One other drowned; Some children there buried alive.

County of Roscomon
Sixteen English hanged at Ballileague.

Nine murdered at Ballinefad, whereof four were children, and one woman great
with child, through whose belly the Rebels thrust their Pikes as she was
hanging, because the child should not live.

William Steward had Collops cut off him being alive, fire-coals put into his
mouth, his belly ripped up, and his intralls wrapped about his neck, and wrists of
his arms.

County of Sleigo.
Thirty eight Protestants put into the Gaol of Sleigo, all, except two or three
murdered there, the same night, by diverse breaking in upon them at midnight.

A Friar, with some Soldiers, undertaking to conduct Mr. Tho. Walker, a
Minister, his man, and two Gentlewomen from Roserk to Abbey Boil, the Friar
riding away, they fell, into an ambush laid for them, where Mr. Walker being on
his knees at prayers they cleft his scull to the mouth, killed his man, and
stripped the women naked, one of the women being afterward murdered at
Ballemoat.

Thirty five men, women, and children murdered near Ballesekerry.

Four murdered in the streets of Sleigo, and Isabel Beard, great with child,
pursued by one of the Friars men into the River where he murdered her, the
very childs feet appearing through one of the wounds he gave her.

Mr. William Ollifant Clerk stripped, and half hanged, and after dragged with a
rope about his neck at a horse heels up and down, because he would not turn
Papist. Another Minister the same time murdered.

At Ardneglasse and Skreene about thirty Protestants, men, women, and children
murdered.

Ten men, women, and children buried alive near Titemple, alias Temple-house.

County of May.
About seven and twenty persons, besides children drowned in the Bay or Harbor
near Killalagh, by the instigation of the Friars.

Thirty or forty English (formerly turned Papists) driven and forced into the
Sea near Killalagh, and drowned.

A young boy killed by one that had been his Schoolmaster, a man wounded, and
buried alive, a Minister murdered after he had gone to Mass, another hanged
near Ballehen.

At the Moine fifty nine Protestants stripped naked, and after barbarously
murdered.

William Gibs and his wife (both very old) murdered at the Moine.

One hundred and twenty men, women and children stripped haked, and after
murdered at Bellick.

About the 20 of Nov. 1641. George Buchanon having received many wounds, was
after buried alive.

About August 1643. the wife of John Gardener of the Barrony of Carragh, having
leave, and two Irish-men for visiting her children at Belleck, was by the said
Convoy on the way cruelly murdered.

County of Tipperary.
Fifteen men and women Protestants were murdered at the City of Cashel, and
near Cashel were three or four children murdered by a Convoy.

Twenty four English at the Silver-mines, after they had revolted to Mass,
murdered.

County of Leitrim.
Mr. William Lifton and Mr. Thomas Fullerton Clerks, kept two days without
meat and drink, then murdered near Manner Hamilton.

An English child taken by the heels, and its brains dashed out against a
block of Timber.

County of Clare
Christopher Hepdich, and sixteen more English Protestants murdered at, or
near the Castle of Inchicrony.

County of Tirone.
Robert Bickerdick and his wife drowned in the Blacke-water, James Carlisle and
his wife also murdered.

Thomas Carlisle put to death, and so were about fourscore and seventeen more.

Mr. John Mother, and Mr. Blithe, both Clerks, murdered in, or near Dungannon,
although Mr. Blithe had Sir Phelim Oneals protection, and threescore families
of the Town of Dungannon murdered.

About three hundred murdered in the way to Colraine, by direction of Sir
Phelim Oneale and Turlogh his brother.

In and about Dungannon were murdered three hundred and sixteen, between
Charlemount and Dungannon above four hundred murdered.

Drowned at the River of Benbarke, and the Black water two hundred and six.

Thirteen murdered in one morning by Patrick, Mr. Crew of Dungannon and two
young Rebels did murder one hundred and forty women and children, the wife of
Brian Kelly of Loughgal murdered five and forty with her own hands.

At a Mill-pond in the Parish of Killamon, were drowned in one day three
hundred.

Eighteen Scottish Infants hanged on Clothiers Tenterhooks, and one young fat
Scotchman murdered, and candles made of his grease. Another Scotchmans belly
ripped up, the end of his small guts tied to a tree, then he drawn about till
his guts were pulled out, that they might try (said they) whether a Dogs or a
Scotchmans guts were longest.

County of Ardmagh.
Protestants in multitudes forced over the Bridge of Portadowne, whereby at
several times there were drowned in the River Ban, above one Thousand.

Great numbers of Protestants drowned at Corbridge and Kinnard.

Mr Fullerton Clerk, Mr. Awberry, Mr. Gladwich, murdered in the way toward
Portadowne.

Many others murdered, five murdered soon after the beginning of the
Rebellion; one hundred and forty, or one hundred and sixty drowned at
Portadowne, fifty murdered at Blackwater Church, twenty drowned near the water
of Callon, and several others murdered.

Mr. William Blundel drawn by the neck in a rope up and down Black water to
confess money, and three weeks after, he, with his wise, and seven Children
drowned; forty four at several times murdered. A wife compelled to hang her
own husband, with several other notorious murders.

At Scaruah bridge, an hundred (some say an hundred andtwenty) drowned more,
eighty more, sixty more, fifty more, sixty -- twenty; seven men murdered.

Twelve murdered, whereof Mr. Robinson the Minister, and his wife and three
children were part.

Many Protestants put into a thatcht house, and there burnt alive.

The Lord Caulfield murdered.

Many burned in the Church of Blackwater. The wife of Arnold Tailor (great with
child) had her belly ripped up, then drowned.

Thomas Mason buried alive. Seventeen men, women, and children cast into a
Bog-pit, many more murdered.

One thousand five hundred in three Parishes murdered; twenty seven more
murdered. Mr. Cambel drowned.

Three hundred Protestants stripped naked, and put into the Church of Loghal,
whereof about an hundred murdered within the Church, amongst whom John Greg
was quartered alive, his quarters thrown into the face of Richard Greg his
father; the said Richard was after there murdered, having received seventeen
or eighteen wounds, after cut into quarters in his wives presence; such as were
not murdered, were turned our a begging amongst the Irish naked, and into the
cold; most of which were killed by Irish Cripples, their Truls, and children.

One hundred and fourscore drowned at twice, at the bridge of Callon. One
hundred (some say two hundred) more drowned in a Lough near Baltinakilmorrogh
within two miles of Loughal.

Mr. Gabriel Constable, and his mother (eighty years old) murdered.

To the number of five hundred forty eight families murdered in the Parish of
Killaman.

Three men had their brains knocked out with a hatcher within the Church of
Benbarb; eight women drowned in a River under the same Church. Christopher
Glover murdered.

By special Command from Sir Philem Oneile, Master James Maxwel Licutenant, was
dragged out of his bed, (raving in the height of a burning Fever) driven two
miles, and murdered; his wife, great with child stripped stark naked and
drowned in the black water, the child half born.

Mr. Starkey (above an hundred years old) and his two daughters stripped
starkenaked; the daughters insorced to support, and lead their father, (he not
being able to go of himself) and having gone three quarters of a mile, were all
three drowned in a Turff-pit.

County of Donegal.
William Mac Kenny, and his mother in law, and his Wife (great with child)
murdered, his said Wife having her belly ripped up, and the child cut out of
the womb.

Robert Akin clerk, and thirteen more murdered at Castledoe.

Threescore persons that came in boats from Killalagh murdered by the Mac
Swines, and the O Boiles.

County of Down.
Fourscore forced to go on the Ice, at Lough Kearne, till they broke the Ice
and were drowned.

Diverse murdered at Castle Island and Down.

Mr. Tudge the Minister of the Newry, Lieut. Trevor, and his wife, and 24 more
(some account 50) murdered and cut in pieces at the pass of Ballonery.

A Scotch-man, an English man, and a Welsh-man imprisoned in the Stocks at
Newcastle, where they lay without breeches upon raw Hides, that their joints
rotted; insomuch, that when two of them were asterwards hanged, one of their
feet fell off by the anckle.

County of Cavan.
Many Protestants forced over the bridge of Belturbet and there drowned.

Adam Baily, and several others murdered at Kilkelly.

William Rocket drowned near Belturbet.

Several Scottish families destroyed, two of the Hovies, and Abraham Jones
murdered, several murders committed at Butlers Bridge.

A destracted English man run through with a Pike, he laughing the while.

County of Monaghan.
Many Protestants hanged at Carick Magrosse.

Sixteen Protestants at once hanged at Clowns. Several others there also
hanged, and sixteen women and children drowned in a Turff-pit.

Richard Blany Esquire; hanged.

Seven murdered in the Fewes, Ensign Lloyd and others murdered and one buried
quick.

John Hughes, and twenty four more murdered.

At Tully threescore murdered after quarter given. Eighteen murdered.

Seventeen men, women, and children drowned at Ballerosse. Many murdered and
four drowned.

Cornet Clenton and his Grand child drowned, and many others murdered.

About thirty murdered in Farney, two of them so aged they went upon staves,
and another had at least forty wounds.

One Mac Maghon, Capt. of Monaghan sported himself by thrusting a wooden
broach into the Fundament of an English man, or Scotch-man, then driving him
about the Room, with a joint stool, being much affected at the miserable
gestures of the poor party so tormented. The said Mac Maghan and his
Confederates at a Feast, after dinner had an English man bound before them, and
at each health every one gave him a wound, after which they cast him upon a
dunghill where languishing he dyed.

County of Fermanagh.
Arthur Campin, and sixteen more with him murdered. At another time 24
murdered. At another time two murdered.

One killed, and fourteen hanged.

Seven hanged at one time, and diverse others put to death.

Fourscore men, women, and children, burned and killed in Lugoole.

At Moueogh Castle eight murdered. At Tullough Castle fourscore murdered,
near Cordiller three hanged, One more hanged.

Fourteen Protestants hanged.

Forty Protestants in the Parish of New Town murdered.

Eighteen murdered.

Thirty murdered in the Parish of Clankelly.

Twelve murdered in New Town.

William Ogden murdered.

Sixty, (another says an hundred) murdered at Tully, after quarter given, or
promised them.

Fifteen hanged at Lothers-Town. Two murdered at Kinnally.

The which cruel Rebellion was in projection several years, before it broke
forth; and in order thereunto an intercourse of letters and correspondence was
settled amongst others between the Earl of Tirone, then in Flanders, and the
Popish Primate of Ardmagh Rely, which barbarous design was also fomented by the
Recusant party of the Parliament of Ireland, who obstructed the sending away
several Companies of Papist soldiers, raised for the service of the King of
Spain, which were kept on Shipboard in the Bay of Dublin; And that they might
the better know how to put their execrable design in execution, they contrive,
on pretense of danger, the searching of the stores: For that purpose it was
alleged in the Parliament, that the Earl of Straffords man had cast out
threatening words against the Parliament, tending to blow them up, the stores
lying under the place where they sat, and amongst those that were appointed on
this pretense to search the stores: the Lord Mac. Guire was one, who freely
gave money to the Officers of the store.

The Parliament being prorogued upon St. Francis day, in the beginning of
October, they met at Multifarnam in the County of West Mead, being a Convent
of Franciscans, the Heads of the Romish Clergy, and many other Laymen, where
amongst other things there it was debated (the time of this bloody Tragedy
being agreed upon) what course should be taken with the English and
Protestants, about which they were divided.

Some were for Banishment, without attempting on their lives, as the King of
Spain did the Moors out of Granado and other parts of his Dominions, to the
number of many hundred thousand.

Others were for the cutting off all the English and Protestants, alleging
that the instance of the dismissed Moors was the sole Act of the King and Queen
of Spain, contrary to the advice of their Councils: and that if they had been
cut off, Christendom had not groaned under the miseries it has suffered by
the Piracies of Argiers, etc.

Some others of them were for securing their persons, until they should ransom
themselves, or be exchanged, in case they should not accomplish their designs
without a war, and being in their power they could dispose of them at pleasure.
But coming to no result in this matter, every party followed their own
resolutions, some killed, others imprisoned, and only plundered, yet such was
their cruelty, that one hundred fifty four thousand men, women, and children,
English and Scotch, were massacred in that Kingdom between the 23. of October,
1641. and the first of March following, by computation of their Priests that
were present, and principal Actors in those Tragedies, and were directed by
some chief Rebels of Ireland, to take the Computation, lest they should be
reported to be more bloody then in truth there was cause.

FINIS.

