AN ABSTRACT OF THE COMMISSION FOR Greenwich Hospital FOR SEAMEN.
Design of the Commission.
HIS MAJESTY by His Letters Patents directed to His Royal Highness the Prince of
Denmark, and others, setting forth His Desire, That the Trade, Navigation and
Naval Strength of the Realm of England (whereupon the Safety and Fourishing
State thereof does so much depend) should by all proper Means be Promoted; and
being persuaded that nothing will more Effectually contribute thereto, than by
Encouragements to Increase the Number of English Seamen, as well for the
Strengthening the Navy Royal, as for Supplying the Occcasions of the Merchants:
And whereas the Seafaring Men of this Kingdom have long distinguished
themselves throughout the World, by their Industry, Skilfulness, Courage and
Constancy, in Engagements and Hazards for the Defense and Honor of their
Country; and nothing being more likely to continue their Ancient Reputation,
and invite greater Numbers to betake themselves to the Sea, than the providing,
That Seamen, who by Age, Wounds or other Accidents shall be Disabled, may be
Supported at the Public Charge; and that the Children of such Disabled, and
also the Widows and Children of such as be Slain in Sea-Service may be Provided
for and Educated: He has Determined to Erect an Hospital for the Purposes
aforesaid.

Grant of the Kings House at Greenwich.
And in Order to put the same in Execution, His Majesty, with the late Queen,
did, by Their Letters Patents Dated the Twenty fifth Day of October last past,
Grant unto Trustees therein named, a Parcel of Ground in East Greenwich in the
County of Kent, containing and fet out as in the said Letters Patents is fully
expressed, together with the Palace at Greenwich, Built by King Charles the
Second, to the Intent that the same shall be converted to an Hospital for
Seamen, their Widows and Children.

And His Majesty considering, That the Constituting a Foundation of that
Nature, and Framing Rules and Statutes for the Government thereof is a Matter
of Difficulty, and such as requires Mature Deliberation; therefore reposing
especial Trust and Confidence in their known Discretions, Commissioners
appointed.
Abilities and Integrities, he has Appointed the aforesaid Commissioners.

Who are Directed to Meet from time to time, and so many as shall be present,
The Quorum.
of whom any one of His Majesty's Privy Council, and any one of the
Commissioners of the Treasury, and any one of the Commissioners of the
Admiralty, and the Mayor of the City of London, or any one of the Aldermen of
the said City for the time being, to be Four at the least, to consider of such
Methods as they shall judge Expedient to be Observed in Executing the same.

And any Seven or more of them, of whom Four or more to be such as aforesaid,
To take to their Assistance such as they think fit.
are Authorized to take to their Assistance such Persons as they shall think
fit to Advise with, in the Execution of this Commission.

And out of their own Number, as often as they shall judge it Expedient, To
make Sub-Committees.
to Constitute such and so many Sub-Committees, and to Invest them with such
Powers, as they shall think fit, pursuant to the Powers given to themselves:
and to Revoke and make Void, and to Revive the said Committees, and calling to
their Assistance the Surveyor General of His Majesty's Works, and such others
as they shall think fit, to consider what part of the Structures now standing
will be unfit, To Consider how the present Building may be made serviceable.
and in what manner such as they shall think fit to stand may best be Altered
for the use of the said Hospital, in order to Represent the same to His
Majesty, and to prepare Models of such Buildings, To prepare Models and Schemes.
and Conveniences, as they shall think proper to be Erected upon the Premises
Granted, with such Schemes or Draughts as may Explain the same, and with all
convenient speed to present the same to His Majesty for His Royal Approbation.

And a Charter and Statutes to be approved of by His Majesty.
And with the Assistance of the Attorney or Solicitor General or others His
Majesty's Council Learned in the Law, to prepare a Charter of Foundation of the
Hospital, and Statutes, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances for the
Foundation, perpetual Management, Rule and Government thereof, and all other
Matters relating thereto, and to present the same to His Majesty's Royal
Consideration.

His Majesty gives 2000 l. per annum to the Hospital.
And His Majesty, as an Instance of His Princely Zeal to so Pious a Work, has
Determined, and does Declare, That He will yearly cause the Sum of Two thousand
Pounds to be paid out of His Treasury, to the Uses of the said Hospital,
without any further or other Warrant to be obtained for the same, into the
Hands of the Treasurer for the Hospital, at such times as shall be desired by
the Commissioners.

And not doubting but His Example, and the great Advantage it will prove to the
Kingdom, will dispose great Numbers of His good Subjects to the Advancing so
Charitable a Design, The Commissiones empowered to receive Subs^^iptions of
Money, etc.
He does Empower the said Commissioners to Take and Receive all such voluntary
Gifts or Subscriptions of Money, Goods or Chattels, Estates or Interests in any
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Hereditaments or other things whatsoever,
which any Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate shall be willing to Give,
Bestow, or Bequeath to the same: And requires, To ^ake public Notices of this
Commission.
That the said Commissioners do Cause Public Notification to be made of these
Presents, in such manner as they shall think most conducible to the furtherance
of the said Charity.

To ^epute Persons ^o take subscripions, etc.
And they are Authorized to Depute Persons, by Instruments under their Hands and
Seals, to Take Subscriptions, and to Collect Moneys Contributed, and to bring
in to the Hands of the Treasurer; and to displace such Deputies, and appoint
others as they shall see Cause; and to establish Cheques, Comptrolls and
Orders, for the due Charging of the Treasurer, and also the said Deputies, and
all other Persons who shall be Chargeable with any Moneys or other Profits to
the said Uses: And upon suspicion of Fraud, Powe to Examine upon Oath.
or Concealments of Moneys or other Things Given, to Examine Witnesses upon
Oath, or by any other Lawful means, and to proceed thereupon with effect.

Required to certify to the Treasury all Gifts.
And They are Required to Certify, from time to time, to the Treasury, the
Names of the Persons, Societies, etc. who shall Give to this Charitable Design,
with the Sums of Moneys or other Things devised, to the end a Perpetual
Memorial may be made of such well disposed Persons, and whereby the Treasurer
may be Charged in his Accounts.

Treasurer appointed.
His Majesty confiding very much in the Ability and Faithfulness of John Evelyn,
Senior, Esquire has appointed him Treasurer and Receiver General of the said
Hospital, during His Majesty's Pleasure; And in Case of his Death or Removal,
does Empower the Commissioners or any Seven, of whom Four or more to be as
aforesaid, to appoint One or more Persons to the said Place of Treasurer, and
such to Remove or Displace, as they shall see Cause: The Treasurer to give
Acquittances.
And the Treasurer is Empowered to give Acquittances for all Sums of Moneys or
other things Received; and shall be subject to such Comptrolls as shall be
Established by the Commissioners: His Majesty strictly enjoining, That nothing
given to the said Uses, be diverted or otherwise applied, than to the
Charitable purposes mentioned, or to defray necessary Charges relating thereto.

Power after His Majesty has approved the Models, to Proceed and Finish.
And the Commissioners are Empowered, so soon as His Majesty shall have
approved, under His Sign Manual, their Report in that behalf, to take down, or
to alter the present Structure, in such manner as shall be appointed. And after
such time as He shall have allowed of such Models and Schemes as they shall
have presented, as aforesaid, under His Sign Manual, or otherwise, for the
Building, Fitting and Furnishing the said Hospital, To Put in hand, Carry on,
and Finish the same, proceeding therein in such Method as to them shall seem
best.

All Money to be Issued by Warrants in Writing.
And by Warrants in Writing, to direct the Issuing of all Moneys, for Buying
Materials, and other Uses and Expenditures of the Hospital; and all other
Charges incident to the Execution of the Commission; And Agree upon, and Set
down Instructions, for the keeping of the Money brought into the Treasury, and
the Materials, Provisions and Stores, and for the Issuing of the same; And
appoint in what manner all Books and Accounts shall be Kept, Audited and
Allowed.

Powers to be given to ^ub-Committes.
And out of their own Number, and such others as they shall choose, to make
Sub-Committees, and invest them with Power to make Contracts, or other Things
which they shall entrust them with, pursuant to the Power given to themselves;
and to make Void, and Revive the same, as they see needful: And they are to
Consider and Determine of all other Matters for the Carrying on this Design,
till the same shall be Completed.

Commiss^oners to be accountable each for himself only.
And His Majesty does declare, That the said Commissioners shall be accountable
only for their own respective Receipts, Actings and Doings. And does Grant to
the before appointed Treasurer, the Yearly Sallary of Two hundred pounds, from
time to time to be allowed upon his Accounts. And does Empower the
Commissioners to Proceed, Agree and Conclude in all Cases and Things left
undetermined upon His late Commission granted for the purposes aforesaid, Dated
the 12th day of March last past; which Commission is hereby Revoked and
Determined.

Dated at Westminster the 10th Day of September, in the Seventh Year of His
Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased,
Printers to the King's most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


