The Reformed Samaritan: OR, THE WORSHIP OF GOD By the Measures of Spirit and
Truth.

Preached for a VISITATION-SERMON at the Convention of the Clergy, by the
Reverend Archdeacon of Coventry, in Coventry; April the Sixth, 1676.

To which is Annexed, A Review of a short Discourse Printed in 1649. about the
Necessity and Expediency of Worshipping God by set Forms.

By JOHN ALLINGTON Vicar Of Leamington-Hastang.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Thomas Basset, at the George near St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1678.

To the Honorable CHARLES LEIGH Esquire. [Now] at Leighton-Buzzard, Be Health,
Honor, Happiness.
SIR,
OF that Gentile who built them a Synagogue, the Jews gave this Eulogie; That
he was worthy, and that he loved their Nation. That your self came a worthy
person into the World, your paternal Dignity will avouch; and that you are one
who not only love your Nation, but the Religion of it, I shall only in
proportion to the Synagogue say, You have lately at your own Cost beautisied
the better part of the House of God, not doubting but Beauty in Place, as well
as in a Person, may be a great attractive; endeavoring to woe the People to
worship their God in the Beauty of Holiness. Having thus done, and hearing the
following Sermon, you did more than desire that it might be made public; and
merely therefore, because it had for subject only the Worship of God; which as
distinct from Service, has not been in your hearing so plainly explicated, as
you heartily conceived it is. Now, [honoured Sir] to gratify you, and at your
instigation to promote the Worship of God, in the capacities of such who are
not sinely learned, I have delivered my Endeavors, and your Desires to the
world. My Intention is good, the Acceptance dubious: but shall I please God and
please you in so doing, I have my end.

There is annexed to the Sermon; [what many years has lain in the posture it
now appears] which for the Brevity, Easiness, and Time it was writ in, was much
importuned. Thousands [since the Glory of our Worship brake forth that dismal
Cloud, which many years it stood eclipsed in] I say, thousands have now courted
it as the rising Sun; but by their mincing and mangling, and neglect of it,
declare they receive it only as an expedient to hold a Living: Whereas when
that was writ, a Living was lost for the using of it, and the Author suspended
by an imperious Beggar [Tam ab Officio quam a Beneficio] for reading the
Common Prayer without Book. The sum is, that to worship God by a set Form, is
the stablest and most certain advance of his Glory; and the securing of the
holy Duty from all impertinencies. A Discourse not unfit to accompany and wait
upon a Sermon precisely about Worship; which shall suffice at this time to
trouble both your honorable Self, and the willing Reader.

From my Study at Leamington, November. 20. 1677. Yours, Most willing to Honor,
Love, and Pray for you. John Allington.

THE REFORMED SAMARITAN.
JOHN 4. 23. The hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth.
TO traverse the Coherence from the sixth to this present Verse, would spend
too much time, and therefore, being intelligentibus loquor, I shall observe as
introductory to my Text, only three things.

1. One concerning the Woman; a Samaritan. 2. The place; Jerusalem and Gerasin.
3. The Worship it self.
First, The observable in the Woman, it was a religious Hypocrisy: For, when
our blessed Master convinced her of being a close Adulteress; then Verse. 18.
she begins to speak godlily, and to turn her discourse (as Factious Saints
use) to a religious Controversy: Our Fathers (says she) worshipped in this
mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where we ought to worship.

Our Savior puts her in mind of living in Adultery, and she puts our Savior
upon the decision of a Question: our Savior tells her of her living with one
that was not her Husband; and she tells our Savior that the Jews did not
worship where they should. Our Savior tells her of an undoubted fault; and she
makes scruple of a disputable Ceremony. And in this she seems to be the Emblem
of too too many, yea of too too many even at this very day: For have not we
those, who make huge scruple about what they understand not, and yet none at
all of indisputable and known sins? I have heard of one, who made an huge
scruple of kneeling to ask Blessing to a Mother, who made none of lying with
another Woman's Husband! I have heard of some, who make an huge scruple of any
Recreation upon the Lord's day, who upon all the days of the Week have made
none at all of Rebellion, Schism, Sedition, Heresy, which (witness the Apostle
Gal. 5. 20.
) are more undoubted wickednesses! Yea, we have heard and seen too too many
boggle at a Surplice, who made nothing of Plundering, Killing, and Cutting of
Throats! Too too many scrupling a Gesture at the Sacrament, who made none
(after their own mode) to receive it with Hatred, Malice, and all
Incharitableness. And what is this, but just as did the Samaritan Woman, to
wave common and crying sins with religious controversies? yea, what are all
such scruples, but merely Religion in Hypocrisy?

Secondly, The next observable it is about the place, from Verse. 21. where it
is written, Neither in this mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem shall ye worship;
and it shall be only this. These words are not (as some mistake them) an
inhibition of set places, as if God under the Gospel would have no Churches, no
Temples, no holy places. But this is a gracious enlargement, and an holy
Liberty given to devout Christians, in any place to erect a Temple, and in
every Country, Town, or City, to build an House of Prayer.

In those days the Samaritans they held themselves bound to Gerasin; and the
Jews (we all know) were confined and bound to go up to Jerusalem for to
worship: but by the coming of Christ and his Gospel, so are Christians
enlarged, that wheresoever we shall dedicate Houses to his Worship, there will
he be worshipped, there will he receive our Vows, our Prayers, our Praises.

Nor does worshipping in spirit and truth in the least oppose this: For, if
worshipping in spirit and in truth were an opposition to material places, then
we might not pray in our Closets, nor in our Chambers, nor in our Houses, nor
in Groves, nor in Fields, nor indeed upon God's Earth; for these are all
material as well as Churches. Nay I might add, not in our Bodies, for even
they are materials also.

By Worshipping then in spirit and truth, there is no rejection of material
places; no, neither of Jerusalem nor Gerasin, in order to Evangelical worship:
For where Story tells us, Eruptions of Fire would not permit the re-edifying
of a Temple, even there at this day the Christians have a Temple, and do
worship.

Thirdly therefore (to come directly to the Text) Worship it self; and to
glance at the high expedient of Uniformity therein.

2 Kings 17. you may read what these Samaritans were; to wit, a people planted
in Samaria, in room of those Ten Tribes which were carried to Assyria. Now this
people by necessity, and out of a fear of extirpation by Lions, sent for a
Priest of the Lord to put them in a right way of worship. He came; but as it is
written, they would not be ruled; they would not be ordered by him: for 2 Kings
19. 33.
they feared the Lord, and served their own gods.

Now it seems to me very observable, that those who would not be ruled by the
Priest of God; those who would serve gods of their own, they could never agree
what gods to have, nor what Religion to set up: Every one is singular, every
one for his own invention, for his own gods.

Verse. 30. the men of Babylon, they set up Succoth-Benoth: the men of Cuth,
they set up Nergal; the men of Hamath, they set up Ashima: But the Avites they
would none of these; and therefore they set up gods of their own, Nibhaz, and
Tartack: yea, the Sepharvaims they will none of them; for they set up
Adrammelech, and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.

And is it not proportionably so, even at this day? Those who will have no
Churches, nor no Temples, but their own Bodies; in them they will have no
worship, but only what their private spirits, and their own Fanatic
conceptions shall set on foot: So that the Samaritans never set up more gods
than they do Idols! Things they call Religion, Ordinances, Worship; when indeed
they really are Self-conceit, Spiritual Pride, superstitious Abominations. Even
so too too many among us, they will not worship the living God, unless they may
have the humor of their own Inventions, that is, do it their own way. So that
as the Samaritans worshipped they knew not what; even so do these, and all
Fanatics, worship they know not how: The ready way to make confusion (as it
daily did) to cover the whole Face of our Land again. For, if the men of
Babylon may set up Succoth-Benoth, why may not the men of Cuth set up Nergal?
And if they may set up Nergal, why may not the men of Hamath set up Ashima? If
every Sect, and every different Party, may follow their own Inventions, and
follow their own gods, or their own worship: I then cannot see any reason in
the world, why the Missal, as well as the Directory; and the Anabaptist, as
well as the Presbyterian, should not have their Way.

It is very, very lately since we in this Land might have said, There was no
King in Israel. And yet even then, look what there follows was not permitted
to the Sons of the Church: For, whereas it is written, Judge. 17. 6. Every man
did that which was right in his own eyes; sure I am, what was right, not only
in our Eyes, but in the Eyes of the whole Church, was not then permitted. The
plea of a tender Conscience, it could then have no hearing: For, besides
Indictment upon Indictment, my self knows the man who under pain of
Imprisonment, and Banishment, was forbid to use one Collect of our public
Prayers: So that Usurpation and the true Worship, seem like the Ark and Dagon,
they could by no means stand together. Schism and Sedition are Twins,
contemporary to all Ages; and therefore that the peace of God and his Church
may be among us, no one greater expedient can be found than an Uniformity in
public and divine Worship.

Nor is this extravagant, or beside the Text: for, the Jews, whilst yet they
had but one God, had but one Temple; and in that Temple an Uniformity of
Worship: whilst they all worshipped God one and the same way, so long, Psalm.
122. 3. Jerusalem was a City at unity within it self; yea, and as it seems by
the Prophet, therefore at unity within it self: For he no sooner gave this high
commendation, but straight follows, For thither the tribes go up, the tribes
of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the
Lord. But when once Jeroboam had set up his Calves, when the Tribes professing
the same God, set up diverse and different ways of worship: when the Samaritan
had a Temple in Gerasin, and the Lord another at Jerusalem: when once they rent
the Church, and made a breach in public Worship; Judah and Israel, Samaritan
and Jew, could never be reconciled; from age to age, the Schismatical disturbed
and persecuted the Church of God. It is observable, from Jeroboams Calves, to
the return from Captivity, there is numbered nigh 500 years; and yet in all this
time the Schismatics kept their stomachs, and left their malice as a
successive Inheritance. For when it was so that good King Cyrus sent home his
Captives; when he gave both leave and assistance to rebuild their Temple; the
Samaritans as afraid of the good old way Ezr. 4. 4.
of unity and uniformity in Worship, they did even all they could to suppress
the work.

Yea, more than 400 years after that, at the Feast of unleavened bread, when
the Priests did open the Gates about Midnight, Samaritani quidam, certain
Samaritans entered into Jerusalem, and went and spread men's Bones amidst the
Porches, and over all the Temple, Antiq. c. 3. initio cap.
as Josephus, Lib. 18.

Now see the peevishness of Schismatics; all must conform to them, or they to
none: For, look what they themselves approved not, that they would not the
right Worshippers of God should do; because they liked not the Festival,
because they would have no Holy Days, because they themselves scrupled the
keeping of the Feast of unleavened bread: therefore they profane the Temple,
and do all they can to keep others from their bounden duty. The Schismatical
party could never be won, never appeased: after once there was Calves in
Bethel, and a Temple at Gerasin, the Jew and Samaritan could never be at unity.

The Church of God (blessed be God) is not at this day confined to a People,
nor to a Temple: Christians may 1 TI^. 2. 8.
in every place lift up pure hands and worship God. But that we may so do in
the unity of Spirit, and in the bond of peace, the premises to me evince, there
can be no greater expedient than Uniformity: For the point here expressly spoken
of, and to, it is public Worship; and almost all the heats and animosities of
Christendom they arise about public Worship.

1 Cor. 1. 10.
I beseech you (therefore) brethren (as St. Paul) by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing. For if the same confession of Faith
be to the Glory of God and Christian Religion, why not the same public
confession of sins, the same public oblations of Praise and Thanksgiving? If
to have one Mind and one Tongue, be commendable, and highly desirable in the
Christian Church; why not one Form of Prayer, why not one public Worship? For,
that it is as expedient in our public devotions, as in our public
professions, to speak the same thing; considerable it is, that as we have the
Apostolical Creed for the one, so we have the Lords Prayer for the other:
Christ having given unto us as well a Common Prayer, as a common Faith; and
indeed no Congregation in the world can confidently say, we know how we
worship, but such only as have set Forms: against which, and the appendencies
thereupon, That there is nothing at all in these (too too much abused) words,
we will now pass to a peculiar and strict survey of them.

The hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers pers shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth.

In which words, for Methods sake, thus.

First, The time here spoken of: The hour comes and now is.

Secondly, The Subject spoken on, and that is the Worship of God: The true
worshippers of God shall

Thirdly, The Mode or manner how: Spirit, Truth.


2 Pet. 2. 8.
First of the Time, The hour comes and now is.

He to whom a thousand years are but as one day, He, to admonish our mortality,
speaks of the whole term and state of the Gospel, as but an hour; The hour
comes and now is; and yet this Hour extends from his coming in the Flesh, to
his coming in the Clouds: and therefore if we strictly and grammatically look
upon the words, being it is not only said, the hour comes, but also Now is;
this Nunc est, this Now is, it must be taken Inchoative, that is, Now
commencing, or now beginning. For as a man at first turning of the Glass may
say, now is the hour in which such or such things shall be done; which
perchance shall not begin, or be done, till the middle, or latter end of the
hour: Even so whereas our Savior v. 21.
says, The hour is coming and now is, wherein neither in that mountain, nor
yet in Jerusalem they should worship; this Now was not instantly, and from that
very period of time to take place, but within the compass of the hour: for
these words are observed to have been spoken even the very first year of his
preaching, and as v. 54.
appears in this Chapter, before his second Miracle. So that neither was
Jerusalem or Gerasin laid aside so soon: yea, before the Temple was destroyed,
and before they forbear to go up to Jerusalem to worship, it was nigh forty
years after this saying. Peter and John went up into the Temple at the hour of
prayer Acts 3. 1.
: the Ethiopian Eunuch Acts 8. 27.
, yea St. Paul himself after this went up even to Jerusalem for to worship. So
that by this approaching Hour, and by the Now in my Text, Acts 24. 11.
we are to understand the state of the Gospel, after the term and dissolution
of that Legal way; so that (to be brief here) both we and our Forefathers for
many bypast Ages, may take up the Text and say, The hour is come, and now is,
when; which is the

Second considerable, the true worshippers shall worship.

In the whole Book of God, there is no one Duty to which there are more
invitations; of which more holy Examples; against violating which, more severe
Judgments, than this general Duty, the Worship of God: And yet at this day, as
if God had laid aside his Honor, those who ought to be the true Worshippers,
they despise, neglect, and lay aside his worship, as if that of the Psalmist, O
worship the Lord in the Psalm. 96. 9.
beauty of holiness; or that, Exalt ye the Lord our Psalm. 99. 5.
God, and worship at his footstool; As if these, and very very many of the
like, were all but airy and empty sounds. If there be no Sermon, too too many
(who by profession ought to be Worshippers) they are come to that, they think
it not worth the while to go up to the House of God to worship.

Sure I am, in the days of Nehemiah it was not so; Worshipping then had as full
a regard as Hearing: As much of the solemn day as was spent in Reading, even so
much and no less was spent in Worshipping: For, Neh. 9. 3.
you shall find, They read in the book of the law of the Lord their God one
fourth part of the day, and another fourth part they confessed and worshipped
the Lord their God. The equal Sisters had an equal portion; they spent full as
much time in worshipping as in reading. Nay, if we survey the Law of God it
self, you shall find that God so far valued his Worship, that he took not a
weekly, but a daily order for it: For, whereas we read

Acts 15. 21. Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, being
read in the synagogue every sabbath. Whereas care was taken for that but once a
Week; we find God commanded the Priests to worship publicly twice a Day: For,

Exodus 29. 38. Thou shall offer upon the altar two lambs of the first year, day
by day, continually, the one lamb in the morning, the other at the evening.
This was God's public, and this was his daily worship. Now if the state of the
Gospel be such, that our Righteousness must exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes Matthew. 5. 20.
and Pharisees; why should not also our Devotion do it? If that people who had
lesser obligation were bound to a daily worship; certainly then it must be a
failing or a sin in us Christians, to despise, vilisie, and neglect God's daily
Worship: For the hour is come, and now is, wherein we Christians are bound to
worship: for the state of Christianity, even by Christ himself, is thus
described; The true worshippers shall worship, and worship the Father too:
whence it is as clear as Noonday, under the state of the Gospel we must be
worshippers.

Amongst Christians, there are many who press and speak much of Gospel- graces,
Gospel- liberties, Gospel- privileges, and Gospel- ordinances; but for
Gospel Worship not a Syllable! And yet our Savior in the Text pronounces
Christians only shall prove the true worshippers.

Now the better to understand what is here meant by Worship: Consider we must,
there are in God two things of distinct Consideration as to us. 1. His Person.
2. His Precepts.


To his Person, we owe all Worship, and Honor, and Glory.

To his Precepts, all Regard, Service, and Obedience.

Now the Question here propounded by the Samaritan, is not about Obedience,
Regard, or Service; for there was no dispute, but both in Gerasin and Jerusalem
God was to be served, and God was to be obeyed: but the Question only is,
where he was to be Worshipped? Yea,

To come more close and stricter to the point, the Question is, not about
inward, but about outward; not about private, but only about publickworship:
For, as for the inward worship of the Soul; as for private Devotion and
spiritual Duties, this was never confined either to Jerusalem by the Jew, nor
ever by a Samaritan determined unto Gerasin: Daniel prayed in his Chamber;
Jeremy prayed in the Dungeon; Job prayed in the Dunghill; David prayed on his
Bed: And it was in all ages lawful thus to worship God in any place.

The scruple then here propounded, as it is not about service, so neither is it
about private or inward worship; but it is about the outward, and about the
publickworship of God; that is, where Sacrifice was to be made; where his
public Homage was to be paid; whether Gerasin or Jerusalem was the place of
public worship. Our blessed Master upon the point, he rejects both, saying,
The hour comes and now is, when (to use the words of Malachi) From the rising
of the Mal. 1. 11.
sun to the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles,
and in every place shall incense (that is, an holy Worship) be offered unto my
Name. So that, whereas of old, Sacrifice, and that only in the Temple, and
that Temple at Jerusalem was God's highest acknowledgment, and outward Worship;
he tells the Samaritan, that hereafter the worship of God would be in a clear
other mode, neither confined to place, nor expressed by Sacrifice; so that indeed
Evangelical worship is the proper subject here to be enquired on, to wit,

What is that public Worship which the true Worshippers should use under the
state and condition of the Gospel? which from the legal, I shall show you,
differs both in the Object, and in the Expression: for, Very Adoratores, the
true Worshippers they shall worship the Father, and him they shall worship in
spirit and in truth.

First, they shall worship the Father.

God in all ages and states of the Church has had his worship; but under
sundry Methods, and diverse Notions: for though he himself, and his self only,
was the sole object of divine Worship; yet in several ages he has been pleased
to be worshipped under several Apellatives, Names, or Attributes: For,

Exodus 6. 3. I appeared unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by the Name of God
Almighty; but by my Name Jehovah was I not known unto them. To Moses (it seems)
God was known by a Name by which he was not known to Abraham; and to Abraham
(probably) by a Name by which he was not known to Adam: So that it is
conceived, Adam and his posterity, they worshipped God under the notion of a
Creator: Abraham, as God Almighty: Moses, by his Name Jehovah. Epist. 136.
Yea, St. Jerome has taken pains to number up, and to explicate ten Names, by
which under the Old Testament the people of God did worship God; and yet among
them all, no mention of this in my Text, no approach to God under the notion of
a Father.

Albeit then we may (as the Jew did) worship and approach unto God as the high
God, as the God of all Spirits; as the God of vengeance; as the Lord God of
Sabbath: yet we have through the mercies of God a far nigher and a dearer
Relative; for we cry Abba Father, Very Adoratores; Cospel-worshippers they
shall worship the Father.

Now, if it be a Gospel-priviledge, and that Privilege upon Scripture-account,
a choice favor, to worship and approach the living God under the Relation of a
Father; then we who have the enjoyment of this favor, we who are the only
true worshippers of God, we have not only a more comfortable object; but we
have a singular and extraordinary, and a most affectionate motive for to
worship: For we are to worship a Father.

Now, if the Jew whose state was servile; if they who had only Attributes of
power and terror to draw them to their God; if they went from their own home
even as far as Jerusalem to worship; if their fear carried them to the holy
Temple: are not we very unkindly and ungracious Children, who so little love,
value, or honor the House of our Father, that albeit in the same Town, we will
not go up to worship? Had the Worship of God been a performance of mean and
slight account, the Ethiopian Eunuch he would never have made so long a
Journey, as from his Country to Miles 964, From Saba to Jerusalem.
Jerusalem to worship. St. Paul, then, a Christian (though he was often told by
the way that Troubles and Bonds abode him at Jerusalem) yet, for all the Now in
my Acts 8. 27. His whole Journey 1928 M.
Text was begun, and notwithstanding Bonds and Troubles abode him there, up to
Jerusalem he would, and did; and that upon this very account, even to Worship.
Acts 24. 11.


Whereas then, as a great grace and privilege of the Gospel, the Worship of
God is brought even from Jerusalem to our own Doors; changed from a costly to a
cheap worship; from Bullocks, Goats and Lambs, to Prayer and Praises: and
whereas to this better worship we are now invited, not by an Appellative of
Terror; but by Allurements of Love. Being, it is said, the true Worshippers,
that is, the Worshippers under the Gospel, shall worship the Father. If Faith
and Obedience, because the Gospel exacts them, be Duty, then the Worship of
God, which is equally required, must needs be Duty too. And what can be more
express than this, from our Savior's own mouth, Very Adoratores adorabunt
Patrem. The true Worshippers shall worship the Father; which, that as we ought,
we may do, we will pass to the last Considerable in my Text.

Third, The manner how. In spirit and in truth. (...)

Spiritu ac veritate [as Beza,] with spirit and truth, (for he leaves out the
In.) And indeed there are Erasmus.
more of the Learned beside him, who taking this for an Hebraism, conceive they
ought to be so read, and Matthew. 3. 11.
indeed so read the like: For whereas it is said (...), I indeed Baptize you
(in Aqua) we English it, not in, but with Water.

Romans 15. 6.
And, whereas it is said (...): we read it right enough, With one mind and one
mouth glorisie Romans 1. 9.
God. And whereas St. Paul says, God is my witness, whom I serve in Spiritu
meo; we read it, not in, but with my Spirit. And therefore whereas it is said
in the Text, The true worshippers shall worship, in spiritu and veritate; we
may very well read it thus, The true Worshippers shall worship the Father with
spirit and with truth.

And therefore those who think by these two words, In Spiritu, in Spirit [for
they never mind in Truth] to void and destroy all outward Worship, they may be
deceived and mistaken in the very letter of the Text, which being it may be as
(if not more) justly read, with the Spirit, as in the Spirit, the bottom of
their Building it totters, if not down. And therefore for the better both
Explication and Application of these words, I shall reduce all that follows
into these four Propositions.

Spirit and Truth are not here opposed to outward bodily Worship, nor to any
outward expression of Grace or Virtue.

A public Worship in Spirit, without Truth (the outward expression of it)
cannot be.

The Christian practice of worshipping God by Adoration and Liturgies,
demonstrates that they held that way the way of worshipping in Spirit and in
Truth.

Lastly, Being Christians are the only true Worshippers, much it concerns us
to give all due regard and respect to the outward and public worship of God
under the state of the Gospel.

First, Spirit and Truth are not here opposed, either to

And this to a wary ear has already been concluded by the premises: For, being
I have showed unto you, how the Question between the Samaritan and our Savior,
was about two Worships; one false, and the other gross; one Idolatrous, and the
other Legal; one by the Jew to the true God, the other by the Samaritan to they
knew not what: To these two Worships, our blessed Lord and Master in the Text
opposes these two, Spirit and Truth.

To the Gross, Legal, and Jewish way of worship, to that he opposes the
Spirit. To the False, Idolatrous, and Samaritan way, to that he opposes the
Truth. So that to worship in Spirit and in Truth, is no more according to the
Letter than only thus.

The hour is coming, and now is, when the Law shall give way to the Gospel;
Moses to Christ; the Jewish worship, which was then by Bullocks, Goats, and
Lambs, to a spiritual worship, which shall require no such Sacrifice, no such
Oblations. And in order to the Samaritan thus: The time is coming and Now is,
when ye shall be better informed in the word of Truth; when ye shall know what
to worship; and then you shall find neither Gerasin to be the place, nor what
ye now worship to be the Object; For the true worshippers they shall worship
the Father in spirit and in truth. So that by spirit and truth, there is
nothing stands here excluded, but either worshipping the wrong object, as did
the Samaritan; or the right Object the wrong way, as the Jews do, even to this
very day.

Hugely then are they mistaken, who conceit, to worship in spirit is a
discharge to bodily or outward worship; when the opposition and the discharge
it only is against Mosaic and Samaritan, against Legal and against Idolatrous
worship. Yea, so far was our Savior in those words from excluding bodily and
outward worship, that those who know any thing of the Greek, know he here uses
a word so proper to bodily and outward expression, that the spirit alone cannot
do it. The word is (...), which signifies an outward prostration, and a lowly
humbling of the Body; so that the true Worshippers of the Father, when in a
godly sear, and with a religious reverence they bow down, and humble their
Bodies before him, they then do what the Text requires; they do (...). They do
worship in spirit, yea, and in truth too. And,

As the Spirit is not opposed to bodily worship; so neither is it to any
outward and exterior evidence, or express of any Grace or Virtue: For to
forbid Grace or Virtue to show forth it self, were, to take splendor from
Light, and to restrain the exercise of all inward Pieties.

Indeed, if we closely consider of the Mosaic and outward worship of the Jews,
to wit, Sacrifice, Oblations, Incense, and the like; these were not accounted
the visible expressions of any inward Grace: Nor were these the outward Acts of
any interior Piety; but those were the shadows of things to come, and the
representative Types of what was substantially to be verified when the Gospel
came; and therefore no wonder if spirit and truth both stand opposed to these:
But bodily expressions, and outward Gestures, Signs and Ceremonies under the
Gospel, these are the outward Evidences of inward Graces, the outward
Manifestations of inward Pieties: As, devoutly to frequent Christian Churches,
and to be present at the public Worship, it is an outward expression of an
inward Grace, to wit, of Christian Religion; for hereby we declare our selves
such, who profess to worship the Father, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. To
profess with the Mouth, it is an outward expression of an inward Faith: To
confess our sin, is an outward expression of an inward penitence: To humble our
selves lowly upon our Knees, an outward express of an inward Reverence: To
receive the Sacrament, an outward express of an inward Piety. So that if Spirit
and Truth stood opposed to these, there could be no visible Religion, nor no
outward godliness in the world: And this properly leads to the

Second Proposition, which is to show, A public

Now that I say, a public Worship, it is no more than my Text requires: For
the whole difference between our Savior and the Samaritan, it was not (you
have seen) about inward or private, but merely about outward and about public
worship; for Gerasin and Jerusalem they were the seat of public worship.

Whereas then our Savior, speaking to the point of public worship, plainly
averreth, that even that, shall be in spirit and in truth; it even hence
inevitably follows, that Spirit and Truth cannot here stand opposed to
Visible, Bodily, and exterior worship: For, if there must be under the Gospel
a public Worship, and that worship must be in spirit and in truth; Outward,
Visible, and Bodily expressions they cannot here be inhibited; for they must be
the publishers of all religious and all interior worship. For,

1 Cor. 2. 11. No man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man
which is in him. Suppose a man to have within him all the graces of the Gospel;
no man can know this so long as they only are within him: for the inward or
reserved things of man knows no man, save the spirit of a man which is within
him. If then the graces of the Gospel was either given to edisie others, or to
glorisie God; both these require they be not kept within; and therefore Spirit
without Truth, or inward conceptions without outward expressions, they will
never do the work of God.

By worship then in Spirit and Truth, we must here understand a complete
Worship; that is, the worship of the whole Man; Spirit and Truth, that is both.
For, as the outward without the inward, is mere Hypocrisy; even so the Spirit
without Truth, the Mind without the Members, will make but an halting and an
halving Sacrifice. Yea, in public, to worship in Spirit without
manifestations of that Spirit, it is both a scandalous, and an incredible
worship: For, as we cannot reasonably believe that man is sober in spirit,
whose Body reels, vomits, and staggers before our Eyes; and as we cannot
reasonably believe him honest at Heart, who we see deceitful in Weights and
Measures; nor him charitably minded, who we hear reviling, cursing, and
defaming his Neighbor: So neither can any man reasonably believe that that man
is devout in Spirit, who is rude in Body; that that man is full of fear within,
who is full of sauciness without; that that man does Reverence in Spirit, who
has nothing of Reverence in the outward gesture: So that Spirit and Truth seem
to me like the outward Expression to the inward Meaning: for if the outward
Expression be not answerable to the inward Meaning; if we think one thing, and
say another, (though we say better than we think) there is no sincerity nor
truth in what we say. Even so here, if we pretend in Spirit to have in us the
dreadful apprehension of our God, when in outward appearance we show nothing
less; if this be to worship in Spirit; it is not, it cannot be in Truth: For
the signs of Fellowship, of Familiarity, and of Boldness, they can no more be
the true expressions of the inward apprehension of Majesty, Terror, and an
infinite Distance, than can Vomiting be of Sobriety; outward Cheating of inward
Honesty; Railing and Wronging of inward Charity. For they, who know any thing
of Truth, cannot but know, that Truth (in general) is nothing else but an
outward Conformity to the inward Apprehension, a real Evidence, and Interpreter
of the inward meaning: And therefore, wheresoever the outward conformity is not
answerable to the inward conception; and the outward Demeanor is not
proportionable to the Spirit that acts within, let people pretend what height
and holiness of Spirit can be imagined, Spirit and Truth are never evidenced in
God's Worship, or (which is all one) to God's honor and glory, unless the
outward Demeanor be proportioned to the inward Spirit, and the Spirit within
be really conformed to his Greatness.

1 Cor. 14. St. Paul speaking of a Christian convert, whose Spirit was touched
with the Greatness, Goodness, and the Glory of his God, tells us, so active and
powerful was the inspired Spirit, that it enforced a manifestation of the truth
of it: for, Verse. 26.
Falling down on his face he worshipped God.

Now, without peradventure, had those who pretend to have the most holy and
best spirits, such a feeling and real sense of the Goodness, Greatness, and the
Glory of God, as had the Convert: Even they, as well as he, would fall upon
their Faces; or at least in God's public Worship, give some more probable and
better evidence that they fear God, and that they are before him but as Dust
and Ashes: for if the spiritual man is the greatest discerner; if he is most
sensible of what a God he serves; certainly then (either there is no truth in
him, or) he is the most devout, and the humblest worshipper in the world.

Amongst us men, in case God should sensibly reveal Exodus 3 4.
himself, and manifest himself to the Eye, as in the Bush to Moses; or in the
habit of the Captain of an Host Josh. 5. 14.
to Joshua; or in Thundering and Lightening upon mount Sinai: In such a case as
this, I believe very few, if any, but would say we were bound to worship; and
in pursuance of that worship, to humble our Bodies, to fall upon our Faces, and
even ontwardly to use the utmost reverence that we could.

And here I have a special Appeal to those who (themselves confessing are in
the religious attendance of their God) put on their Hata! To them I appeal,
whether if the Great God, even now, should at this instant break in upon them,
and show himself [as I have already said] as terrible as upon mount Sinai; or
in a flaming Bush; or but as he did to Joshua with a Sword in his Hand: I
desire such to consider, whether such an Apparition, or such a Manifestation,
would not, not only move, but hasten them to throw off their Hats, to fall
upon their Knees; yea, prostrate on their Faces. Now then if it be so, I
beseech you let us calmly consider, what is the solemn, real, and serious
bottom or motive, for which we ought to give unto our God all Glory, Honor,
Reverence, and Worship. Is it Visibility, or is it Sight? If so, then none are
bound to Reverence, Worship, Kneel, or fall down before him, but those only
who see him with their Eyes, and behold him as a thing sensible; whereas God
himself has told us, Exodus 33. 21. There shall no man see me and live.

The ground, then, Foundation and Motive to glorify and worship God, it is not
in Sense, but in Faith; it is not the seeing, but the believing, the Glory,
Majesty, Dominion, Power, and Greatness of our God, that should move Christians
to fear, adore, and worship: And therefore, if we believe God to be in Heaven
as glorious as the Angels see him, as terrible as the Damned find him, or as
dreadful as he appeared upon Mount Sinai: If we believe him to be a God mighty
in Power, glorious in Majesty, and that God who is to be feared above all Gods:
In the Name of that God (I beseech you) let us but manifest that Faith, and my
Text is done; for so to do, doubtless is to worship the Father both in Spirit
and in truth.

Matthew. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I
in the midst of them. Our Savior did not say, there you shall behold or see
me; yet he positively said (...), There am I.

Now, being God will be worshipped where he is not seen, let us but so pray, so
praise, so sing, so worship where he is [though not seen] as if we did see him
we believe we ought; there would never be any further dispute or demur about
outward Worship: For the Spirit of God, and Truth, are in such a perfect union,
that he who worships in Spirit, that is, in the due Faith, and fear of God, he
will be devout, he will be humble, he will by a meet demeanor, and outward
deportment, show the reality and truth of such a Spirit; for such cannot but
conclude the truth. No public Worship can or ought to be in Spirit only.

Thirdly, The Christian practice of worshipping God by Adoration and Liturgies,
demonstrates that they held that way the way of worshipping God in spirit and
in truth.

(...) Adoratio, or, as we render it, Worship, it is taken either in Abstracto,
or in Concreto, as the School; that is, either for an Act of it self, or as in
Conjunction with some other Christian-duty. Matthew. 4. When the Devil made his
last assault upon our Savior, he did require neither Prayer, nor Praise, nor
Sacrifice, nor Oblation; only thus said, Verse. 9. All these things will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. He only required an outward act
of Worship abstracted from all Duty. Whence it appears to me, that Adoration or
Worship abstractly considered, when it only imports God's Majesty, and our
Distance, even thus, and no more, it is of great account with God Almighty; or
else the subtle Devil would never have attempted by a single act of Adoration
to have robbed the World of a Redeemer, by thus doing to make the Savior of
Mankind a Sinner.

But, by Worship in the Text, we are not to understand Worship in the Abstract,
but as going along with other Duties, such as make up Christian Worship. Now
that it may appear that unless the Christian Church (for of Schismatical and
Fanatic spirits, unless by pity, we are to take no notice) by a Worship in
Spirit and Truth, and by worshipping the Father, understood worshipping in a
Form (for Father implies a Form) and by public Liturgies; let us a little
survey their Piety and their Prayers. First, Our blessed Lord and Master, who
gave this rule, he himself exemplified what he gave for the exact Pattern, and
the very Basis of all Gospel Worship, is, Pater Noster, Our Father. The
Apostolical Matthew. 6.
Symbol, the Canon and Square of all the Professions of our Faith, it begins,
Credo in Deum Patrem, I believe in God the Father. Confession of sins, as the
words were by our Savior put into the mouth of the penitent Prodigal, it is an
address unto the Father; I will go to my Father, etc. And Father, I have sinned
Luke 15. 18.
against heaven and against thee. The Sacrament of Initiation, or first
admittance into the mystical Communion, it is confined to this rule; In the
Name of the Matthew. 28. 19.
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Yea, when the Church in humble
thankfulness returns Praise and Glory unto God for all his benefits, it is
done (as becomes true Worshippers) by worshipping the Father, and by saying,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

And as for the Church of England, is not every Collect a most exact
Gospel Worship? Almighty and most merciful Father, begins our Confession.
Almighty God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, begins our Absolution. Then
the Prayer of the Son unto his Father: And the Close of every Collect is,
through Jesus Christ; which is still an implication of the Father: So that
according to this rule, the true Worshippers shall worship the Father. Who can
be truer Worshippers than that Church, all whose public Prayers are Addresses
and Acts of worship to the Father? And as for Spirit and Truth, had it been
inconsistent with public and outward Worship, or with Form, then St. Paul
would 1 Timothy 2.
never have writ to Timothy, (...) that Prayers should be not only said, but
made for Kings and all that are in Authority.

St. James the Brother of our Lord, he had scornfully and ignominiously been
termed Jacobus Liturgus, James the Liturgist, had set Forms been inconsistent
with Spirit and truth. Justine Martyr he would never have spoken of (...), of
Common Prayers, nor Ignatius before him of (...), of one Prayer, had it been a
stinting of the good Spirit to have a Liturgy, or a Common Prayer. Yea, there
would have been no Churches to have worshipped God in, no public Assemblies to
have worshipped there, nor indeed no use at all of our Bodies in order to God's
glory, if Spirit and Truth concluded against outward worship.

Whatsoever then the ancient Churches understood by Spirit and Truth, they did
not understand an opposition either to bodily or to outward worship: For, that
which is held the best Interpreter of Scripture, to wit, Praxis Ecclesiae, the
Church-Practice, you see it does evince the contrary; for they had Churches;
they had known and set Forms for public worship. Yea, Beza Quae ad Ordinent
spectant, ut precum formulae disposuit Apostolus; Those Decencies which
appertain to Order, as Forms of Prayer, the Apostle himself prepared and
disposed.

By Spirit and Truth then, we may very well here understand a worshipping of
the Father, according to those measures which the Spirit, Light, and Grace of
the Gospel prescribes and allows to us. By Truth, we may understand such
outward expressions and manifestations as are proportionable to such a Spirit,
to such Light, to such Grace: for so by their unanimous and constant practice,
the primitive and best Churches understood it.

Lastly therefore, give me leave in a word to show how much it concerns us to
give all due regard and respect to the outward and public Worship of God under
the state of the Gospel.

The Servants of God under the Gospel, they are styled by our Savior Very
Adoratores, the true Worshippers (not the unsatiable Hearers.) Now it seems
strange to me, that Christians should emphatically be called the true
Worshippers, and yet many make no account at all of Evangelical Worship; as if
God did not as much regard the honor done unto his Person, as he does the bare
hearing and listening to his Word: Or as if Pray continually, and Continue in
prayer, sounded not as much duty, as does Be instant in season and out of
season.

By Evangelical Worship I understand Prayers, Supplications, and giving of
Thanks, confession of Sin, profession of Faith, making and performing of Vows,
oblation of Praise, singing of Hymns and Psalms, reception of Sacraments,
Adoration either with or without these. So that the Father is then worshipped
in Spirit and in Truth, when there is a reverential address, or a religious
performance of all or any of these before him; so that we cannot come under the
honorable Appellative in the Text, Very Adoratores, true Worshippers, unless
we outwardly and publicly even thus assemble for to worship. Esaias 66. 23. the
Evangelical Prophet, speaking of Gospel-days, thus writes: All flesh shall come
to worship before me, says the Lord.

To worship, is (not to clap on our Hats and sit on our Seats to hear a Sermon,
but) to perform some act of honor, some humble office, some such religious
Duty, the reverence whereof may show forth our distance, and the Father's
glory; the performance whereof may move all who see it say, These men are in
the presence, and before their God: These men know what they worship: These men
have the Fear and Apprehension of a glorious Majesty before their eyes.

For, being the great design of God in all his works is the setting forth of
his own Glory, Worship it is the very immediate tendency to that great end:
For, they that worship, it is their actual employment to set forth his praise,
and to magnify him under some glorious Attribute or other: So that indeed
between Hearing and Worshipping there is as much difference, as between Hearing
and Doing: For Hearing being but a disposition to Doing, Worship is the very
practice; Doing, and actual Advance of God's honor; and therefore a Duty not
to be laid aside, nor so coolly frequented and performed as by too too many. He
who in the second Commandment said, Thou shall not bow down to them or worship
them: He who forbids Sacrisice, and Prayers, and Praises, yea, the very bowing
of the Body to false Gods, does not in so doing imply less than a reservation
of this Worship to himself: And therefore to him who is the everliving God, and
the everlasting Father, to him we must ascribe and give the Glory, the Honor,
and the Worship that evangelically is due unto him: for the true Worshippers
are in all duty bound to worship the Father, and to worship him in Spirit and
Truth.

Hos. 6. 6. I desired mercy and not sacrisice, and the knowledge of God more
than burnt-offerings. Under the Law, we all know the ordinary and outward
Worship it was Sacrifice, and Burnt-offerings; and yet mercy and the knowledge
of God, Spiritual and Evangelical acts were even then most acceptable; and even
then upon this very account you shall find both David and the people going up
to worship.

Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of
the Lord. Now, what did the people go into the House of the Lord for? or for
what did David so rejoice to go up with them? was it think you to hear a
Sermon? No; but it was to worship; or, as it is v. 4. To give thanks unto the
Name of the Lord. And,

Psalm. 42. 4. What is it the Prophet David there so sadly remembers, and in
bitterness pours forth his Soul for the want of it, but only this; I had
gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God. What to do?
only to hear? No; but to worship, and to give praise to God: For it follows;
I went up with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept
holy day. He was a great Worshipper, and delighted to go up with them who went
to worship. And it seems to me worth observation, and to our present purpose,
that from the beginning of the world, all along in Scripture, we never read of
any erection raised to God, but the first and prime intention of it was
Worship. For,

The first holy erections we read of, they were Altars; and those we know were
for Sacrisice, which was then Worship. The second we read of, was the
Tabernacle; and at the Door of this Moses and Aaron they went up to worship.
Thirdly, we read of a glorious Temple built by Solomon; of a second built by
Zerubbabel; a third by Herod, all devoted and built for Worship. Yea, says God
by his Prophet, My house Esaias 56*
shall be called the house of prayer to all nations: and what is that but the
house of Evangelical worship? And indeed we find to that very use the blessed
Apostles Acts 3. 1.
did put the Temple; Peter and John they went up to the Temple at the hour of
prayer. Yea, the very first Houses that the holy Christians after them built,
they were called (...), Oratories, or Houses of Prayer. And indeed what is
Heaven it self, and the glorious presence of our God, but a place of worship?
Rev. 4. 10. The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the
throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their crowns
before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and
honor, and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created.

1 Cor. 13.
Yea, if that Argument of St. Paul, upon which he prefers Charity before Faith
and Hope, be concluding; if Charity, because it abides when Faith and Hope
shall be no more, is therefore the more excellent gift; certainly then, since
we find Worship where Preaching shall not be; since we find Worship the
employment of Angels, and the everlasting exercise of beatified Saints and
Souls; to worship God must needs be a duty of no mean concern, specially if we
consider how we are taught to pray, Thy will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven: for the will of God there is an incessant, and an everlasting worship.

Now certainly either we mind not what we pray, believe not we are to do as
well as to say our Prayers; or else we could not conceive our selves bound to
worship upon Earth even him, who is incessantly worshipped in the Heavens.

And being I have showed unto you how all holy places that were ever erected,
either by Commandment from God, or by the instinct or motion of the Spirit of
God, were all chiefly designed for worship; that is, for offering up unto God
either Sacrifice, or Prayers, Praises, Confession of Sins, Professions of
Faith, Hymns, Psalms, and spiritual Songs; therefore such places, they ought to
be frequented by us, and that purely upon the account of these performances,
that is, upon the account of Worship: For,

He that enters into this House of Prayer, and devoutly, as did the Publican,
shall smite his Breast, and say no more than God be merciful to me a sinner; he
does God more honor than is done by the rude and ordinary hearing of a Sermon.
He who shall humbly fall upon his Knees, and sincerely offer up unto the Father
the Prayer of his own Son, those two Knees do God more honor than a thousand
Hats upon a thousand Heads. Yea, being it is the charge of our blessed Lord and
Master, Let your light so shine before men, that they may Mat. 5. 16.
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven; It is
impossible any example should be visible, unless the Reverence be sensible, and
the outward Expressions such as may move others to fall down and worship; that
is, reverendly to confess, to praise, to bless, and to glorify our Father
which is in Heaven. It is an old saying and a true, Occultae Musicae nullum
encomium, Of concealed Music there is no praise: For, let an Artist have in
him the sense and habit of Music never so well, be he able in his Spirit to
lodge the comprehensions of all Harmony; yet unless he either sing or play,
unless he either by Voice or Instrument discover this hidden skill, he can
neither give delight to the Hearer, or get any praise or respect unto himself.
Even so it is in Religion and holy Duties; let men have in Spirit the habits of
Faith, Hope, Charity, and all Graces whatsoever; all this, whilst but in the
Spirit, it only is Occulta Musica, undiscerned Piety, invisible goodness,
nothing at all either edifying others, or advancing God's glory. So that
whether it be Conversation or Worship; Spirit without Truth, inward Religion
without outward Evidence, Faith within, without Works without; they may be
Arguments of a Fanatic, by no means of an holy Spirit. So that I shall
conclude this whole Discourse with that of our Savior, Matthew. 19. 6. Whom God
has joined together, let no man put asunder. Whether it be in our converse
with God or Men; whether it be in God's Service, or in God's Worship; whether
what we do has respect to the Person of God, or to the Commands of God; Spirit
and Truth, whom God has joined together, they must never be put asunder.

What Graces soever we have in the Spirit, the truth of their being there must
be evidenced by our outward carriage; what Reverence, what Fear, what Awe, and
what Esteem soever the Spirit has of the Majesty, Presence, and Greatness of
our God, that must be verified, seen, and proved by our outward Worship. For,

If God in Heaven will not that Angels and Spirits worship within themselves
(and as some take the Notion) in Spirit only: If to him all the Angels cry
aloud, the Heavens and all the powers therein: If to him Cherubin and Seraphin
continually do cry, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and Earth are
full of the Majesty Rev. 5. 11*
of thy Glory: If to him Ten thousand times ten thousand were heard saying with
a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches,
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing; certainly then
all the Earth should worship him, magnify his Name, confess before him, and
confess him before men; we should all sing, and praise, and laud, and do every
thing, and nothing but such things in time of his holy Worship, as may speak
the Glory, the Goodness, the Holiness, the Greatness, and the Majesty of the
God we worship. And thus to do, is to do my Text; thus to do, is to worship in
Spirit and in Truth. And so I have done with these words, The hour comes and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth.
Tibi soli Domine debetur Latria, tibi omnis honos, adoratio, cultus, nunc, and
in aeternum,

Amen.
FINIS.
A REVIEW OF A BRIEF APOLOGY FOR SUCH SEQUESTERED CLERGY, Who choose rather to
suffer Sequestration, Than to lay aside The LITURGY, And receive The DIRECTORY.

Written in a Letter to Mr. STEPHEN MARSHALL; whose Answer is here Printed,
never before extant; and how obtained.

TOGETHER WITH A brief Persuasive to the only use of Set FORMS in Private
FAMILIES.

By John Allington, Vicar of Leamington-Hastang.

Quod ad formulam Precum and Rituum Ecclesiasticorum valde probo, ut Certa illa
sit, a qua Pastoribus discedere in Functione sua non liceat; tam ut consulatur
quorundam simplicitati. and imperitiae, quam ut certius ita constet omnium
inter se Ecclesiarum Consensus.

Johannes Calvinus Protectori Angliae, 1 Edw. 6th.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George near St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. 1678.

To the Honorable, And his much honored Neighbor, CHARLES LEIGH Esquire; At
Burdingbury.
SIR,
THe justice of your Birth forces me to preface you by that [which I conceive]
is least honorable in you, Your native Nobility. For, morally to speak, look
what is necessary is scarce laudible. -- Quae non fecimus ipse,
Vix ea Nostra voco.
An adventitious is no acquired Honor: And if Poetry may pass for Heraldry,
Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus.
There is no real Nobility which has not more of Virtue than Blood in it. And
this seems patronized by a great Fountain of Honor, even our blessed Lord and
Master, who allowed the Jews to be the Seed, but not the Sons of Abraham: for
he plainly tells them, it was Works and Imitation, not a Line or Descent, that
made Children unto Abraham.

The witty Atheist who in his Dialogues brings in Galatea and Doris discoursing
of the love of Polyphemus, tells her, she should not look upon his Deformity,
or mind his having but one Eye, and that in his Forehead; for he was the Son
of Neptune. But the nice Nymph replied smartly, An vero credis genus illi
quicquam profuturum ad formam? Think thou that a Descent can make beautiful?
or because begot by a God, deformities are comely? Now truly as descent cannot
make that lovely and amiable that is not so; so neither can descent make that
honorable that is not so: For though I perfectly abhor to think that Hoc
proprium est sanctorum, quod Rebus creatis pro suo jure utuntur. Beza in Hebr.
2. p. 8.
Dominium fundatur in Gratia, That Right or Propriety is founded in Grace, of
that only Saints have right to their Goods, or only the godly party a just
title to Riches and secular Dominion; yet may I distinguish between real and
secular Honor. I conceive such to empty themselves of all real Repute, and
divest themselves of all due Honor, who by doing unworthy things make
themselves vile, unclean, and that which stands in direct opposition to what is
truly honorable: So that a man may as well argue, deformed and ugly
Polyphemus was therefore beautiful, because Neptune was his Father; as a
Vicious person therefore truly and really honorable, because a person of true
honor got him.

To you [my honorable Neighbour] I therefore make my Address, because you have
Honor of your own, Intrinsecal Honor, such which you merit to be honored and
regarded for, Religion, Sobriety, Temperance, and the rare Grace of these
times, Conjugal Chastity; no man rejoicing more with the Wife of his Youth, and
[as the holy Pen expresses it] ravished always with her love.

To you [worthy Sir] I have made bold to give the Patronage of what here
follows; which being a brief Assertion of a necessity of publicly
worshipping God by a set Form, I therefore make yours, because beside that
personal Piety which your God alone is witness to, your prudence in your Family
has wisely chosen constantly to use only that Form which we rightly call
Common Prayer. And indeed many, very many reasons may be given to confirm your
choice, and persuade your imitation.

First, By the Law of the Land Open Prayer, such which is for others to come to
hear, is only the Service of the Church, our Common Prayer: So that if Law be
a rule, and the regular man be the laudible person; he is most so who conforms
to Law, and regulates himself and Family by it.

Secondly, An unknown Worship, it is a proportionable folly to an unknown God:
For, as St. Paul told the Athenians it was superstitious and unlawful for them
to worship they knew not what, [though that unknown was thought to be the true
God:] Even so as unlawful it may seem [or else let Latin Prayers pass] to
worship a known God we know not how; which he who joins issue in a conceived or
unknown Prayer must needs do: For the Worship must be over, before he can judge
of it.

Thirdly, To offer the Blind, Lame, or Sick to God for Sacrifice, God himself
has declared Evil. But whosoever shall bare his Head, fall upon his Knees, and
be ready to join in the Oblation of he knows not what; he is in a present
disposition to offer up to his God [for ought he knows] the Blind, the Lame,
the Sick, that is, such crude and unhallowed, both Petitions and Expressions,
as are unworthy the Almighty; yea, unfit to be presented to a Governor.

Fourthly, To offer that to our God which would not please our Governor, God
abhors. Now what man amongst us will be content that a Petition be drawn and
proffered in his Name to a man of Power, and he never see it, nor hear it read,
till it is read and offered to the Governor? And shall we think it meet with
less consideration to offer up our Prayers to God, than Petitions to one like
unto our selves?

Fifthly, Every considering man will find, to the completing of a public
Prayer, there must be a concurrence of these six Acts. 1. Hearing. 2.
Understanding. 3. Consideration. 4. Judgment. 5. Oblation. And Lastly,
Devotion. Now, whether these can be better managed when a man knows what to
pray, or where a man must warily listen what [through distance, or for not
acquaintance with the Voice] he often cannot understand, or understanding cannot
so instantly consider and judge of, as to deem it a meet oblation for his God:
Whether, I say, these acts can better be discharged [and Praestantissima
quaeque Deo] upon a transient than a set Form, let every man so judge, as he
will answer it to his God.

Sixthly, Men of different Principles can never conscionably join in conceived
or conceited Prayer. For, he who holds Original Sin in Infants, as such, no bar
to Salvation, he cannot abide that men in Prayer should say they are damned
before born, and came into the world Brands of Hellfire! Or such who hold
Sacraments have no effect but in the Elect only, these cannot join in a
preparative Prayer; but either they must have a Congregation of Elect only, or
they must rashly say they know not what, and pray for such grace for some
present, which they pretend to know God will never give. And indeed, upon what
but upon this, are built all the sorry Objections against the Liturgy?

Seventhly, Conceived Prayer, or, as they call it, praying by the Spirit, is
for the most part a great cheat, being the main Product of a ready Tongue and a
strong Memory, in which is treasured up for all occasions Scripture-Phrases,
Collections, Notes, and such Expressions as are most taking and popular. For,
that the Holy Spirit will put words into the mouth of any man, as he did once
into Balaam's Ass, suddenly and irresistibly; or that by the Spirit of Prayer
is meant a capacity to speak in the Vocative Case an Hour or two, is not yet
proved to a serious and a sober Christian.

Zech. 12. 10.
That place of Zechary, I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications; it will by no
means do them this service. For [Authority I hope undeniable to conceivers] the
Assembly-Annotations tells us, And I will pour; This Prophecy had its
accomplishment partly upon our Savior's coming, and yet shall more fully upon
the last conversion of the Jews: So that by them the present Church seems not
the subject of this promise. Indeed they say the house of David typically
represents the Church of Christ and the Children of God. But then by the Spirit
of Grace and Supplications, they by no means mean the gift of Prayer, or a
power of a sudden to say what they list in the Vocative Case. For by the spirit
of Grace, they only mean an help from God to make Prayer in Believers holy and
acceptable, and that is far from long and indigested Rapsodies. And as for that
upon which Fanatics lay the great stress, the Spirit of Supplications; The
Comment declines it wholly, and rather sides with those who render the Original
by Compassion or Lamentation. So that this is a pitiful Bottom to cozen and
cheat the people on, with, or to an expectation of such a surprise of Spirit as
shall make them pray what they list, and as long. And indeed both the learned
in the Hebrew Tongue, and the Context bear against it: for albeit some
conceive, as the vulgar Latin renders it, Prayer or Supplications may; yet as
Cornelius a Lapide [whom I therefore quote, because he has prepared the
Collection for me] upon the place observes, the Septuagint, the Chaldee,
Pagnine, the Tigurine Version, and Hierom [by what some Humorists call the
Spirit of Prayer] they rather render Compassion, Commiseration; a Mind tender
and propense to pity and compassion. And indeed if we consider the very next
words, and by them measure the prime end of this promise, we shall find the
genuine and proper meaning of the Text must needs be thus:

I will pour upon the house of David and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem a Spirit
so tempered with Grace and Tenderness, that they shall be sensibly touched and
affected when they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn
for him, as one who mourns for his only Son. Enough to evince the
Septuagint, the Chaldee, and the rest, rather to (...), The Spirit of
Commiseration, Pity, and Compassion, than as the vulgar Latin [which, but to
serve an interest, the godly Party abhors to follow] Spiritus precum, the
Spirit of Prayers: Yea, in former Tyndal Rps. Bible, Geneva.
and elder English Versions it is read thus, The Spirit of Grace and
Compassion; and perchance had been so still, had not this pretended gift of
praying sprung out not many years before the last Translation.

But since men have had an itch to magnify their own gifts, and, as did the
Scribes and Pharisees, by long prayer to get into and deceive the people, set
Forms of Prayer has been mightily deprest; as if those Prayers were unworthy a
Parlour, that did decore a Church. But,

If we shall look back to the days of Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary, we
shall find both at home and abroad, both in private and in public, the
Church-Prayers were venerable and of great use.

In the days of Edward the sixth, one Thomas Cottesford put out the
Church-prayers in the Singular Number, that they might be fitted for a Closet
and a personal Devotion, and accommodated to every day of the Week Morning and
Evening: And he was held a very good man in his days, and [as I have been told]
of the Puritan way.

In the days of Queen Mary, Dr. Tailor, Parson of Hadleigh in Suffolk, [as in
his Life appears] when his Wife came in an Evening to visit him, his
Evening-prayer was the Letany; and whilst he lay in Prison, his daily Prayers
were the Service Book of Edward the sixth; and that Book he gave to his Wife as
a pious Legacy. So that it was then no strange thing to use the Common Prayer
in a private house; nor was that arrogance of Spirit in holy Breasts, as to
think no Prayer comparable to those of their own conceiving.

I may take God to witness [honourable Sir] I can say with a perfect Heart as
Moses once did [Numb. 11. 26.] Would God all the Lords people were prophets,
and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. But to hear ignorant, rash,
cunning and catching people, calling their own, God's Spirit, and their crafty
effusions, the Breath of God and his Dictates; This my soul abhors; an
indignation to this, was a great motive to the following Letter. I conceived a
necessity upon me then to assert a set Form, when an abundance of what was then
called Prayer, savoured more of Diurnals, Designs, News, and Villainies, than
of godliness, or purity of the Gospel. Yea, the Spirits of too too many of my
own calling are not yet to be trusted to speak what they list in Prayer, some
yet taking occasion rather to instill their present dislikes, than to promote a
sincere and pure Devotion.

Now being it is so, that men of different Principles can never conscionably
join in a controverted Prayer, there seems to me even hence, a great necessity
that Prayer should be set and known; that Prayer should be with such prudence
and care composed; that nothing be in any of public cognizance which has any
thing of private Interest and Design in it.

In the Offices of the Church of Rome, and in factious Prayers, we see and hear
too much of this.

Upon Ash Wednesday thus prays the Roman party: Omnipotent and eternal God,
spare the Penitent, and be propitious to the Supplicant -- Et mittere digneris
Sanctum Angelum tuum de Coelis, qui Benedicat and Sanctificet hos Cineres --
And vouchsafe to send down thine holy Angel from Heaven, that he may bless and
sanctify these Ashes. Will you see to what end? It follows -- Vt sint
Remedium salutare Omnibus Nomen Sanctum tuum implorantibus, and semetipsos pro
Conscientia Delictorum suorum accusantibus, ante Conspectum Divinae Clementiae
facinora deplorantibus, vel serenissimam pietatem tuam suppliciter obnixeque
flagitantibus --

That they may be an wholesome Remedy to all who humbly call upon thy holy Name;
and out of conscience of their own demerits accuse themselves, deploring their
heinous sins in the sight of thy Divine Clemency, or humbly and earnestly
begging thy most serene Piety.

Et praesta per invocationem sanctissimi Nominis tui, ut quicumque eos super se
asperserint pro Redemptione peccatorum suorum, Corporis sanitatem, and Animae
tutelam percipiant, per Christum Dominum nostrum.

And grant that by the invocation of thy most holy Name, whosoever shall
sprinkle these upon themselves, for the Redemption of their sins, may receive
the health of Body, and protection of Soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now this Collect having that in it which the Principles of our Church allow
not; for as much as we are wholly ignorant of any capacity in Ashes of being
blessed and sanctified; or of any promise made, that upon prayer for such a
Sanctification God will send an Angel from Heaven on such an errand; we not
believing that Ashes are ordained to be an wholesome remedy to all who humbly
call upon God's holy Name, or that in order to remission of sin we may sprinkle
them upon our Heads; or if we should, that thence should issue (no not upon
Christ's account) health to our Bodies, or protection to our Souls: we [I say]
disbelieving all this, cannot join in such Petitions, neither give our presence
or Amen to such a Prayer. And many, very many such extravagances are in the
Roman Breviary and Missal.

Now if Protestants generally opine it is not lawful knowingly to be present
when Petitions against their Judgment and Conscience are to be offered up in
Prayer and preferred to God; certainly then, it is at least very dangerous for
any Christian to frequent conceived and unknown Prayers: For as bad, or worse
than any is in the Roman Liturgy, have done, and may come from men so praying.
And this probably was a main reason that the Independants dropped off from the
Presbyterians, and the Quakers both; for neither having common principles,
neither could conscientiously endure to pray together. And indeed to an unknown
Prayer a discreet man may very well say, he therefore will not be present at
it. I profess, it is a grand desire of my Heart, that as there is but one
Shepherd, so there might be one Fold. I should rejoice at nothing more, than an
universal Communion, a Catholic Peace among Christians; and perchance wise men
will find no one better expedient, than an uniformity of Worship, by such a
Form of Prayer, to which all sincere and sober Christians might say Amen.

Now a Form nigher to such an one, wiser than my self have not seen any, than
our present Liturgy: For let all the Exceptions to which the Roman Breviary
and Missal are liable; and [could they be numbred] let all the insipid
Excursions, Vagaries, Impertinences, and Follies of Extemporary and conceived
Prayer be reckoned up; The Liturgy of the Church of England is not in any
proportion [for Exceptions] to be compared with either; our Compilers aiming as
Christians more at Unity, than at any discernable design whatsoever.

But the Porch begins to be too big for the Building: and therefore, my most
honorable Neighbor, I thus contract.

In Privacies, as Closets, let the devout proceed a Gods Name, to pour out
their Souls by such expressions as may best heat Devotion, and best fix the
Spirit: For words that most affect the Heart, and best suit to private
grievances and personal wantings, are the best expedients there: For indeed
only the Spirit of man knows what the Spirit would.

But when the religious Master in his Parlour shall call in his Family to
public Duty, then the Prayer, be it what it may, it would be set; and that
were it only therefore, that the weak and more ignorant might surely learn it,
it being a very laudable and good thing, to minister Words as well as Grace
unto the hearer; and also for this reason further to secure the stranger, who
upon this account can make but one hazard of his discretion; for then he shall
be able to discern whether or no it be meet for him any more to join in such a
Form. But if any worthy and devout person would that all who lodge under his
Roof, or come ordinarily to his Table should join with him at his hours of
Prayer [without some trespass upon prudence and civility] he can neither desire
nor require it; unless he shall use a known and a public Form, and to choose
the Common Prayer. For then, shall the Strangers be, Children of one and the
same Mother the Church of England; it would be an unhandsome refusal in them,
not to join in prayer for a blessing from God the Father in the words of our
Catholic and holy Mother. Which Blessing may God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost, confirm to you and yours, and upon all the honorable
Family, is the unfeigned desire of

From Leamington-Hastang, 1666.Honorable Sir, Your Neighbor professing
himself most ready to Love, Honor, and Serve you, John Allington.

TO THE READER.
THough this little Treatise now appears under a second Impression, it is the
Author's First: For the Father being in those days Proscriptus, the Child might
very proportionably be Expositivus. When the Father durst not show his Head,
the Child durst not tell his Name.

Nor was it written with any intention of a public View; so that indeed by
that shift, it bear's a fairer Front than he who writ it durst have put upon
it: for amongst the honorable Army of Confessors, Divines sequestered upon our
Church-account, he held himself too too unworthy to write their Apology: All
his design was to give the reasons of his own Sufferings, and to show that he
conceived he had just cause to prefer the Liturgy to his peace.

Now for as much as these Reasons were given in such a time, when if they had
not been Reasons, the Pressures and Indigenoes attending them would easily have
discovered, at their Request whom I much honor, I have reviewed the thing, and
find that what is Truth and Reason, it will still be so, change the state and
condition of Seculars how they please: So that look what in the days of Trial
they then did, no other in these better days do they seem to me. And what to
me, that also they appear to some so heartily judicious, that upon their
account, and (as they conceive) for the good of others, they again show
themselves; not so much because strong, but because short and plain, and ad
Captum vulgi, and to their capacity who most need them; it being thought by
some, that what was writ and published when the Liturgy (like Christianity in
the days of St. Paul) was every where much spoken against; that will be much
sooner heeded than what has been published, since our Form of Worship has
been like the rising Sun, either for the Beauty or Necessity of it, received at
most hands: For to receive it now may be gain, but to retain it then had more
of godliness. But as the Apostle of the Gospel, the same may I say of the
Liturgy; whether in pretense or truth it is now used, I do therein rejoice, and
will rejoice; for I know this may turn to the salvation of many, by the supply
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; which being the spirit of Wisdom and Holiness,
will much more certainly accompany a well-digested Form, than a sudden Rapsody,
in as much as Consideration and Prudence approach nigher to Holiness and
Wisdom, than rashness, basty and inconsiderate Effusions.

One pretending to pray in my sequestered Pulpit, is said to say, [O Lord get up
upon thine Horse, and make haste into Ireland, or thou will lose more honor
there than ever thou gotst in England.] He certainly had less of the spirit of
Prayer, than he who shall devoutly read the meanest of our Collects. And it is
very well known, if it were worth the while to shovel up such Dunghils, we
might present the World with an huge heap of such unsavory Profanations; and
therefore except the madness of the people, and the upholding of their Credits
who have thus dishonored God, I cannot imagine what should hinder as universal
joy, that Forms are established, and Ministers confined to pray with the Spirit
and with the Understanding also: For if St. Paul did wisely well when he
preferred five Words spoken with the understanding, before ten thousand in an
unknown Tongue, certainly it is as proportionably true to say, A Prayer of five
Lines deliberately made, understandingly penned, and devoutly offered, is to be
preferred before an whole hour of that which neither Speaker nor Hearer can
give any tolerable repetition or account of.

Some whom I have lately treated with are come to this, Truly they like the
Prayers, and wish there were no worse made: but the Imposition, that Christians
should be under penalties compelled to be present at these Prayers, that they
like not. Now for their sakes who make this Objection, I must needs (and
especially to them) remember, that when the Lords and Commons, acting both
without and against their King, were doing (as the godly Ministers and Party
then hoped) their work; then, even they (now Enemies to Imposition) were by
them styled Custodes and vindices utriusque Tabulae. Not only Gods Ministers,
but Gods Avengers. Then it was lawful for their Magistrates in matters of
Religion and Worship to Impose; and if not obeyed, to Dispose, even of all men
had.

Thus thought the Worthy that I have to deal with; for Mr. Marshall March 26.
1645.
in a Sermon upon Psalm. 102. v. 16, 17. thus; Those in Authority in things of
this life, may command and act ad Modum imperii [by way of imposing] in matters
of Religion, And a little after: As Josiah put to death those that followed
Baal, so may the Parliament those that will not return to the Lord, and leave
Antichristianism.

In the year 1647, I have the testimony of many persons of Quality (then
Prisoners in the Tower) who after an hundred Solicitations but to have Bread
out of their own Estates, received from a Chairman this Answer; He would
famish them into the taking of the Covenant and Negative Oath.

In the Articles for which I loft my Livelihood, a grand Charge is, the refusal
of the Directory. Now, if it were lawful for usurping Powers to oblige, under
the severity of undoing, to be present at no man knew what; at such Prayers as
could neither be considered on, nor reviewed: Certainly then a Fortiori, it is
much more lawful for a legal and undoubted Authority to exact our presence at a
Form, which may be both seen, and read, and examined before men approach to
make or give consent to the oblation of it. And indeed (not to make a business
of this pretense) it is undoubtedly clear, that no party in Authority but did
impose and did exact a Conformity to their Imposition.

Witness the Protestation, the Covenant, and the Engagement! All Forms, Humane
Forms; and such as have neither Command nor Example in the Book of God: Yea,
they were Forms Contradictory and gainsaying each the other: And yet whosoever
refused any one of them, he was proceeded against as disaffected to the present
Government, and by consequent unworthy to enjoy his own Bread. Nor do I believe
there can be found so great a difference between a Vow in Form and a Prayer in
Form, that it shall be lawful for Usurpers to impose the one, and unlawful for
the legal and loyal Magistrate to impose the other. So that refusal of the
Common Prayer merely upon the account of Imposition, it seems to carry a
greater measure of stomach than Conscience in it.

And thus thought Mr. Calvin, or else he would never have writ to the Protector
in the first of Edw. the sixth (as in the Title Page) That he exceedingly
approved a set Form both of Prayer and Ecclesiastical Rituals, and would have
it such, as no Pastor might recede from. And for proof of it, in England, I
shall only relate what happened some nine years after, and may be read in the
1531 Page of the old and unpurged Edition of The Book of Martyrs, of John
Careless a Coventry-Confessor; who to Dr. Martin thus:

The second Edition [speaking of the Common Prayer of Edw. 6.] is good and
godly, and in all points agreeing to the Word of God. And then infra: I will
add thus much more, That the same Book which is so consonant and agreeable to
Gods Word, being set forth by common Authority, both the King's Majesty that is
dead, and the whole Parliament House, ought not to be despised of me, or of any
other private man, under pain of God's curse and high displeasure, and
Damnation except they repent.

In a Letter of his.
April 25, 1556. See here one ready to go to the Stake [being, as himself
writes, proclaimed Heretic at Paul 's Cross] makes such a conscience of
obeying the Authoritative Imposition of the Common Prayer Book, that he
professes, Nor he himself, [and will these Exceptors say he had not the Spirit
of God?] nor any private man might not under the pain of God's curse despise
it; pronouncing Damnation to all despisers if they repent not.

In the Stirs of Frank-ford reprinted Page 180.
you shall find the Exiles of Frank-ford were so far from thinking it a
pressure to a tender Conscience to impose a Discipline, that they made it a
condition without which no reception into their Congregation, That not only
Ministers, (as with us) but Men of all sorts, yea, and Women too, were to
subscribe unto it. Nor is it ever to be dreamed there should ever be such a
thing as Subordination, (or as they love to speak) Ruling Elders, without
Impositions: Or that any wise man should impose, who has not a coercive Power.
So that either every particular Christian must be a Church, or there must be an
obeying of them that have the rule over us, and a Communicating in such Prayers
as Romans 13. 17.
we our selves made not.

As for that fond Objection, (giving, but not granting of it) That set Forms
stint the Spirit; I conceive the result of that Dispute amounts only to this.
Whether it is meeter every private Minister, or a consultation of many Fathers
should do it? For both equally do it. For, if the Prayer which they call
conceived Prayer be indeed so; forasmuch as no Conception is imaginable without
Form, by consequence this conceived is a formed Prayer. And if so, then the
Spirit in the Speaker is confined pro tempore to that Form.

If it be not conceived nor considered, then it is rash, indigested; a present
unfit for a Ruler, much more for a God. However, be it what it will, it
circumscribes the Auditors, and binds up their attention to the present
speaking.

In a word, being the Nation has sadly found, that both God has been highly
dishonored, and the Souls of men truly religious mightily grieved at the
Follies, Rebellions, Impertinencies, and prodigious Failings of private
spirits, even under pretense of Prayer; there is a grand necessity of stinting,
restraining, and limiting such spirits; toward which there is no more excellent
expedient than a Form of Prayer; nor any Form (that I ever yet saw) beyond our
own; concerning which I shall add this only.

Sir Edward Cook in his famous Reports, reports, how in the 33 year of Queen
Elizabeth, Mr. Cawdry sometime Parson of South-Lussenham, (in the little County
of Rutland) was deprived as the Jury then gave in, For that he had preached
against the Book of Common Prayer, and refused to celebrate Divine Service
according to the same.

Now (of the same little County) the Writer hereof May the 5th 1646. was at the
Committee for plundered Ministers in Westminster Sequestered. March 17th, 1653,
at the General Sessions at^ Oakham A President without a President: or the Form
of the Indictment.

The Jurors for the Lord-Protector of England, upon their Oaths do present,
that Edward Freeman of Ayston in the County of Rutland Gent. and Dorothy his
Wife, the 25 of December, and the first of January 1653. and diverse other
Sabboth-days, and several days commonly called the Holy Days of Saints, and
Friday called Good Friday, and suchlike days as Ash Wednesday, and Sundays in
Lent, Easter Day, and Whit-sundays, do usually travel from Ayston aforesaid to
Wardly in the same County, to hear Mr. John Allington Clerk to read the most
part of the Book of Common Prayer, and to receive the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper according to the Form of the said Book; and also do present the said J.
A. Clerk, for reading the said Book of Common Prayer, or most part of it, at
every such Assembly; and for administering the Lord's Supper to Popish and
Prelatical persons of other Countries, Cringing, Bowing, and Kneeling to the
Altar and Sacrament then administered, contrary to Ordinance of Parliament in
that case provided. And did also say, he would be torn in pieces by wild
Horses before he would give over bowing at naming Jesus.


Indicted. And upon the 28th of November, 1655, actually deprived by
Major General Butler, for Officiating or Celebrating Divine Service by the
same. To the abiding of which Sequestration, Indictment, or Deprivation,
whether (notwithstanding Mr. Stephen Marshall's following Answer) the Reasons
here following in the Letter were persuasive, shall now be left to the censure
of the patient and the prudent Reader.

Isaac Massey.

A BRIEF APOLOGY FOR THE Sequestered Clergy.

Wherein (among other things) this Case of Conscience is judiciously handled:

Whether any Minister of the Church of England may (to avoid Sequestration)
omit the public use of the Liturgy, and submit to the Directory.

In a Letter from a sequestered Divine to Mr. STEPHEN MARSHALL.

Querelam Ecclesiae quisque Catholicus facit suam.

Printed in the Year 1649.

In Nomine Crucifixi, secundum illud primae ad Corinth. cap. secundo, verse.
secundo.
Reverend Sir,
THis Address may seem very strange; and yet if you shall consider the
occasion, it will appear that I could not prudently do other; for you being
accounted a Light in that very House in which I stand eclipsed, I could not
imagine by any other mean than your splendor, how to obtain the dissipation of
this Cloud.

Sir, so it is, that that worshipful and worthy Knight Sir John Trever is one
to whom I owe very much; for it was his Letter and his Influence that first
guided and planted me to and in the School of the Prophets: It was respect to
him that gained me a Tutor; and it is now my respect to him, which gains you
this trouble.

For, when about the beginning of Michaelmas-term I was at London, meeting him
in the Palace-yard, I thanked him for a late courtesy: his reply was, I had
disabled my self from the capacity of a courtesy. I took leave to answer, it
was my Conscience and the tenderness thereof that has thus straightened me. He
told me again in words (as I conceive) to these equivalent, that I was more
biased by Conceit than Conscience, and guided rather by Will than Judgment.

I have so little left, that I can demonstrate to the world I have not made
gain my godliness; and I shall now desire to make it as evident unto you, that
it is not Fancy, but Scruple, and Scruple only, for which my self, and in me a
Wife and five Children very deeply suffer; so that I here with all respect
implore your assistance, either to satisfy my weakness and set me right, or
(which perchance may be the shorter work) be pleased to satisfy him whom I do
so highly honor, that you conceive my grounds and reasons are such as may
conclude me a rational and conscientious, though weak Brother.

The misdemeanors (for so they are called) for which my conviction (bearing
date May 5, 1646.) testifies I am sequestered, they are these: 1. Adoration or
worshipping God by bowing of my Body Eastward, or toward the holy Table. 2.
For the exterior acknowledgement of the Deity of my Savior, when summoned to
it by his blessed Name Jesus. 3. For deserting my Cure two whole years. 4. For
officiating by the Common Prayer Book, with refusal of the Directory: To which
is added a general surmise of Malignancy against the Parliament.

First, as of least concernment, I shall give you this brief account of the
third charge, to which I negatively answer: I never at all did desert my Cure:
For, being, as Justinian, derelictum dicitur quod Dominus ea mente abjecit, ut
id in numero rerum suarum esse nolit, that only is deserted which is thrown
off with a mind to be no more possessed; I cannot possibly be said to have
deserted my Cure, when by Petition upon Petition, by Letter upon Letter, and
all the ways I could imagine, I implored my quiet at home, or to have leave to
know why; and our Committee never would or did give way to either: so that what
is here called desertion, is no more than what those words of Scripture will
well warrant, When you are persecuted in one City, fly unto another.

Secondly, Every absenting more than two years, in these days of trial, has
not been accounted sequestrable; and therefore under favor I suppose, though
this by way of cumulation is put in, this is not the gravamen; for there is not
in the Conviction any charge for flying to, or being in any forbidden Quarters.

Lastly, I was so far from deserting my Cure, that I kept at my proper cost
(though sequestered) a Curate all my absence; one who kept my people freer from
distractions and aversions from the ways of the Church of England, than since
they have been. But haec obiter; that which my conviction declares me to suffer
for, it is a pretense of superstition, expressed by bowing to the East, to the
Altar, and at the Name of Jesus. 2. For not laying aside and relinquishing the
Liturgy.

Now I beseech you with patience peruse this my Defense, in which I shall
endeavor to clear first my acts of commission from being superstitious: And
then 2, give my reasons why I take it to be a sin of omission to renounce the
Liturgy.

First, bowing to the East, and to the Altar, are not only false accusations,
but false in such a degree, that (without my confession) are impossible to be
proved: for being the intention only can specificate the term, it is not in
the power of any man living to say to what I bow, or to what I kneel; for I am
confident your self bends your Knees toward many a thing to which you abhor to
do it.

Bow at his Footstool; that is, at the Ark and Mercy-seat; for there he has
made a promise of his presence. The words say not, Bow to the Ark, but to God
at the Ark. Thus Mr. Perkins; Reformed Catholic 707.
and thus and no otherwise did your Christian-brother bow either toward the
East, or toward the holy Table. Now as the Jews (in Mr. Perkins charitable
Divinity) did not bow to the Ark, but to God at the Ark; even so, when
occasionally your Christian brother bowed at the holy Table, it was not to the
Table or to the Altar, but to his God he made his Adoration, and that for the
same reason which Mr. Perkins uses; for there he has made a promise of his
presence: There has he enabled us (vi promissi) to say, This is my Body, this
is my Blood.

Now that it is an act of superstition to worship God by bowing of the Body, is
a scruple in which I cannot be satisfied: For, as Mr. Perkins, so think I --
The Worship of the Body is called Page 855. Ibid.
Adoration, which stands in bowing of the Knee, bending or prostrating of the
Body, the lifting up of the Hands of Eyes -- A duty which the same reverend
Author proves to be, as himself speaks, altogether necessary, and that for
three irrefragable reasons. 1. Because Love must not be conceived in the mind
only, but also testified in the actions of the body. 2. Christ redeemed both,
and therefore must be glorified with both. And lastly, Christ being an head to
the whole man, for this cause not only Soul, but Body also must stand in
subjection to Christ. Many others might be added, but it seems to me vain to
add a Beam unto the Sun. Now if to worship by bowing of the Knee, prostrating
the Body, and lifting up of Hands or Eyes be a duty lawful, yea altogether
necessary, no matter which way soever it be done, still it is, as Mr. Perkins
fully, an act, not of Superstition, but Adoration. For as it was no
superstition in the Jew to worship God by bowing before the Ark or Westward; so
superstition it is not to worship God by bowing before his holy Table; that is,
in the phrase of antiquity, Eastward.

And here, for their sakes who are weak, but willing to be wise, I shall make a
not impertinent digression, to show how it is a pure popular error, to say
that mere position can make an Altar; or that ranging a Table at the East End
turns it to an Altar.

Scripture will furnish us with Altars in open Fields, nigh no 1 Kings 18. 32.
Wall. The old Altar repaired by Elijah was so far from leaning to a Wall, that
it was circumvironed with Water, surrounded with a Ditch or Trench. In the
Temple of Solomon an Altar may be found standing [as the contentious would have
it] in medio, in the middle. And sure I am, the most considerable Altar that
the world ever saw, the Cross! upon which was crucified the precious Substance
of all Types, it had no such Dimensions as unhappy Christians have wrangled
about: For it stood without the Gate; yea, a Cross it stood, and yet was a most
real Altar. So that it is not Posture, but the Oblation; not the Situation,
but the Sacrifice which makes an Altar. I read, the very Altar on which [the
supreme Lord of Superstitions] the Pope in person says Mass, it stands in
medio, in the Body of the Quire. And doubtless, might popish Priests have
liberty to say Mass, they would not stand upon a position North or South. So
that Altarwise has more of scare, than any real fear in it.

As for bowing to the East, or to the Altar, I am able to produce a Letter writ
by me five or six years ago, ex Diametro against it, and am still ready to
ratify that Doctrine.

The second act of Superstition, it is bowing at the Name of Jesus: and to
clear that, I shall thus argue. No act directly tending and intended for the
advance of the glory of Jesus, can be superstitious; but to bow at the Name of
Jesus in the sense of the Church of England, is an act both tending and
intended for the advance of his glory, and therefore cannot be superstitious.
For the proof of the minor Proposition, I appeal to the 18 Canon of the Church
of England, where the end and intention of that gesture is clearly thus.

When in time of Divine Service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and
lowly Reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has been
accustomed; testifying by these outward Ceremonies and gestures [observe what]
their inward humility, Christian resolution, and due acknowledgement, that the
Lord Jesus Christ, the true and eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the
world.

Now upon this ground I thus argue: For as much as both Words and Gestures have
their individuation and specification merely by use, Law or Custom; what this
gesture of bowing at the Name of Jesus is to signify and import in the Church
of England, this the Representative part thereof having clearly manifested, we
are to take it in that sense and in that signification, in which and for which
it comes from them proposed and commended to us.

For as in Languages we receive and use words in and according to that power
and meaning which the first Authors and contrivers delivered them unto
posterity; even so, that I might ever avoid the being contentious, look what
spiritual and internal duties my Mother the Church of England professed to
express and signify by such and such exterior gestures, such I conceived they
did import, and in such sense and signification I did use and communicate them
unto others.

Whereas then (as the Canon clearly) the due and lowly Reverence exacted at the
Name of Jesus, is only to testify our inward humility, Christian resolution,
and due acknowledgement, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the true and eternal Son
of God; This being the known and declared end and meaning of this Gesture,
bowing at the Name of Jesus can no more in my weak apprehension be accounted
Superstition, than is inward humility, Christian resolution, or the due
acknowledgement of the Lord Jesus Christ to be the true and eternal Son of God:
for being Actus exterior and interior eandem constituunt virtutem; being the
outward expression and the inward meaning do make but one complete act; if the
inward be virtuous, the outward cannot be vicious; if the inward be religious,
the outward cannot be superstitious: So that since bowing at the Name of Jesus
is by the Church and use of England determined to signify an expression of
inward humility, Christian resolution, and a due acknowledgment of the Deity of
the Son of God; I cannot yet imagine how, to him who so understands and so
uses it, bowing at the Name of Jesus can be counted superstitious.

Nor does only the Canon of the Church of England, but even the Canon of holy
Scripture warrant me sufficiently that superstitious it cannot be; for Dato sed
non concesso, suppose it no duty of that known Text, yet there is congruity
enough to avoid the Superstition of it: for if by those Knees the Apostle
means the spiritual and inward Knees of the Heart, then, as he, without
thought of Superstition, expressed that inward duty by bodily incurvation, why
may not I or any other (by his example) express my inward profession of the
Deity, as he, by a corporal expression, by bowing at his Name? But my intention
is not to write a Volume, or indeed to say ought more than may conclude my
design mentioned, to prove that I have not been, nor yet am scrupulous without
cause, nor a sufferer without reason.

Now my first scruple is, whether a Minister may with a good Conscience
renounce or leave off any Act, Rite, or Gesture, under the brand and notion of
Superstitious, which he believes is not so?

I dare not do it, for these Reasons:

1. I should belly mine own Soul, in calling good evil, and evil good.

2. I should confirm a scandal laid upon many godly Orthodox Divines, that they
in thus doing have been superstitious.

3. I should do an irreparable violation to those holy Gestures which I do
verily believe are advancers of God's glory.

4. I dare not omit that as superstitious, which I believe not to be so, for
fear in so doing, to this undetermined notion, I might add such Latitude, that
under the color of Superstition, even Religion it self may be violated. In a
word, for my particular, whether I look upon Adoration in abstracto, as the
mere expression of that subjection and distance which Dust and Ashes owes to
his Maker; or whether I look upon it in concreto, as joined with some other
duty, as saying our Prayers, receiving the Sacrament, or profession of our
Savior's Deity; in neither respect (it seems to me) more guilty of
Superstition, or troubling the Waters, than was the Lamb in the Fable when the
Wolf charged him: So that if by some greater Light, or Latitude of
understanding, your clearer judgment shall discern otherwise, I shall with all
respect and thanks yield up my Soul to further illumination; which till it
shall please God to give me, I dare not in cool blood call an honest woman
Whore; or what I conceive religious superstitious, for more than yet I am, or
hope for to be worth. And this may suffice for the first scruple, viz. That my
judgment concluding otherwise, I dare not acknowledge or relinquish Adoration
under the notion of superstitious innovation.

The second thing I have to do, is to give my reasons wherefore I conceived it
a sin of omission to lay aside, much more to renounce the Liturgy: And that I
may do it methodically,

First, I shall give my Reasons why I dare not countenance the worshipping of
God without a Form. Secondly, why I dare not in specie omit this Form.

First, I dare not countenance the worshipping of God without a Form: for,
being the Scripture charge not only to hold the Faith, but to hold fast the
very form of sound words, I conceive a set Form of Prayer a necessary expedient
to this end: for being experience both ancient and modern has taught us this
sad truth, that Errors, Heresies, and Innovations in Doctrine are instilled
and infused by the conceived Prayers of such who are either Authors or Abettors
of such Opinions, therefore (and especially in these times) I dare not but
endeavor a set Form: A set Form seeming now as necessary, as an Antidote in
time of pestilence.

Secondly, to worship without a prepared and set Form (it seems to me) to serve
the living God with less care than Pagans did their Idols. For witness Plato, a
Law there was, whatever Lib. 7. de leg.
Prayers or Hymns the Poets composed to the gods, they should first show them
their Priests. And Alexander ab Alexandro testifies Lib. 4. c. 17
the Gentiles read their Prayers out of a Book before their Sacrifice; and that
for this reason, Ne quid prepostere dicatur, etc. or for fear some thing rashly
or preposterously might pass the Lips; as if stolen from that of Solomon, Be
not rash with thy mouth, Eccles. 5.
and let not thine heart be hasty. An Argument to me, that even an Heart may be
overhasty; and therefore my weakness desires a set Form.

Thirdly, The serving and worshipping God by a set Form seems to be approved by
God in all ages, before the Law, under the Law, under the Gospel. Before the
Law we read thus: Then Genesis 4. 26. Joan. Drusius in difficilioribus Genes^os.
began men to call upon the Name of the Lord, Eo tempore ritus certos colendi
Deum institutos fuisse quos observarent filii Dei. From that time forward, say
Expositors, certain Rites or set Forms were taken up for the public worship of
God; yea, forsitan propter Idolatriam insurgentem, perchance for the prevention
of incroaching Barradius, Tom. 4. l. 10. c. 12.
of Idolatry, says a learned Neoterick: therefore was Enoch sedulous to
prescribe and deliver a set Form. But whether Enoch were or no, sure we are God
Almighty under the Law, to prevent Idolatry, had his set Rites; and in
particular to the point in hand, a prescribed and set Form of Prayer: On this
wise shall ye Numb. 6. 23.
bless the children of Israel, saying, (as it follows) The Lord bless thee
and keep thee, etc.

Under the Gospel both St. John the forerunner, and our blessed Lord and
Master the substance, both we know taught to pray; and it is strange teaching
without a Form; as the corner and first Stone in the building, the Lord left us
a Prayer; and this Prayer proved the basis and fundamental of all future
Liturgies: This, through the devotion and piety of the Church, increased and
grew into a Form; and in this I suppose M. Beza may be my advocate, In 1 Cor.
11. ver. ultim.
who tells me and all the world, Quae ad ordinem spectant, ut precum formulae
disposuit Apostolus: Those things which appertain to order, as do forms of
Prayer, the Apostle himself appointed and disposed. So that set Forms in the
judgment of M. Beza are Apostolical. The English Translation reads it thus:
Such things as appertain to Order and Form of Prayers, and other such like, the
Apostle took order for, in the Congregation, according to the consideration of
times, places, persons, 1 Cor. 11. 39.

Yea, after the great Reformer Martin Luther had a while tried what it was to
want a set Form, himself professes (lib. de Formula Missae) coactus sum, I am
constrained, observe by what, and to what; constrained he was alios Canones,
aliamque Missandi Formulam prescribere, to prescribe fresh Canons, and another
form of Mass: And if you please to observe by what he was constrained, his
words are, Propter leves and fastidiosos spiritus qui sola Novitate gaudent,
atque statim ut Novitas desiit, nauseantes. By reason of light and humorous
spirits, who only delight in Novelty, nauseating what themselves liked when it
cease to be new. A humor which the first Zeal of our times did not digest;
and therefore, whether I appeal to Beza, or the more eminent Luther, still a
set Form. A set Form, according to Beza's note, because Apostolical. A set
Form, according to Luther, because woeful and extavagant experience demonstrated
the necessity of it. No curb for fastidious and rambling spirits, but a set
Form.

Fourthly, The want of set Form prevents that which I am bound for to
endeavor, the conversion and communion of the adverse party: for either I must
persuade them to worship God according to my discretion, and rely upon the
implicit faith of my prudence, or else I must produce a Form in which I desire
their communion, and to which I must endeavor their conversion. Now I believe
all those who renounce an implicit faith in the whole Church, or in the
Representative of it; all such (I say) at least will abhor so far to resign
themselves unto a private Minister, as to worship God all days of their lives
according to his mutable dictate. I am sure the Papists will say this is worse
than what we call Popish servitude: for they are bound only to believe and
serve God as the Church orders; but where all is left to the will of the
Minister, people are bound to worship and serve God as his private spirit leads
them; and I wish I could not feelingly say (even from follies vented in my own
Pulpit) what an Ignis fatuus that is.

Lastly, To avoid prolixity, for my own particular, should I renounce a set
Form, I must needs profess my self guilty either of Superstitious Innovation,
or (which in materia Religionis is bad enough) popular insinuation.

First, That to worship God without a Form is Innovation, this the whole
Christian world will attest unto me; the Eastern and Western Churches,
Wittemberg where Luther, Geneva where Calvin, Scotland where Knox flourished;
and to innovate and act against a Catholic Custom of Christendom, of the whole
Christian world, may breed a scruple in a wise, much more in a weak Christian.

Secondly, As Innovation, so it would seem to me unavoidable superstition, and
that whether Superstition be positively or negatively considered: for
Superstition being positively considered, being the issue of misgrounded Zeal,
this superstition is active in the production of superstitious performances,
whereof this is one, to conceive that God will be pleased with no prayer from
me, unless of my own conception, nor no devotion unless it be of our own
invention: this, I say, is the superstitious issue of a misguided zeal. Again,
as misguided zeal is the Mother of superstitious performances, even so ignorant
fear is the motive and cause of superstitious forbearances, as when one vainly
fears, and in that fear refrains such an act, as displeasing, which indeed is
rather pleasing to Almighty God: Touch not, taste not, bandle not, these are
negative superstitions, issues of ignorant fear: And so far as I can conceive,
scrupulously to reject or lay aside set Forms as superstitious, is out of
ignorant fear really and actually to commit (pardon the phrase) a negative
superstition.

Thirdly, Again, should I not superstitiously (which as drawing nigher
Religion, is more honest of the two) lay aside a set Form, I cannot imagine any
other principle but popular insinuation to move me to it; and to make that a
motive in Religion, scarce appears to me religious. Omnia ponenda post
Religionem nostra Civitas duxit. If the Pagans had so much Divinity as to say,
it was a Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. de Religio.
Law in their City, that all things whatsoever must give way unto Religion,
certainly it behooves me, who am a Christian, in matter and point of Religion,
to look upon nothing through a carnal or secular Perspective. Now to me (and
with me runs the whole current of Antiquity) set Forms of Prayer and Worship,
they are the most religious and assured means either to preserve or advance
Religion. The scruple then is, whether any of my judgment and persuasion may
for any popular or secular end in the world (and for that end merely) lay aside
a better, and assume in God's worship a worse way? whether this be not having a
Male in my Flock, to offer unto God a Female, judge you.

Printed 1628.
That blessed speech of Sir Benj. Ruddierd to Mr. Rym; He that thinks to save
any thing by his Religion but his Soul, will be a terrible loser in the end, It
is worthy to be written in letters of gold, yea worthy to be engraven in the
Heart of every Parliament Man that sits: it is indeed a saying that has so far
prevailed on me, that I begin extremely to question the truth of that vulgar
opinion, that the Worship and Government of the Church of Christ are so left as
to be accommodated to the proportionable exigences of States and Kingdoms. For
my particular, I conceive, the glory of God attended, municipal Laws ought
rather to stoop, than they to strain; for Religion is so tender a Virgin, that
she may not admit the least prostitution; and I am sure a conscientious breast
fears to rumple her very ornaments.

Whereas then to worship God without a set Form seems to me destructive of the
form of sound words, which charily must be preserved, a worship more careless
than what Pagans used, an Innovation which takes away the very ground and basis
of conversion and communion with an adverse party; whereas it would be in me
either Superstition or Popularity to desert a set Form; I must crave leave to
follow these Dictates till I have better premises given me, from which I may
conclude otherwise. And so I shall desire your patience to accompany me to my
last endeavor, which is to show, that I cannot with a good conscience
renounce, or as yet lay aside this our individual Liturgy, and that for these
reasons:

1. It makes our Religion to be ill spoken of by the greatest part of
Christendom, and so preventeth the conversion of Papists, who accuse us of
unsetledness and changes; yea, it furnishes them with an unanswerable
exception, viz. That we have these many years convicted, punished, and
imprisoned them for what our selves now so far distaste, that at Sessions we
give a charge against it, traduce it under the brand of the old Mumpsimus, and
indict it, and punish one another for it; this I profess my weakness cannot
satisfy.

2. If better it were a Millstone were hanged about my Neck, than that I should
be a scandal to my weak Brother, the omission of the Liturgy being at this time
a scandal not only to the weak, but to the strong, being the cries and tears
of both require it; how should I dare to look my God in the Face, when I shall
wilfully become scandalous both to the learned and unlearned, both to the
strong and to the weak Christian? yea, of this, sad experience has made me
very confident, such a (...), such a stumbling block as is this, the
suppression of the Liturgy, was never since Queen Mary's days amongst us; for
the want of this has hindered thousands from their accustomed piety and
devotion; the weak, because they have no other; the strong, because they have
no better way: and whatever prevents piety cannot but be rather scandalum
datum, than acceptum, a real and true scandal; so that till a better Form be
actually established in lieu of this, my Conscience tells me I may not leave it.

3. What by Oath and Subscription I am bound unto, that without relaxation from
the same authority to whom I swear, and before whom I subscribed, I may not
relinquish. But I have sworn to my Diocesan, and subscribed to maintain the
service of God, not only in genere, but in specie, according to the particular
form and way of the Church of England. And therefore, to say no more, as an
honest man, I am bound to make that good which I have sworn, subscribed, and
negatively promised to maintain.

4. It is against my Oath of Supremacy to acknowledge a power Ecclesiastical
Independent upon the only Supreme; and this cannot (in my apprehension) be
avoided, if the King forbidding I receive the Directory, and the King
commanding to use it, I reject the Liturgy.

5. Beneficium supponit Officium. The duty which every Parochial Minister is
bound unto, is a daily recital of his Office; for being Parishes are of humane
institution, founded and endowed by the piety and liberality of devout Patrons,
look what they conditioned for, (so far as just and pious) that I conceive I am
bound unto. Forasmuch then as in the Church of England, prayer, daily prayer,
yea (and ever since the Reformation) this very form of prayer is the condition
of our admittance, though preaching be multiplied, I cannot conscionably omit
that, without which, yea, and for which I had Institution and Induction to my
Living; so that in my weak judgment it is a very considerable scruple, whether
what is given for a public and daily duty, may conscionably be taken by him
who does it but once a week, much less by him who does it not at all?

All Ages will argue for a diurnal and daily Devotion: The Jews had daily their
Morning and their Evening Sacrifices; and to shame us to the doing of it, I
shall only add what Cornelius a Lapide borrows from Plato, Lib. 10, de
legibus, thus: Graecos omnes aeque ac Barbaros, Sole tam Orient quam*
Occidente adorare Deum -- and ideirco Clemens secundo Libro Constitutionum,
cap. 24. acriter redarguit Christianos tardius Templa adeuntes, cum Gentiles
and Judaei suas Synagogas dilucul'o frequentant. For whereas the Angel of the
Lord said unto the Disciples newly out of Prison, Acts 5. 20. Go, stand and'
speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life; The reason is
thus given -- Scientes Judaeos de More dilucul'o ad Orationem venturos in
Templum. Knowing that the Jews did customarily repair early to prayers in the
Temple.

Lastly, It is very considerable to me, whether those words in my Protestation
(The true reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and popish Innovations) do not bind me, so far
as lawfully I may, with life, power, and estate, to maintain either this, or
some other set Form, and that for these reasons:

First, This word or notion, Religion, necessarily includes all the actual
muniments thereof, be it what Religion it may be: for if, as Lib. 83. quaest.
31. Inst t. l. 4. c. 14. p. 19.
Austin out of Cicero, Religio est virtus quae superiores cujusdam naturae,
quam divinam, vocant cultum caeremoniamque adfert, Religion be a virtue which
obliges as well to Ceremony as to Worship: And if, as Mr. Calvin, in
professione religionis homines non posse caeremoniis carere, Men cannot profess
Religion without Ceremony, be it what Religion it may be: Then (so far as my
capacity reaches) I cannot vow, promise, and profess to maintain and defend a
Religion, but under this notion and term Religion, I bind my self to defend
and maintain whatever congruously is requisite in the defense and support of
it. For as he that is bound to maintain a House, must preserve the Thatch as
well as the Grunsel; and as he who is bound to maintain a Close, must have a
care of the Hedge (though it be but a dead one) as well as the Crop: even so,
when I did promise, vow, and protest to defend and maintain the true Religion,
in which I was baptized and bred, I know not how I could hope to make good
this, unless the necessary muniments, whereof the Liturgy is a main one, were
preserved in it. And that in this I was not singular, I may appeal unto a Vote
afterward annexed to the Protestation, in which it is declared, that several
persons had raised the same doubt; an Argument that the Deduction was very
obvious, and very natural. Now forasmuch as I had vowed before I saw the
limitation, after the Vow I durst not enquire; a Vow and an Oath (as I
conceive) in this dissenting: an Oath, it must be taken in the sense of the
giver; a Vow, because voluntary, in the sense of the taker only: so I took it,
and the obligation is still upon me.

Secondly, Whereas Religion in the Protestation has this restrictive
difference, Reformed; and not only so, but so reformed as in the Church of
England, against all Popery and popish Innovations; I cannot see how I could
protest to maintain a Religion so reformed, but that I must necessarily imply
that service which the first Reformers, and all succeeding Parliaments have
made the Characteristical note, and formal difference betwixt us and them; and
this (we all know) has been the Liturgy: for from his denying Communion in
this, the Papist was called Recusant, and by his joining with us in this, he
was said and held as reconciled to our Church.

Thirdly, In case the Protestation had run thus: I promise, vow, and protest to
maintain the true Religion established in the Church of Rome against (as they
call them) heretical Innovations; would any man believe the Missal were here
excluded, which is the very formality of their professions? Or in case it had
run thus: I promise, vow, and protest, to maintain that reformed Religion,
whose character and distinctive formality is the Directory; would any doubt I
vowed to maintain the Directory? and can hope to perform my Vow, can I hope to
maintain the Religion of the Church of England, and lay aside that which is the
practical character of my profession?

Fourthly, If this notion, Reformed Religion of the Church of England, includes
not Liturgy, then they are not sufferers for the true Reformed Religion of
England, who suffer merely for the Liturgy; but they who so suffer, cannot
imagine else what they suffer for.

Fifthly, It is very probable to me, the compilers and chief managers of this
Protestation, by Religion mainly meant the Form of God's Worship: for in the
first nineteen humble Propositions, the eighth runs thus: That your Majesty
will be pleased to consent, that such a Reformation be made of the
Church Government and Liturgy, as both Houses of Parliament shall advise -- To
the people in the same year, the Lords and Commons declare thus, April 9, 1642.
they intend a due and necessary Reformation of the Government and Liturgy of
the Church. A plain and evident demonstration to my capacity, that both Lords
and Commons did then declare, this notion or term Religion, it includes both
Church Government and Liturgy; otherwise what ever is of late attempted or
done concerning these, cannot be said to be a religious, but a politic
Reformation.

Lastly, How could I promise, vow, and protest to defend and maintain a
Religion which is said to be true, and actually reformed, unless there be some
Form actually in being, which my judgment and my Conscience must look upon? for
to swear the maintenance of a Religion or Worship, or Discipline not fixed, and
digested into a Form, seems to me like that formidable et caetera, to swear and
vow to maintain I know not what; and upon this ground thousands there are who
have stumbled at the very Threshold of the Covenant, not daring to swear to
defend a Reformation, where they cannot come to see the Form.

Nor is this new, or without example, and that from such as profess themselves
of the Reformed Party: For the Bohemians, professing themselves to tread in the
steps of their Reverend Martyr John Huss, disavow for ever Communion with the
Waldenses; and that for two Reasons; whereof (if my Author deceive me not) the
first is, Quod Nulla publica extare voluerint Doctrinae and Fidei suae
Testimonia; because they had no public Form or Testimony to declare what their
Faith and Doctrine was: vid. quintum Evangelium, page 42. praef. Bohemi ad
Confessionem Wittemberg 1578.

Whereas then beside Statute-subscription, and those many obligations
contracted under Episcopacy, I conceive even by the Protestation, and from the
very sense of the House that made it, Liturgy is a very considerable
ingredient in the compound of Religion, and this present Liturgy in this the
reformed Religion of the Church of England; As then in Music, though there are
many rare and exquisite voluntaries, yet solemn and set Music is not therefore
to be rejected: even so though there are and may be in the Church of England
such, who can express as readily as conceive, and conceive as devoutly as can
be imagined; yet for all that, this is no Supersedeas or bar against studied,
penned, and set Forms of Prayer. And more than this, as I read, was heard, and
ordered to be printed by the honorable House of Commons in a Sermon called,
Babylon's downfall, in these words: Cursed shall he be that removes the ancient
Landmark, etc. What is the ancient Landmark of England, but our Laws and
Religion? (which contains as well facienda as credenda, and has as well the
Liturgy as the Articles and Homilies for her boundaries) and therefore if any
man shall remove this Landmark, cursed shall he be of the Lord, and let all
the people say Amen. Certainly they who said Amen to this imprecation, and
those who ordered there should be an impression of it, they were then no
visible Enemies to Liturgy, no not this Liturgy. All then that I shall now
trouble you withal, shall be a slight proposal of this one scruple.

Whether a Minister is not as much bound to suffer in defense of the spiritual
Muniments of Religion, as any Subject for the temporal Muniments and
Privileges of State or Kingdom.

For Christian Religion, or the Muniments thereof, I am apt to think with
Tertullian, the Sword is no good advocate, Lex nova non As Grotius cites him de
jure belli.
se vindicat ultore gladio; the foolishness of preaching, not the arm of flesh,
must and did establish these: And therefore I propose the scruple only in
point of suffering; for if we look unto the Author and Finisher of our Faith, I
conceive with St. Peter, that by his example we are called upon to suffer, and
in this case to suffer only.

Now in these times of loss and suffering, I have often considered with my self
for what, either as Subject, or as Christian, especially as a Christian
Minister, I stand bound to suffer.

Now whilst I look upon my self as a Subject, having nothing at all before me
but some secular or temporal advantage; my next consideration is, what secular
or temporal commodity is dearest to me: for I suppose no man will lose Gold to
save Chaff, nor expose his Darling to preserve his Vassal. Now forasmuch as all
temporal or secular goods are reducible to these three heads, jucundum, utile,
honestum, either pleasant, profitable, or honest; that which of these three is
dearest, that which of these is absolutely the best, that (I conceive, though I
suffer the loss of the other two) I am bound to preserve.

Job 2. Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life,
Though the Devil spoke it, both God and man approve it. Skin for Skin, whatever
is pleasant, or whatever is profitable, a man will rather suffer in, than in
his life; for of all things pleasant or profitable, Life is the dearest. Now
albeit among things pleasant or profitable, Life is the Jewel; yet bonum
honestum, that good which does consist in honor or honesty, this, it is often
even dearer than life it self: So that for defense of reputation and a good
name, for the advance and benefit of posterity, for the vindication of a
friend, for the preservation of a trust; for these and such like, there is many
an one who will dare to die: but merely for what is pleasant or what is
profitable, I think no man living: So that indeed it is only bonum honestum, it
is only for what is honest, or what is honorable, a man as a man, a man as
rational, is bound to suffer.

Now if it be so, that honor and honesty has so strong an influence upon a
reasonable soul, that Reason will persuade even the natural man to prefer
honor and honesty before life; if property, liberty, and the Laws of the Land
are so dear to Subjects, that even for them thousands have laid down their
lives; my great and grand scruple is, whether bonum religiosum, whether a
religious good, whether that which I verily believe tends to the good of
Religion, ought not to me, a Christian, and a Minister, to be full as dear as
any bonum honestum, as any honest or mere secular good to me, or any subject in
the world: And (I profess to you upon the faith of a Christian) be it sound, or
be it weak, this is the principal ground and motive of all my losses; and to
support me I have these Reasons.

1 Cor. 9. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we
shall reap your carnal things? Between spiritual and carnal things the Apostle
seems to make so despicable a difference, that the one is not to be compared
with the other: carnal things, secular and worldly interests, they are not
considerable, if compared with things spiritual. A clear argument to me, that
no spiritual or religious performance ought to give way to any carnal end. And
such I conceive are all the muniments of Christian Religion, such in particular
a blameless Liturgy.

According to this rule, the Royal Master and glorious Triumpher over savage
cruelties, imputes all his sufferings to the score of Christ, saying, I shall
be more than Conqueror through Christ Illis Med. upon death.
enabling me, for whom I have hitherto suffered, as he is the Author of Truth,
Order, and Peace, for all which I have been forced to contend against Error,
Faction, and Confusion. A plain evidence that Christ may be suffered for in the
preservation of Order, as well as in the vindication of Truth.

Secondly, It is a rule amongst Casuists: That man that suffers either for
doing this, or forbearing that in relation unto Christ and his glory, that
person is a sufferer in the cause of Christ; as he that will not lie, upon this
ground, because dishonorable to the Christian Profession, if he should be
persecuted because he will not lie, such an one, though not in materia fidei,
yet because his restraint is for Christ and his glory, he were persecuted for
Christ his sake.

Whereas then in my poor judgment I am convinced there is no means generally
more expedient for the advance of the glory of Christ and the preservation of
the Faith, than a well-composed and set Form of Liturgy; whatever I shall
suffer for not rejecting this, I shall confidently lay upon the score of my
Savior: forasmuch as I therefore only by suffering endeavor the defense of
this, because I do verily believe Liturgy is the advance of his glory: So that
if a temporal good (whose reward and encouragement cannot be but temporal) can
move a man to suffer, much more a spiritual, whose reward (through the mercy of
a gracious accepter) may prove eternal. For he who will not see a Cup of cold
Water given for his sake lost, neither will he forget the least of sufferings
which relate to his glory.

Thirdly, In suffering for spiritual muniments, and for that only which
relates to Christ only, and his glory, there is no interest but God Almighty's
considered or concerned: But in suffering for temporal, though public good, we
have private ends and personal advantages of our own; so that it must be much
more acceptable to God Almighty to suffer for spiritual, that is, his interest,
than for secular, that is, our own.

Fourthly, If that Citizen be held an unworthy member, who will not spend his
Purse and pains for the privilege of his Corporation: And if that
Country-clown be held no good Townsman, who will not stiffly maintain the Modus
Decimandi, the Custom of his Town; certainly then that Minister has a very low
and poor estimate of that Liturgy which he subscribed unto, a very unworthy
esteem of the Catholic custom of the reformed Church of Christ, that will,
without suffering, betray his trust; making less account of what Martyrs sealed
with their Blood, than will a Citizen or a Countryman of a trifling Privilege
or Custom.

Fifthly, Considering and enquiring after the elder times, when such was the
purity of intention, that nothing but Christ's glory was attended; I cannot
find that any thing in Religion was molded unto State-ends.

Si Ecclesiasticum negotium sit, nullam Communionem habento civiles Magistratus
cum ea disceptatione, sed Religiosissimi Episcopi secundum sacros Canones
negotio fine imponentem, in Authentica Can. 123.

Not to the civil Magistrate, but to the religious Bishops, Justinian (no less
than an Emperor) attributes and decrees the decision and determination of
Ecclesiastical affairs. And certainly if there be any Ecclesiastical
Government, as the Law speaks -- Cui jurisdictio data est, ea quoque concessa
esse intelliguntur sine quibus jurisdictio expleri non poluit. To whom
jurisdiction is committed, all that must be granted, without which he cannot
exercise jurisdiction; and that must needs be a directive and a coactive power.

Now impossible (it seems to me) that those who have, (be they Prelates, be
they Presbyters, or be they of what name or title soever our next new light
shall call them) I say, it seems to me impossible, that those who have this
spiritual power should ever discharge their trust unless they resolve to
suffer, and to suffer precisely for the muniments and defense of the Church of
Christ, and the power of him committed to them; for the impartial and thorough
executing of this charge cannot but displease great ones; and Flesh and Blood
is a bitter adversary: so that indeed it will evidently appear, the decay of
Discipline, Liturgy, and all the Muniments of the Church, they have therefore
suffered, because those who should have suffered for them would not. And I
beseech God this sin be not laid to our charge: for my own particular, I
beseech God give me grace to say heartily as did some of the Martyrs, Though I
cannot dispute, I can suffer for him.

Sixthly, For me to omit any act, gesture, or form of Worship, which I believe
or feel to be an advance to Piety, merely from secular or private Interest;
this, in my judgment, is to prefer a carnal thing before a spiritual, and to
endeavor rather to please man than my God. And indeed I could here with a
great deal of truth and sadness relate unto you, the serious and sharp
complaints of such Ministers, who profess their Souls long after the Liturgy,
grieved at Heart, and (as they pretend) troubled at Soul, because they dare not
use what they conceive much the better way. A lamentable condition is the
Church in, when Ministers worship God with reluctance, and, only to save their
stakes, comply and do as the State would have them.

Lastly, Forasmuch as the muniments of Religion are preservers of the dearest
thing imaginable, Gods glory, and our Souls welfare, I do not know what I
should suffer in defense of, if not of these.

I lately reading (as it fell proper to the day) the fifth of Esaias, when I came
to those dreadful words: I will take away thy hedge, and it shall be eaten up,
break down the wall, and it shall be trodden down, it made my Heart even ache to
think how applicable this methodical destruction is to our ungrateful Vineyard;
I will take away the hedge, I will break down the wall. Take the Hedge and the
Wall away, cut up the Fence, and the Vineyard will soon be waste; the
Government, the Discipline, the Liturgy, which as a Hedge or a Wall ever since
our Reformation preserved the Vineyard; since I see it has pleased God to
suffer this Hedge and the Wall to be trodden down, I can but fear confusion and
desolation to be the sequel. For since the worldly wise man verily believes,
where the Fence is wanting, spoil and waste inevitably follows; and therefore
his main care is to tend it: Even so, where the muniments of any Profession or
Religion are slighted and taken away; where Liturgy, (this thirteen hundred
years without controversy held the Hedge and mound of Faith, and God's Worship
in a national Church) where (I say) this is pulled down and taken away, there
is imminent and evident fear, a gap is opened to let in whatever will come; be
it the beast of the field, be it the little Foxes, be it the wild Boar of the
Forest, come what will, there is no muniment, no provision, no fence against
it; so that in my poor conceptions, the Hedge, the Fence, the Muniment of the
Church, they are matters of such necessary consequence, that Ministers, I
conceive, had better lay themselves and all their Fortunes in the Gap, than for
want of fence to suffer the destroyer to come in.

Indeed I have been told by some who wish very well unto me, that humane
inventions, and things merely circumstantial, ought not to be thus stood upon:
I thank them heartily for their affection, and bless them for their good will;
but our judgments yet must differ. For if no suffering for humane invention,
if life it self may not be exposed to hazard in defense of humane
constitutions, certainly then no fighting for the Laws of the Land, nor no
taking up arms for Privilege of Parliament, for these sure are humane and
political institutions; and as these are necessary for the preservation of a
State, even some such are also necessary for the preservation of a Church; and
of such, Churchmen cannot be too chary.

Again, whereas Liturgy in genere, or ours in specie is counted but a
circumstantial business, I believe I may find out such circumstantials in a
Christian Church, as will hazard the whole if they perish.

Chron. Chario. Diocles.
In the tenth Persecution under the Tyranny of Dioclesian, a Decree passed, ut
Templa and libri delerentur; that Christians should deliver up their Books, and
destroy (or at least permit the destruction of) their Churches. Books and
Churches, I conceive, are but circumstantials to Religion; for the world was
more than 2400 years old before there was any Scripture in it; yea, the
Christian Church it was from the birth of Christ more than 90 years before the
Canon of the New Testament was completed; yea, after the Matthew. 41.
Death and Resurrection of our Savior there is (supposing his Luke 51.
passion at 31) ten years numbered before any Gospel at all was Mark 61.
committed unto writing, twice ten before the second, thrice ten before John 98.
the third, and more than three twenties before the last: a plain argument that
Books and Writings are but circumstantial to Religion; for one may live and die
a very good Christian, and know never a Letter on the Book.

Suppose now the Pope and Popery should so far prevail, as to have power, under
the notion of Books heretical, (for so they will not stick to call our Bibles)
to call in, and under pain of death to deliver up our Bibles even to the fire,
could any conscientious Protestant satisfy his Soul with this poor evasion,
Alas the Bible is but circumstantial, the Doctrine and Religion of it I can
preserve though the Bible be gone! Without all peradventure it is most true, a
learned and well-grounded Christian, he may preserve the faith, he may deliver
and hold fast the form of sound words, though among Turks, where a Bible is not
to be looked upon: and yet for my particular I should scarce look upon that man
as a Christian, who to save his Purse, yea his Body, should deliver up his
Bible to the fire.

In the Roman Martyrology there is a commemoration made of Ian. 2.
many holy Martyrs, who despising the sacrilegious Edict of Dioclesian 7. [Quo
tradi sacros codices jubebantur, potius corpora carnificibus quam sancta dare
canibus maluerint] chose rather to deliver their Bodies to the Executioner,
than holy things to Dogs, or holy Books unto the fire. And truly I should
rather honor these as Martyrs, than those for good Christians, who under
pretense of things circumstantial, should deliver those to save themselves; so
highly (I conceive) God would be dishonored in the betraying of so great a
preserver and muniment of his honor.

Again, as Books, even so (to some much more clearly) Churches, Oratories,
Temples, they are mere circumstantials. Now suppose the Independent and
Congregational Brotherhood should so far overpower, as to command the
demolition (as they call them) of our Steeple Houses, the destruction and
levelling of our Churches, I would very fain know whether in point of
conscience I were not rather bound to suffer, than in any measure to appear
willing to so high a Sacrilege? I who am Flesh and Blood as well as other men,
could find pretty evasions and glosses to fool my Soul withal: I could say (as
I hear) is not a Sermon as well in a Parlour as in a Church? Did not Christ
preach in a Ship, Paul pray upon the Sands, and shall I suffer in defense of so
unnecessary a trifle as an heap of Stones, a popish Relic, a sorry
Meeting House? For my particular, I am afraid many things are daily called
circumstantial, not with consideration whether so or no; but because these are
the things in question, these the points which I must either dissemble, desert,
or suffer for, I pray let me, as a close to this, present you with the example
of one, who though a Bishop, was ever reverenced as a Saint, and a good man; I
mean that great Doctor St. Ambrose, who being once tempted Epist. 33.
and provoked even in this very point, and that by no less than the Emperor,
to deliver up his Church, though it pleased the Emperor in a fair way to send
Earls and Tribunes to him, ut Basilicae fieret matura traditio, that there
might be a seasonable deliverance of that Royal Palace, (for so his piety terms
the Church) yet you shall find this reverend Pastor so far from deeming this a
circumstantial trifle, that he offers his Goods, his Body, his Life, in lieu of
it.

Ea quae Divina Imperatoriae potestati non subjecta; The things of God are not
subject to Imperial power, was the peremptory position of this Bishop; and then
proceeds -- Si patrimonium petitur, invadite; si corpus, occurram: vultis in
vincula rapere, vultis in mortem? voluptati est mihi. If you, who are sent,
demand my patrimony, invade it, take it! if my Body, here it is; if to bonds or
death you desire to carry me, it shall be a pleasure to me; pro altaribus
gratius immolabor, I will gladly be a Sacrifice to preserve my Altar. He would
rather die the death, than suffer an Arrian Minister to officiate in his
Church: yea, as it is in the same Epistle, cum propositum esset ut Ecclesiae
vasa jam traderemus -- when the Emperor's Officers demanded a present delivery
of the Church-Vessels, the conscientious Bishop was so far from holding these
such circumstantials as not to be stood upon, that he plainly tells the
Emperor, it was neither lawful for him to deliver, or the Emperor to demand
them.

In Sermon ad plebem intra Basilieam, Ep. 33.
Trade Basilicam, deliver the Church, is as much as to say, (as the same Father
to his Flock) speak a word against God, and die; nay not only so, Nec solum
dic adversus Deum, etiam fac adversus Deum: It is not only to speak, but to do
against God, which in his judgment deserved no less than death. Thus zealous
of a circumstantial, and of exterior muniments, was that holy Bishop: to
betray a Church, yea a vessel of a Church, it was in his Divinity a sin against
the Deity, an act against him for whose Glory and Service they were preserved.

In these sad times of trial, I conceive one main end of God's Judgments
(especially upon his Clergy) is to discern who those are who have hitherto
merely related to him for their Bellies, and who for his glory mainly; who have
been spiritual, and who carnal professors of the Ministry: For those who served
him chiefly for their Bellies and carnal ends, to them the invasion of nothing
is considerable, in which their interest and their ends are not involved; but
such who with purity of intention have mainly studied and sought the advance of
God's Service, to them, as to St. Ambrose, the muniments of Religion, the
abridgement or abatement of any thing that was adjuvant to this end, is more
considerable than all their secular interest, or personal advantages of this
world; insomuch as I can knowingly say it for some, Threescore pound a year,
and our old way, will be preferred before 300 in a worse Model. It is to me a
consideration not unworthy my Pen, to see how the judgment of God has
followed such who have measured and stuck to his interests, merely as they
moved with their own. In the 21 year of Henry the eighth, in a P. 118. in
Bridewel.
Parliament which began the third of November, the Commons sent up to the House
of Lords a Bill against the exaction of unconscionable Mortuaries; to which
Bill it is observed the spiritual Lords made a fair Face, and were well content
a reasonable Order should pass against them: But this was (says my Author)
because it touched them little; for when within two days after a Bill
concerning Probates of Testaments (in which there had been incredible
extortion) was sent up to the Lords, then the Bishops in general (says the
Historian) frowned and grunted, for that touched their profit: then said the
Bishop of Rochester, Now with the Commons is nothing but down with the Church.
When the Bishops personal profits were touched upon, then (as if the very Church
were falling) Fisher cries out, The Commons lack faith, the Commons think of
nothing but down with the Church. Yea, in the progress of this Reformation, are
not Bishops found conniving and abetting the demolishing of religious Houses?
and was not this probably with an eye to the preservation of their own? as if
they said, Let Monasteries go, so long as Bishoprics be preserved. Well, they
are dead and gone; but has not vengeance followed upon Episcopacy? Are there
not now amongst us who cry, Down with Bishops, sell their Lands, and think this
no Sacrilege, provided that Parsonages may be augmented, and Tithes supported?
Well, Bishops are preached down, and their honors laid in the dust; but does
not vengeance hasten after the promoters of it? Do not the Presbyters find
that there are who conceive they have less right to Tithes than Bishops to
their Lands? Are there not who are as industrious to deprive them, as they have
been (for their own ends) to deprive their God? An evident argument, that Just
and righteous art thou O God in all thy ways. An argument that makes me verily
believe, those who for private interest, and merely either for praise or
profit, throw off the Liturgy, forbear their duties, and betray the muniments
of Religion and the Church of Christ; God will in his due time reward such into
their own Bosoms, blasting that private Interest for which they have betrayed
his.

Whereas then I must profess before God and the world, I can apprehend no
motive or inducement so prevalent as to persuade me that the Liturgy of the
Church of England is any way a hinderer of God's holy Worship, or an obstacle
to the solid and sufficient ministration of the Word; but on the contrary,
consonant to God's holy Word, agreeable to Orthodox antiquity, and an approved
promoter of God's glory in the Church I live in: being (I say) to consent to
the abolition of Liturgy, I find in my Soul no moving motive, but either the
hope of more, or the holding of what I have: I dare not (finding within me
nothing but carnal interest) put a specious show of Religion upon it, and tell
the world that I lay aside the truly divine Service of the Church, because
Prelates over-valued it, the ignorant doted of it, the Papists nosed with it,
and an idle and unedifying Ministry maintained by it.

These, I profess, to me are neither true nor weighty considerations; for if I
should now (as I am) forbear or lay it aside, it is not any, or all these, but
only in mine own defense, only for mine own ends I should do it: Now whether
any man may salva conscientia prefer what he conceives in God's service a worse
way, merely for the boot of private Interest, I leave it to your prudent
consideration; concluding with that of Chrysostom. Qui hominem timet, Hom 84. in
Matthew.
ab co ipso quem timet deridebitur; sin vero Deum, hominibus quoque venerabilis
erit. He who in God's cause prefers man, he shall be scorned of him he fears;
but he who fearing God despises man, shall be had in reverence even of those
men: The patient abiding of the meek shall not always be forgotten.

And here I had thought to have put a period both to your trouble and my own;
but I must needs crave leave that you would thus far be an advocate both for
me, and all in my condition, as to procure a belief that such who are constant
to their Faith and Principles, according to the established and old way of
England, may be held, if weak, yet conscientious Christians; for it is none of
the least pressures of the Cross upon us, that we of all men are thought to
have no foundation; whereas we in our judgments believe verily, if what we
hold and suffer for be not that very Religion which the Divines of England
unanimously subscribed, and professed to ratify, there is not any in England
that is above seven years old; and to innovate in Religion has (I am sure) by
the Sages of this present Parliament, been so severely looked upon, that I
should be very loath to be such a capital offender.

All that my soul longs after, is but to obtain the same liberty which all
different parties (but such as hold to their rule and Conformity) daily have, a
free exercise of my Conscience in that way of Worship, in which both Church and
State visibly held and professed communion till very lately; a way of worship
in the days of Queen Mary justified against the Papist; a way of See the
Supplication of the men of Norfolk and Suff. in the Book of Martyrs 728.
Abridg, page 413.
worship in the days of Queen Elizabeth so highly protested against the
Puritan, that Stow in his Chronicle has recorded, at Bury Assizes, 1538.
Hacket and Coppinger were hanged for spreading Books seditiously penned by one
Robert Brown against the Common Prayer Book.

Now, reverend Sir, till some better judgment shall unfold the mystery, it
must be my wonder, that that very Form which this very Parliament passed under
the notion of Divine Service, should on a sudden become such an abomination,
that any way of Worship, but it, is permitted; any body of Professors
conscientious, but such as use this; all other Ways being held, if not
religious, yet tolerable. This I can assure you is no mean scandal and riddle
to such as are very intelligent and very conscientious Christians.

December. 31, 1646.
Indeed a Declaration passed, and by the House of Commons was ordered, not
only to be printed, but by special order to be published by the care of
Knights and Burgesses, against all such persons as should take upon them to
preach of expound, not being ordained here, or in some Reformed Church.

But whereas in October last a Petition against this Declaration was exhibited,
and with thanks received by both Houses; whereas notwithstanding that
Declaration, such as have no act of Ministerial Ordination passed upon them, do
daily, uncheck'd, preach and expound in Churches and public places:

I humbly desire you so to qualify my conscientious constancy to the most
Christian form of the Church of England, that to persevere in it be no more
held contumacy against the Ordinance, than was that Petition against the
Declaration; so shall I be bound to give you more thanks than were the Houses
to give them.

In a word, I beseech you (good Sir) by that conscientious subscription in
which we both visibly agreed; by that Canonical obedience which we both
deliberately swear; by that Doctrine which at our Inductions in the face of our
Congregations, and the presence of Almighty God, we did profess to ratify; by
that solemn Protestation which since this Parliament began we both took; by
these, and by all those duties, in which (I suppose without scruple) we did
both within seven years last past practice and communicate;

Be pleased to look with some charitable respect upon one who now only is what
generally all the Divines of England very lately professed, at least pretended
for to be; one I am who fear to change, left (as a defloured Virgin, that
having lost the chaste Vail of her strict modesty, then lies open to all
proffers) I should find my self tractable to all changes: and how various they
may yet prove, God knows.

Blessed be God, for Religion, whether in Doctrine, Discipline, Government, or
Form of Worship, I am very well; might I enjoy my peace within this pale, I
should bless God, and the contrivers of it; or might there be a Reformation,
and not abolition, I should yet hope to live in a Ministerial way: But however
let me live (I beseech you) in your esteem, either as a conscientious Brother,
or as your Convert; Arguments may pierce deeper than Afflictions; the one
(blessed be God) I have born with a tolerable patience, and the other I am
ready to receive with a proportionable meekness.

Sir, the total of my desire and endeavor is, that either as a Divine you
would satisfy my Scruples, or as a Christian satisfy my friend; and for
either of these I shall subscibe my self,

December 22, 1647. Your thankful Brother in the Lord, John Allington.

THE ANSWER OF Mr. STEPHEN MARSHAL Of FINCHFIELD, A Grandee in the late
Assembly, which could not be importuned till after the printing of the Letter.
Responsa prudentum had of old an Equipage even with Law it self; and since
there has been no recourse to Oracles, no Vrim nor Thummin to give certain
Answers; the greatest Appeal left to doubting Man in point of difficulty or
scruple, it is to consult the Prudent.

Now that Mr. Marshal thought himself, and was also thought to be, an Oracle in
his time, I shall only set down such Answers as except an Oracle who would
dare to give? For, when he was consulted about that sad War, which the Land
cannot yet forget, The Cause is a right cause, the Cause of God.

In his Letter to a Friend in the City, p. 36.
In the same year, e Tripode, in a Sermon preached to the two Houses, Earl of
Essex, Mayor and Aldermen: All Christendom, except the Malignants in England,
do now see that the Question in England is, Whether Christ or Antichrist shall
be Lord and King? Jan. 18. 1643.
And then because Oracles are in point of War mainly consulted about the
success, Believe, this Cause must prosper; though we were all dead, our Armies
overthrown, and even our Parliament dissolved, the Cause must prevail. In his
Sermon upon Mich. 7. 1, 2.

And as we may conceive he would not thus have spoken, but that he believed
himself possessed, inspired, and fitted to be an Oracle; even so that he was
taken so to be, I shall now call to witness his eminent Employments. Who was
held fit to be an Oracle to the Army but Mr. Stephen Marshall? who so fit to
give Answers History of Independency, part 1. page 52.
in Scotland as Mr. Marshall? who to satisfy his conscientious Majesty as Mr.
Marshall? And when the City was in great Fears and Straights, when they wanted
an Oracle indeed, through whom spoke the Army, but by Mr. Marshall? He by
Letters answered them, The Army had nothing but good thoughts toward the City.
Upon the Answers received by this Oracle, 50000 l. was lent, the City-Gates set
open, and the Tower delivered; yea, I find it written, 53.
As Moneys are decried and inhaunsed by the King's Authority, so is every man's
Religion cried up or down by Marshall 's Authority, and Stamp: So that Delphos
it self was the inferior Oracle.

Whereas then, when the preceding Letter was written, I stood (as appears) in
great need of an Answer; to whom could I in prudence have gone better, than to
this so eminent an Oracle? He! who without fear or difficulty could give
Answers to the greatest affairs and concerns both of Church and State. He who
was (quasi gentium Apostolus) the Occumenical Oracle to Scots and English. He
who professes himself acquainted with the Minds of all Christendom, yea and
the Mind of God too! Here sure, or nowhere, was I to expect an Answer; this,
or no Pope Stephen, was infallible.

Whereas then my humble Address was, Eminenti, to so great an Eminence, I doubt
not but now the Reader as well as the Writer may expect, either a full, or a
fair, a civil, or a charitable Answer.

In the Letter there is (I think) a modest and Hypothetical Request, either to
salve my Repute with the Worshipful Knight I writ about, or to make me his
Convert: his Charity might have done the one, if his Judgment could not do the
other. But I could not importuue either, till at length I met him at Cambridge,
Dr. Hill.
(that very day the Usurper of Trinity kept his Divinity-Act) in the
School-yard: I desired to speak with him, told him my Name, excused my boldness
that (being unknown) I troubled him with a Letter. At this he began to open,
and said, And printed it when you had done. To which I solemnly and truly
protested, Who printed it I knew not, nor of the printing of it, till a
Neighbor showed it me; adding, Sir, I am now for London, and intend to wait
upon that worthy Person in whose house you was then Couchant; I humbly desire
to know whether you have done me the favor to satisfy him that you found me a
conscientious though a weak Brother.

Et jam parturiunt montes.
His Answer was, You may go look. Had he bid me go look how and what he
subscribed when he was Ordained and Instituted, it had been somewhat; for the
Form of his Subscription was:

I Stephen Marshall, do willingly and ex Animo subscribe to the three Articles
above mentioned, and to all things that are contained in them.

Whereof the second is the Book of Common Prayer -- That he himself will use
the Form in the said Book prescribed in public Prayer and Administration of
the Sacraments, and none other.

Or had he bid me go look what he himself did (after the Renouncing of his
Subscription) when he married his Daughter by the Common Prayer, this had been
something: but indefinitely to bid me go look, was next door to say to a Dog,
Get you out.

And here I cannot forbear with honor to remember Learned and Civil Mr.
Jeremiah Whittaker, to whom when I addressed my self upon the same scruple, I
had of him in his house a very kind reception: and when in discourse I told
him how I had negatively subscribed to use in public Administrations the
Common Prayer, and no other, He told me I was surely deceived, and desired me
to meet him at the Dean of Westminster's (where the Assembly then sat) next
Morning; which I did, and brought with me a Book of Canons; but the good man
anticipated the showing of them; telling me, that indeed the Subscription was
as I said; and that I had called to his remembrance a sin, which but for me he
should never have asked pardon for! A fitter man to deal with a tender
Conscience than Mr. Marshall.

He did go look indeed; but it was into his own Breast, and there he found he
had sinned against his Subscription; which ingenuous Confession I wish may do
him more honor than a Monument.

Vtilitas facit esse Deos, qua nempe Remota
Templa ruunt, nec erunt Arae, nec Jupiter ullus.
It was partly said by the Poet, Profit makes Gods: Temples, Altars, and
Jupiter himself, were no further valued than men got by them. Trucly, I do
heartily wish, that even among us, none did drive on Religion as a Trade,
subscribing and avowing the Liturgy with as changeable Consciences as they did
the Covenant and the Engagement, valuing nor one or other, but as a present
Expedient; which truly makes me call to mind what a Reverend' Bishop of the
Church of Ireland observed here in England, viz. The greatest danger that ever
the Common Prayer Book had, was the indifferency and the indevotion of them
that used it but as a common Blessing; and they who thought it fit for the
meanest of the Clergy to read Prayers, and for themselves only to preach. This
doubtless did, and ever will depress the honor of the Liturgy; for mobile
Vulgus, she moving people can never value what they see is by the Priest but
superficially professed.

When Augustus Caesar and Mark Anthony were at variance, there is a known Story
of a poor man, who not being able to prognosticate which should return the
Conqueror, made two Crows equally ready: one could say, Ave Caesar victor
Imperator; and the other, Ave victor Imperator Antoni: One prepared to salute
Augustus, and the other Anthony. All a matter to the poor man who was chief, so
he got by it. Now as Crows, even so Oracles, they have been taught to speak
for advantage, many of them being like unto Wind-instruments, which sound no
longer than they are puffed up. Now of my Crow-like Oracle, the Author of the
History of Independency thus: Mr. Marshall when he saw Independency prevail,
secretly turned his Coat the wrong side outward -- could not tell whether C.
should import Charles or Cromwell! And this my unlucky Letter bears date that
very year; so that my Oracle, being at a loss shall be pardoned, and have no
more said either to him or of him for this so dobious and unexpected Answer in
a case of Conscience: You may go look.

Anno [ut sertur] Mirabili Responsum Mirabile, 1666.
FINIS.

