THE GRAND CONSPIRACY OF THE Members against the Mind, OF Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in the four following SERMONS.

By JOHN ALLINGTON, [A Sequestered DIVINE.]

THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1654.

SERMON. I. Preached, 1644.
ROMANS 7. part of the 23. v. But I see another Law in my Members warring against
the Law of my Mind, etc.


IN these words (though I say it not) some may, perchance, fancy a proper
Emblem of the Times; for here is the Inferior warring against the Superior,
the Lower house against the Higher, the Members against the Mind, and, which
is somewhat more, both pretend a legal Combat, both plead the Law is on their
side; for the Members, as well as the Mind, pretend a Law, Law against Law; I
find a Law in my Members warring against the Law of my Mind; so that both
Mind and Members warring, give out, and boast they have Law for it, whilst
each seek the destruction of other, they both profess, as legal, to justify
their proceedings.

In the grand Difference and sad Combustions of these days, no Man (I suppose)
will hold a private Person to be a competent Arbitratour; and yet in this great
Dissension and Mutiny between Mind and Members, between Flesh and Spirit (I
conceive) there is no man so little interessed, but it concerns him nearly to
be able to say in which of these is the Legislative Power, it concerns every of
us to be able to say whether it be in the power of the Mind, or the Members to
propound a Law; whether it be in the power of the Mind or the Members to
denounce a War; whether the Mind or the Members ought in this case, to have the
Negative, or the Overruling Voice.

For, How shall it be found possible to compound this difference? How in this
War can we possibly be able to say or determine on which side we ought to be?
(for Neutralls in this fight no men living can be) Whether we ought to side
with the Mind or the Members? Whether the law of the supremest or of the lowest
portion of the soul ought to sway the whole man? This (say we) cannot, before
it evidently shall appear in whether of these God has placed this Power.

For, if the Members have the Power, if they must give the Law, it is then
Rebellion in the Mind not to be ruled, or to war against them; But if the Mind
have this pre-eminence, if Law and War shall prove only at her dispose, it is
then Rebellion in the Members, not to be captive at her Will, not to be guided
by her Law, not to lay down Arms whenever she commands. So that the main
business in this Text is too too like the discourse of these days, point of
Prerogative, Supremacy, Monarchy; for this the Members would have, this they
claim, this they war for; and this the Mind will not assent unto. For,

This she challenges as her Royalty, as her Crown and Dignity, as her Right,
and inseparable Authority; This she claims, and professes to hold from God;
with this she pleads, that she, and she only, is by God entrusted; yea, that
she is in conscience bound to plant, not only a guard about her person, but
being as the text implies, the Members are first in arms, she is also bound to
muster up all the Forces she can, to the subversion and utter extirpation of
what Law soever is enacted, or of what war soever shall be raised or commenced
against the Mind: Now whether Mind or Members can in this case produce best
evidence, the sacred records of Scripture will clearly manifest; in them we
shall impartially see which does usurp, and which usurpeth not; which may raise
war, and which (without apparent Rebellion) may not stir a foot; which law we
must, and which e contra we must not be ruled by. I find a law in my Members,
etc.

Law and War are points of great consequence: as then in high Courts points of
that nature use to be; even so in the discussing of this Text shall we proceed.
First we shall put it to the Question:

1. Whether to Mind or Members God has given power of Law? War?


2. What is the Law of the Mind? And what the Law of the Members?

3. Whether it be not damnable Rebellion to disobey or resist that part which
God has invested with this Power?

4. Being resolved upon these questions, we shall see what ought to be every
Christians resolution; Whether a man ought to be guided by the Mind, or by his
Members? yea, whether a man is not bound in conscience to war against the lower
and inferior of them?

1. Whether to Mind or Members God has given power of Law? War?


There is no power (says the Apostle) but from God. Romans 13.
God without doubt is the original of all power, of his fullness it is, that
every thing which has power, has the power it has; for that man is superior
to the beast of the field, and not they to him; it therefore only is, because
it pleased the Lord to give Man Power and Dominion over them, and not them over
him. Or that Man, and not Woman, Genesis 1 2^.
is the nobler sex; that the Man over the Wife, and not the Wife over the
Husband, has the ruling or commanding power, this is also from the disposition
of the Almighty, because to the first of all Wives he was pleased to say, Genesis
3.16.
Thy desire shall be subject to thine Husband, and he shall rule over thee.

Whether then of the grand Contenders in the Text? Whether the Mind or Members
ought to have the prehemimence and the superior power? This we must learn from
him, who is the fountain of all power, and the first ordainer of all Disparity;
for what he has given to the Members, the Members must have, and what he has
allotted to the Mind, the Mind must not be deprived of; where the power of Law,
and the power of War has by God been placed, that is the most proper seat,
there we must maintain, there look for it.

In the beginning of times, when it pleased God to create the World, we shall
read that he therefore made Beasts to be subordinate, and under Man, Genesis
1.27.28.
because after his own Image, and according to his own Likeness created he
Man. Now between Mind and Members there is a much what like proportionable
distinction, for as the Beasts and Brutes of the field, even so the Members,
that is, the Passions, Flesh, and lower parts of Man, they are wholly led by
Sense, and are in compare unto the Mind, no better then brutish, and void of
understanding. As then man, by reason of his being created in the likeness of
God, is therefore superior over the beast of the field: even so for as much as
the Mind is that, wherein man is made like unto God, and the Members, those
portions or passions by which man agrees, and is like to Brutes, therefore
must the Mind be superior to the Members, and have like power over them, as
Man has dominion over the Beast of the field.

For as these two, Sense, and Reason, make the specificall difference between
Man and Beast, even so does it between Mind and Members; the Mind is that part
of the soul in which God placed Reason; Understanding, Judgment, that part of
the soul in which Grace, freedom of will, and choice of good is fixed and
seated; whereas on the other side, by the Members we are to understand either
the outward Senses, and corporal Members of the body; the sensual appetite,
whether Concupiscible, or Irascible; that is, all our Passions and Affections,
such as are, fear, joy, wrath, love, hope, grief, or the like. In a word, all
whatsoever (which is indeed the Totum and all) all that we have (and may find
the like in Brutes, all such) whether Passions, or Desires, or Affections, they
are comprised and comprehended under this word [Members.]

If then Man himself, because he is the Image of God, is therefore made
superior to the Beasts which have no understanding; certainly then that part
of man, in which this similitude or likeness does consist, that power and
portion of the soul, in which this Image of God is, that must needs be the
supremest, noblest, and chief commanding portion, in that doubtless (if in
any) there must reside the power of Law, War, and direction in all proceedings.

Now the Apostle plainly tells us, the New man (that is, that part of man which
bears the Image of his Maker, and the likeness of his God) is that portion of
the soul which is capable of Knowledge, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 3.24.
capable of Righteousness and true holiness. And this must needs be the mind
of man, for the Affections and Members they cannot rise to so high a pitch;
hinder they often both may, and do, but lead or guide they cannot, into the paths
of righteousness.

Col. 3.5. You have these words, Mortify your Members which are upon earth.
The power of life and death cannot be in any other but the supreme hand;
whereas then the spirit of God says, Mortify your Members, whereas it puts a
kind of killing power (and that over the Members too) this manifestly infers
the mind to be the superior faculty; yea, the Mind is that in which God has
placed the power of both Law and War.

Again, if (as before I have proved) Eve was therefore subject unto Adam,
because she once daring to direct, misled her husband; then for certain, the
Affections, Senses, Members, they must all be captivated and subject to the
Mind, for they never lead, but they misguide the mind, they never counsel, but
(as we very well phrase it) they Transport the soul. That this our Kingdom is
not now, as in our state of more innocence it was wont to be (a pleasing
paradise) that now so many Swords are drawn, and so many sluices of blood let
open; is not this because we have (even yet) too many uxorious Adams? because
we have yet too many that suffer their Eves to lead them? or, to give it in the
phrase, and bounds of my Text, is it not because things are managed rather by
disaffected passions, then by Law and Conscience, rather by jarring Members
then a composed Mind?

The Scripture assures, if the blind lead the blind (both will at length
precipitate) both will fall into the ditch; the eye and light of the soul is
the mind of man, in it and it only shines the light of grace; all the
Affections, Passions, and carnal Desires, they are as so many Clouds, darkning
and eclipsing this blessed light, and therefore if by them we shall suffer our
selves to be led, if we shall square our actions by their Law, and order all
our doings to give them content, we shall too late find we have followed a
blind guide, and that both Mind and Members must infallibly perish in this
course.

In the first verse. of the following Chapter they who are in Christ Jesus, they who
in him would be found without condemnation, they must walk, not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit: a plain evidence, that not the Passions, Lusts and
Affections, not the Flesh, and Members thereof, but the Spirit (that is the
mind of man endowed with the Spirit) that is it that must lead the way, that is
it that must give the Law and Rule of walking; we must not walk after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit; not after the Members, but according to the Mind.

Ecclus. 37.16. Let Reason go before every Enterprise, and Counsel before
every action. That part and portion of the soul, in which God has placed
Reason, Counsel, Conscience, Grace, that is it which must give direction to
every Enterprise; our judgment, and not our lusts, our Mind, and not our
Members, which have the power of Law and War. Pass we then to the second
Considerable, let us see what is the Law of the Mind, and what is the Law of
the Members.

The Law of the mind is indeed no other but the Law of God, for I delight in
the Law of God concerning the inward Man. Verse 22.
The inward Man, that is the Mind, Spirit, and better part of man, that
acknowledging (like a Monarch) no superior but God only, will not yield to any
but Gods Law, and therefore says the regenerate mind, I delight in the Law of
God.

The Law of the Members, that is indeed rather a tumultuous Ordinance then a
Law, it is rather a mutinous Enforcement then a legal Course; it is, says the
Apostle plainly, Verse 25.
the Law of Sin, a Law which has nothing of a Law in it, for it is indeed the
breach of all Law, it is sin (says St. Paul) and yet because the Members have
so voted it, it must be called a Law, I see (says the Text) Another Law in my
Members.

Another Law, a Law clean contrary to the Law of the Mind; a Law (I may well
say) clean contrary to the Law of God: For, as in all Monarchies, it is the Law
and Order of God Almighty that Subjects receive from, and not give unto their
Sovereign Laws; even so it is the Law of God, the mind unto the members, not
the members unto the mind prescribe a Law: all our senses, all our members,
all our actions, and all our thoughts are bound to follow her guidance, they
must come and go, do and suffer, when and what she prescribes.

Sure I am, it has been resolved of old (but wanting books I cannot cite the
Authors) in matters of high consequence and concernment, that they who are
bound to obey, are not so much to attend the reason as the authority of a
command; the Subject is not bound to sift his Sovereign, for if he were, I see
not how it could be said, Prove. 25 3.
The Kings heart can no man search out: yea very good proof I have to say, our
Savior commanded St. Peter to do what he understood not, Job. 13.7.
What I do (says the Master) thou know not now, and yet, under a fearful
commination, he urged his Obedience. And indeed were it not thus between mind
and Members, were not the senses and affections to obey the mind till they were
satisfied, and saw reason for it; if that old saying be true, Amare and sapere
ipsi Jovi non datur, that lust and wisdom can never consist together, then for
certain no exorbitant passion would ever become obedient and pliable to the
soul.

But indeed, so absolute a Monarch is the mind to the soul of man, that if any
one affection, any one sense, passion, or member shall dare to do any things
against her judgment and her resolve, that Person is really disaffected, that
Sense infallibly malignant, and that member without all question delinquent in
the Court of Heaven: For look what is said of a King, and by a King, the same
is very appliable to the sovereignty of the mind, Eccles. 3.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power. Where the Mind has said the
word, there is no power in Man, to warrant the gainsaying of it; and if the
following Interrogation in that verse must positively be read, that is, -- No
man may say unto the King, What do thou? Then is this regal pre-eminence a
most pertinent explication of the Minds superexcellency; for to it, no Sense,
no Member, no Passion, no Affection may say, What do thou? Yea, so severely
has God subjected the whole man to the direction and Law of the Mind, that
albeit the Mind misguides, albeit she issues forth an Order, which will destroy
the Members, yea, and the whole man to boot: yet Meant erronea ligat, yet for as
much as the Mind or Conscience is the supreme Judicatory in men, for as much
as the Mind is (as we have sworn our Sovereign is) the only supreme, sin we
needs must, should we not follow her even in a wrong direction, much more if we
adhere not close, whilst yet her Law is the Law of God, and all her Judgments
consonant to his glory. In a word, the Law of the regenerate Mind is to go
before, to guide and order even the whole man in the paths of righteousness.

Now the Law of the Members, that is (as the Text speaks) Another Law, that is
a clean contrary course: for whereas it is the legal and divine prerogative of
the mind to give Law unto the whole man: the Members finding this a curb unto
their liberty, and a main suppression of their desires, they strive by all
means possible to subvert this Order, to change this Government, to overthrow
this Fundamental Law; for they being carnal will not endure a spiritual
Governor, they being many, will not abide that the mind being but one, should
overruled them, and therefore (as if it were their Charter, their privilege,
and their right) they strive to give law unto their mind, and resolve to wage a
war, if she be not led by them.

James 4.1. From whence are Wars and Contentions amongst you? are they not
hence, even of your lusts that fight in your Members?

The lower House of this Natural Parliament in Man, consists of many Members,
of many Lusts, of many disordered passions; all which, though they Combine,
Covenant, and so far agree, as to war against the Mind, yet they have also
their several designs, and their particular ends; for as when there was no
King in Israel, Judge. 17.6
Every man did what seemed good in his own eyes; even so, to the end that every
man may walk as his Lusts lead him, that every Lust may be a Law unto it self,
therefore as against a common enemy, the Lusts and Members are continually
warring against the Mind.

Nor only so, but as St. James observes, They fight in our Members too; The
Lusts war against, and quarrel one with another; and indeed no wonder, for
amongst equals who should command? who obey? Why should not Wrath have as much
command as Joy? Why not Joy as much as Love? Why not Love as much as any? That
Member which desires a Monopoly of pleasure, wars against that, which stands
upon Honor and Repute: and that Member, whose design is Honor, endures not
that which is bent upon Wealth and Riches. The Lusts of Man (even like contrary
winds) they rage and swell one against the Mind, they admit a league; they are
all like those wicked Citizens (in this they agree) We will not have this Man
reign over us. Luke 19.14.
The Law of the Mind shall not rule, regulate or order us; so that, as St.
James has taught us, even thence are Wars and Contentions, because our Lusts
fight in our Members.

Eccles. 10.7. I have seen (says Solomon) Servants on Horses, and Princes
walking as Servants on the ground. That sight of Solomon, is indeed that which
the Mind and Members differ and war about; for the Members, they, though
Servants, would be on Horses; Yea, they would have the Mind, though their
Prince, to walk and wait upon them. And this is apparent from the words next
following in the Text, for that which St. Paul complains of, (though it bear
the name of a Law) himself shows was flat Tyranny; for the Members endeavor
to make even a very slave of the Mind -- I see a Law in my Members warring
against the Law of my Mind, and leading me Captive unto the Law of sin, which
is in my Members [ leading me Captive] Nothing will content the Members,
unless they may captive and enslave the Mind; and for this I am confident,
there are very few of us, but may find in our souls, even an experimental
proof.

For, what Passion can you imagine in the soul, which, whilst it is
predominant, expects not from the Mind, what service and assistance soever it
shall please to challenge, yea, the Mind must leave all, and give diligent
attendance to it only?

Is the soul of any of us enflamed with Malice, and the thirst of Revenge? Is
there a Mordecai whom we stomach, and will have removed from the Kings gate?
Does not this Passion solicit the Mind, to contrive the means, and to lay the
plot how this cruelty may be satisfied? Yea, is not the Court full of terror
and disturbances? Is not the Mind a restless wretch? Is she not perpetually
vexed and molested, unless she pass what Bill soever this Tyrant in that
behalf shall present unto her?

Or, suppose Covetousness and desire of gain to be predominant, can the Mind
be quiet? Will this passion be satisfied with either Reason, or Conscience, or
any manner of Moderation?

Acts 5. So Religious was the Princely part, and so devout was the Mind of
Ananias and Saphira, that in Judgment and Piety, they thought all they had but
a competent Oblation for the Lords service: But when their Members and covetous
affections began to mutiny, when the fear either of future want, or the
Carnal and Covetous thought that they had promised too much; when these began
to bustle and gather head, when these had raised a Tumult and Combustion in the
soul; the poor distracted Mind, even against Honor, Conscience, yea, to her
own undoing, is forced to repeal what she had before enacted: and though no
less then the robbing of God was concerned in it, assent she gives to their
violent importunity. And therefore very lively is St. Paul's expression, I see a
Law in my Members, leading me Captive to the Law of sin. Nothing can or will
content the Members: No Law, no Peace, unless they may lead the mind Captive,
and make her the Sovereign become a slave unto their Lusts. Pass we therefore
to the third considerable, viz. Whether it be not damnable Rebellion to disobey
or resist that part which God has invested with this power.

3. Of Rebellion indefinitely Samuel has said, it is as the sin of Witchcraft,
a sin most abominable before God. Nor indeed have I yet met with any, who
question the guilt or Damnability of this crime, uno ore (for ought I know) all
men in this agree: That which is indeed Rebellion, is a crying sin, and a most
damnable design; all the difference and doubt is, what indeed Rebellion is,
and what that power is which is damnable to resist.

I must not forget that my text is between the Mind and the Members, and that
Rebellion at this time concerns me no further, but only as it respects the
outward and the inward man, the Monarchy and Government of every regenerate and
good soul.

Now for the better stating and explicating of this, I have observed from
Scripture, that every Jar, War, and opposition is not Rebellion; for Rebellion
it was not, for the Kings of Judah, and the Kings of Israel to wage War against
each other; Rebellion it is not for Subject to contest with Subject, neither is
it a Rebellious act for the Sovereign to Tyrannize over, and oppress his
people.

For as by Scripture phrase, I am warranted to speak, Rebellion is ever the
opposing of some higher power, and in special of that power which by the
Ordinance of God, they (who rebel, oppose and resist) are bound to obey and
suffer under; so that it is an act of Rebellion to withdraw from, or stand
against that power, under which till some difference, distaste, opportunity or
grudge arose, we ever held our selves bound to live and to be governed by.

For, let the ground of Isreal's Revolt from Rehoboam their natural King be
what it may be, (sure I am) when they so did, the Scripture says, Israel
rebelled against the house of David: 1 King. 12.19.
Let the case be what it may be, when Edom deserted Judah and made a King over
themselves, the Spirit of God says, 2 Chronicles. 22.8.
Edom rebelled from under the hand of Judah; yea, and albeit some countenance
the fact, and seek by a Religious pretense to war^ant the attempt, yet, when
the Citizens of Libnah turned from their lawful (though Idolatrous) King
Jehoram, the Scripture phrase in the Geneva Translation is, Verse. 10.
Then did Libnah rebel; whence to me it seems very clear, that we are bound
under peril of Rebellion and the guilt thereof, to obey or suffer under that,
whether it be Part, Person, or Faculty, which God has invested with the power
of giving, or prescribing Law unto us.

And indeed if you please to rely upon the Geneva Translation, I then needed
not to have thus wheeled about; for though our last Translation read it, I see
a Law in my Members, Warring against the Law of my Mind, it is there said, I
see a Law in my Members Rebelling against the Law of my Mind. And indeed from
the premised instances it seems very clear, that all War against that power
which ought by Gods Ordinance to be obeyed, is indeed Rebellion.

Romans 14.23. St. Paul has delivered it as a rule beyond exception, Whatsoever
is not of Faith is sin. Now that sin (if deliberately done) cannot but be
Rebellion: for, Faith being in that place no other thing then the Law of the
Mind, then the Judgment of Reason and Conscience; Faith being in that Text no
other thing, but the Order and Direction of the Supremest power; for a man not
to do according to these directions, not to obey and be ruled by the highest
Commander in the Soul; for a man not to submit to the Mind, which is to him
Gods Vicegerent, is indeed to rebel at once, both against God, and his
Heavenly Ordinance.

And in this respect, it seems to me, that God in holy Writ, does so often call
sinning Israel, a Rebellious people; a people who would rather be led by their
own lusts, then by his Law, by their own affections, then by their own mind.

Ezekiel. 2.5. Son of Man (says God) I send thee to the Children of Israel, to a
Rebellious Nation that has rebelled against me.

They in Gods esteem, Rebelled even against him, against God himself, who would
neither submit to that power which God gave his Prophets, nor yet to that
wherewith he had endowed their minds, for the due ordering of the Affections,
Actions, and endeavors of all turbulent and inferior Members.

Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit contrary
to the Flesh. Flesh and Spirit, Mind and Members, they are ever contrary and
one against the other. War (as will appear in the next point) will ever be
between them, for their deeds and their designs are contrary. But as I never
read, neither can conceive, that a King, compared to his Subjects, can be a
Rebel* So neither do I conceive it imaginable, how the War waged by the Mind
against the Members, can be Rebellion; nor on the contrary, how that which they
raise against the mind, can possibly be any other: For between Superior and
Inferior, there cannot possibly be a War waged, but Rebellion it must be, and
how the higher powers can be guilty of this crime, I am yet to learn. Whether
then it be in the body Politic, or in the natural Polity and Order of every
particular, every soul must be Subject to the higher, or, as the Original, the
supper-excelling power: As the Subjects to the King, even so at least must the
Members be to the Mind; which to make the more clear and evident, we will pass
to the last considerable, and Result or resolution of a Christian, viz. Whether
a man ought to be guided by his Mind, or by his Members, yea, whether a man is
not bound in Conscience to War against the lower and inferior of them.

Boethius l. 1. m. 7. -- Si vis lumine claro cernere verum
Gaudia pelle, pelle Timorem.
He, who would walk as a Child of the light, and would clearly discern truth
from error, must (as Boethius well admonishes) clear his soul of the thick mist
of passion; neither Joy, nor Fear, nor Hope, nor Grief, nor any other affection
may sway, or be predominant in the Soul: For, Nubila men's est, victaque
sraenis, haec ubi regnant.

ibid.

The mind is clouded, hood-winked, yea, as the Law of the Members would have
it, the Mind is Captivated and inslaved where these reign.

Medea in the Poet confessed the Law of the mind showed her good things, yea the
better way, -- Video meliora proboque, I see and approve what is best; but such
was the violence of her Members, such the confusion of her enraged affections,
that she concludes ( Deteriora sequor) not with the better mind, but with her
violent and overpowerfull Members.

Pilate at the arraignement of our Blessed Savior protested, that according to
the Law of his Mind, his Judgment, his Conscience, he saw nothing worthy of
death in him; yea, he called for water, and washing his hands, said, Mat. 17 24
I am innocent of the blood of this just man. And yet for all that, rather then
the people should want a Sacrifice, rather then endure those terrible things
which his troubled affections and passions present unto his Mind, in despite
of Mind, Law, or Conscience, he does (not as his Judgment, but) as his Fears
command to please the many, he delivers up the Innocent. And indeed from
hence, even from the Law of the Members it is, that such there are of whom the
Prophet complains, who call evil good, Esa. 5.20.
and good evil, which make darkness light, and light darkness, who call
bitter sweet, and sweet bitter. In these sad times of distraction, wherein the
dearest things we have, our Goods, our lives, yea, our Mind, our Consciences
are at stake; It behooves every of us sadly, and severally to consider, what is,
and what has been the main principle and direction of all our present Actions;
whether the Mind or the Members, whether judgment or passion, whether
Conscience, or only carnal, smi^ter and by-ends? I do verily believe, there
never were more bitter conflicts then now there are between Mind and Members,
between Flesh and Spirit; yea, it is to be feared, the Mind, that is, the
Judgment, Reason and Consciences of too too many of us, are so overwhelmed and
hurried on with violent passion, rash engagements, and resolute ^xorbitances;
that it will be very hard to re-inthrone the Prince, and to set the Mind again,
where God has placed it; very hard to dispossess the soul of those, which
without all peradventure are truly malignant, and evil counselors; such as
will do all they can to keep back all saving, peaceable, and sound
intelligence; for such without all doubt, is the endeavor and Law of our
insinuating and Tyrannizing Members: Nothing will they relish, but private
interest.

The Law of the Mind of old was, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and unto God the things that are Gods. The Law of the Members is, let us make
him like one of us, and as for God vote him incapable of any property. The Law
of the Mind was, That even for well-doing we should patiently suffer; The Law
of the Members is, that we suffer nothing which we can resist. The Law of the
Mind did run thus, It is a snare for a man to devou^ that which is sanctified,
Prove. 20.
or that which is holy; But the Law of the Members pronounces (as St. Peter
did sometime in a dream) that things are common, Acts b^.
though they appertain to Heaven: The Law of the Mind was, After the vow
enquire not, Heb. 13.
that is, be assured, what is once vowed to God, no after-thoughts can
disanull: The Law of the Members is, such vows were superstitious acts, and we
may convert to other use, what in piety our forefathers gave unto their God.
The Law of the Mind was, Obey those that are set over you, that is, says
Hemingius (who was no Papist, nor suspected) the Pastors and Governors of the
Church; The Law of the Members is, ye shall be so far from obeying, that ye
shall vow the extirpation and their rooting out. By the Law of the Mind,
Bishops and spiritual Overseers they are bound to watch over, and to give
account for Souls; but by the Law of the Members, Ghostly Fathers may not
command their Children, nor may they, who are bound to give an account, pass
any binding sentence without lay-approbation: Yea, whereas in all former
Reformations, the Law of the Mind ever was, that the better form actually
should be, before the worse were put away: The Law of the Members is, that we
swear to extirpate what we have, before we can so much as conjecture what shall
be. Nor indeed can I imagine what other guide, or what other Law, but the Law
of the Members steereth, and directs those Pens and Tongues, who under the
Vizard of Popery, strive to make odious all exterior piety; who for the better
Liberty of the Subject, have lately Printed, and by an Argument e concesso
claimed, Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce: a book dedicated to the P. and
Assembly.
that it is more lawful by Scripture to put away a perverse Wife, then to
Rebel against a Tyrannous Prince; yea, that there is a necessity both in
Charity, and Conscience, for that Man and Wife to be divorced, whose
dispositions naturally disagree, who cannot live loving^y and quietly together;
yea, it has now past the Press for a Popish Practice to make a Sermon upon a
Text. I should tire both you and my self should I follow those, who thus follow
the extravagancy of their Members, the rancor, violence and exorbitance of
their passions.

Plutarch in his Tract of Superstition tells us, there was one Tyribastus, who,
when he should have been apprehended by the Persian, drew his Cemiter, and (as
he was a valiant man of his hands) defended himself valiantly; but as soon as
they who came to lay hands on him cried out, and protested, that they were to
attach him in the Kings Name, and by Commission from his Majesty, he laid down
his weapon aforesaid immediately, and offered both his hands to be bound and
pinioned.

An example strongly convincing me, that even the Law and light of Nature, were
it not clouded with carnal and perverse affections, even that glimmering light
were enough to teach the Mind, that resist we may not against Gods ordinance.
Tyribastus threw down his Cemiter, and apprehends, in the very Name and
Authority of a King, a Majesty, and Reverence not to be resisted.

The very Pagans whose Gods were Idols, yet for as much as in their
apprehension they were as Gods, of those their Temples there were such
venerable estimators, that what they sought to have secure indeed, Pat^icius
Sines^^lis. l. 8. Tit. piet. 15.
they reposed in their shrines. Thus did Alexander (that great Commander) who
in the Temple of the Sun in Sicily, laid up a great treasure; and one Clastenes
a most noble Greek, fearing the plundering of his Estate by Tyrants, laid up
his Daughters dowry in the Temple of Juno Samia, and till this very day among
learned Christians it is determined Sacrilege, Non sacrum de sacro tollere, to
steal from an Holy place a common and unholy thing. This I am sure was and is
the Law of the mind.

But the Law of our Sacrilegious and ungodly members is such, that it will not
allow, no not to God himself a Property, nor the Church to be a Sanctuary for
its own goods: like the Roman Pagan presidents, they seem to profess the Son
of Mary unworthy to be served in costly vessels making all holy things so
common, that they are now become primi occupantis, catch that catch may; The
ready way to provoke God (if not already so far incensed) to give such over
even to a reprobate mind; that is, to follow the Law of the Members; which
undoubtedly will at length bring even to the gates of death.

Eccles. 18.30, 31. Go not after thy lusts, but refrain thy self from thine
Appetites, (for) if thou give thy Soul the desires that please her, she will
make thee a laughing stock to thine enemies that malign thee. The ready way to
captivate the Mind, and to bring its Sovereignty under the power of Malignant
Enemies; is to give way to thy Lusts, and to let the Members prescribe a Law
unto thee; let them but have their desires, and thou shall soon be made a
laughing stock to thy Enemies round about thee: It is very likely, as the
Devil to our Savior, thy Members may promise thee a condition most glorious:
Mat. 4.8.
All the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them will I give thee; That
is, all possible content and Honor: But if thou once fall down and worship, if
thou will suffer thy Mind to prostitute, and yield up it self unto the Members,
they will soon (instead of a glorious state) bring thee to an ungracious
servitude. They will not allow thy Mind a Negative in any thing, for the
ambition of sin is, to reign in our mortal Bodies.

What then must the Mind do? without doubt War it must; for as therefore the
Inferior may not War, because it has a Superior to appeal unto: even so on
the contrary, for as much as the Mind is the Supreme, War she may, yea War she
must against the Members; for she for them, not they for her, must be
accountable to God.

Ever since the days of Job, it has passed for a rule, The life of Man is a
warfare; and ever since the Prophet Micah's time, it has been delivered as a
Caveat, Mic. 7.6.
A man's enemies are those of his own house. Now the Generalissimo, or chief
Commander in this War it has ever been the regenerate Mind; The Mind of man
(even in all ages) has been entrusted, yea commanded to this War, commanded to
charge upon, to subdue and reduce the Members.

2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
The weapons of our Warfare (says St. Paul) are not Carnal, but mighty
through God. Ask you what to do? It straight follows, To the pulling down of
strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ.

A larger Commission was never granted then the Regenerate mind has; For
should the Members Garrison themselves (as they too often do) within the strong
works of Ambition, Pleasure, Profit, she is (even by him that is able) promised
relief enough, even to the pulling down of those strong holds; nay, she may not
leave so much as an imagination, nay, not any thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God.

Yea, what power can be desired in a Commission, which she has not? To lead
Captivity Captive power she has, for to the obedience of Christ, she is bound
to bring into Captivity even every thought: Power over life and limb she has,
for says our Savior, If thy right hand offend thee, ^ut it off; Mat 5.29.30.
if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out. Power she has to afflict, to
kill, yea to put her enemies and Rebels to the most not only painful, but most
shameful death.

Mortify your Members which are upon Earth, yea, not only so, but our Flesh,
Col. 3.5.
Affections, Lusts, they must be Crucified. Gal. 5.24.
They must, because they have been Traitors and Rebellious, be put not only to
death, but to a shameful death; not only must we mortify but crucify the
Members. And indeed, till the Mind shall thus do, we can neither look for peace
nor truth.

Affectus corrumpunt Intellectum. As Bribes blind the wise, even so the
Affections and Members they corrupt and pervert Judgment. As Justin Martyr of
old, Scimus quosdam ad iracundiam suam evangelium pertrahentes, observed, that
some made the Gospel to be suitable to their fury: even so nothing must be
truth, nothing must pass for good or godly, nothing must men make conscience
of, where the Members, Lusts and Passions are predominant; nothing may such a
Mind pass, either for Law or truth, but only what likes and pleases them.

And as no Truth, even so no Peace, where there are ruling Members; ruling
Members being ever as Turbulent to the Mind, as ruling Elders will prove unto
the Church. And therefore if whilst yet we may, see we will what belongs to
our Peace, resolve we must to submit to the Ordinance of God; to bring every
thing under that Obedience, which he has made the supreme; that is, the
Subjects to their King, and the Members to the Mind. So shall we enjoy unity of
Spirit in the bond of peace, so shall we indeed be (as St. Peter speaks) A
chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People.

Perchance some may dream, unless the Members may have power to curb the
Mind, the Mind as supreme may with all impunity oppress and destroy the
Members; whereas indeed, so fearful vengeance as for the supreme Offender,
there is none treasured up. For as those blessings which are the immediate
issues of Gods own hands, are far more excellent then those, which by ordinary
means are conveyed to us; even so those wretches, those miscreants, which God
has reserved to his own immediate punishing, those of all Creatures are most
miserable.

Tophet was ordained of old, Yea, Isa. 30.33.
for the King it was prepared; The King who because Supreme can in this life
have no Avenger for him, (witness Gods Truth, though his Subjects use no other
then right Christian Weapons, Prayers and Tears) there is torture enough
prepared. And indeed, look but into our own breasts, we may find conjecture
enough of this severity, for whoever (as the Apostle speaks) is, (...),
self-convicted, whosoever is, as the Poet renders it, surdo verbere caesus,
lasht with the sting of an invisible whip; whosoever is, as Jeremy told Pashur,
he should be, Magormissabib, a terror to himself: Jer. 20.4.
This bosome-vengeance, this secret and private Executioner, as it is upon the
Supremest power, so is it the severest torture. And therefore it highly
concerns the Mind to preserve it self, and to order according to Gods Law, the
motion of every Member. For the power of Law and War it is in the Supreme, and
that is the Mind, and therefore her Members must have no other but the Law: she
from God, and they from her must take their Government. So shall men be able to
give God the glory, and to suppress that unnatural War which sin fomenteth in
the Members.

Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. Whosoever gives Law
unto us; it is he that reigns over us; unto what member or lust soever we yield
to obey, that is our King, that is our Governor, ambition, luxury,
covetousness, malice, these are they which would reign, these are they which
would give Law unto us, but I have abundantly showed you, it is the Mind, and
the Mind only, which God has entrusted with this power, not sin under any
pretense of Law whatsoever; but the regenerate Mind is that must reign over our
mortal bodies, not the Law of the Members, but the Law of the Mind is that we
must hold to; yea, for this Law we must war, in defense of this Law we are
bound even to die the Death. So fight I, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27.
not as one that beats the Air; but as one who had a real enemy to subdue,
for it straight follows, contund^ corpus meum, I beat, I chastise, I bruise my
body; he would rather live upon Bread and water, then suffer his members to
give Law unto him. And indeed this is the fight, that good fight we are all to
finish; this that fight, in which striving we must resist unto blood, every
imagination, every thought, every desire, lust, or act which exalts it self
against that knowledge and Law of God. This we are to bring under, this we must
lead captive, for not a member can go to Heaven, which does not orderly follow
the Mind thither. In a word, to conclude all, It is an observation amongst
controversall Writers, and too true, That when men's affections and Members do
frame Opinions, and pass Laws, men are much more earnest in defense of such
errors, then are sober Christians in the maintenance of what the mind and solid
judgment proposes to them: there is no diligence, no care, no means wanting
in the pursuit of that which the affections and members declare expedient. And
indeed, in this my hearts desire is, the minds of us all should be instructed
by our common enemy, that is, to follow with more earnestness the War and
Duties which God requires we should manage against the Rebellious Members; so
shall God of his Mercy then give grace unto the Mind, that it may subdue the
Members, that so the whole man may from this his Militant Kingdom of Grace, be
translated and advanced to his Eternal and Triumphant Kingdom of Glory, and
that for Christ Jesus sake, the only King, without rebellious members: To whom
with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory now and for ever,
Amen.

Sit Deo omnis gloria.
THE GRAND CONSPIRACY OF Jews against their King. A SERMON Preached in August,
1647.

ROMANS 5.7. Scarcely for a Righteous Man will one dye, yet, peradventure for a
Good Man some would dare to dye.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1654.

SERMON. II. Preached, 1647.
JOHN 18.36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this World; if my Kingdom
were of this World, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews.


OUr Blessed SAVIOR, Mat. 2.
Born King of the Jews, is in this Chapter brought in question for his life,
accused, arraigned, and condemned for the defense of his Birthright. A
dangerous thing (it seems) to be born a King. But yet behold, he has a
Personal Treaty for it, and that not in Patmos, but in the City Royal he is
brought before Pilate, to whom, even in Jerusalem, as my Text tells you, he put
in this answer, My Kingdom, etc.

In the words are here two generals,

I. An Assertion, a Kingdom I have, but my Kingdom is not of this World.

II. The Proof of this Assertion, If my Kingdom were of this world, then would
my servants fight, etc.

1. O^ the Assertion, a Kingdom I have, but my Kingdom is not of this World.

That Christ had and has a Kingdom, this the very first Particle in his
answer does imply, Regnum meum, my Kingdom; now a Kingdom there must be, in
which he has a property, or else he could never have said, My Kingdom is not
of this World: and again, If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
servants fight. And indeed thus Pilate understood him, for in the verse
immediately following, Pilate replieth, Art thou a King? Yea, in his
Condemnation Pilate thus testifyeth of him, Joh. 19.19.
Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews.

A King he was, and a King of the Jews too, for, Tell the Daughter of Sion,
Mat. ^1.5.
Behold, thy King comes unto thee meek, and sitting upon an Ass. The King of
Sion, a meek King, and this was indeed his ruin; for a meek King is no fit
King to be King of Jews. Had he come to Sion as a Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
had he come in fury, had he manifested his power in the confusion of some
thousands of them, then he should have been King; then Grandees as well as the
Boys would have cried out, Hosanna in the Highest. But if he come without his
Militia, if he come meek and sitting upon an Ass, if he be content for the
peace and happiness of his people to make himself a Sacrifice, to vail his
Majesty, and lay by his Scepter: Then, as if he were in a condition not fit to
govern, they apprehend his person, Declare against him, and though they can
prove nothing, they deliver him up to be judged by a Foraine power. So that,
what we sometimes said of a neighbor King, that he was Rex Galliae, but not
Gallorum, King of France, but not of French men: Even so might our Blessed Lord
and Master say, he was Rex Mundi, sed non Mundanorum, He was King of ^he world,
though not King of the Men of this world; a Kingdom he had, but says he, My
Kingdom is not of this world.

Now for the better explication of this assertion, we shall proceed by these
three degrees:

1. The Kingdom of Christ is over this world.

2. Christ has a Kingdom in this world.

3. The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world.

First, The Kingdom of Christ is over this world. Psalm. 99.1. The Lord is King,
be the People never so impatient. The Lord is King, even our blessed Lord and
Savior, and that not only as God, Mat. 28.18
but even as Man also. For being it is said that All power is given to him both
in Heaven and in Earth; Clear it is that he has, and that he has as Man too,
power and dominion even over the whole World. For being it is said, All power,
the Power of Sovereignty and Dominion cannot be exempted: And, being it is
said, All power is given, This shows in what capacity he has this power, to
wit, in that by which he is lower then the Father, Isa. 49.
in that by which he is made capable to receive ex dono, to take of gift, in
that by which he is become the Savior of the world. So that indeed the same
person, who was the Savior, he is also the Sovereign of mankind.

And this may not improbably teach us* that Kings, his Vicegerents, they are
proportionably Saviors, as well as Sovereigns, nursing Fathers as well as
potent Princes: So that to withdraw from the protection of a Sovereign, it is
to despise and throw off a Savior. He who was the Savior of the world, he is
also King of Kings, and as St. Paul speaks, The only Potentate. 1 Timothy 6.15.
And he under whose wings we have been securely safe, let the sad want of him
now say, it was Christus Domini, the Lords Anointed, the only Potentate, the
only supreme Governor of this Kingdom.

Or, take the point thus, Is it so that he, whose Kingdom is not of this
world, has for all that Power and Dominion over all the Kingdoms of this
world? Maugre then all the designs, plots, jealousies and fears, that Devil
or Man can set on foot; Our Lord the King shall reach his end, Psalm. 2 3.
Our Lord the King shall break their Bonds in sunder, and cast their Cords from
him. For to him all power is given.

Indeed if in the perusal of the Gospel, we should stand to observe the
Industrious malice of his Enemies, we shall find their plot and design was,
even root and branch to cut him off; they endeavored to kill him with shame,
and to bury him with Infamy: Mat. 27.64
For when as a Malefactor they had put him to death, their greatest care and
thought of heart was, to prevent his Resurrection. And therefore their great
suit to Pilate is, Command that the Sepulcher be made sure. Rebels are afraid
of a King, though he be in his grave.

And indeed they had cause so to be, for though his Kingdom was not of, yet I
have showed unto you it was over this world, over their Designs, over their
Plots, over their Malice; in so much that you may read, that very stone, which
they rejected, it became the corner stone; And that very Sovereign, whom they
ignominiously laid in the grave, and thought to secure by Soldiers, he had
(witness those very Soldiers) a glorious Resurrection, so that indeed there
is no contesting against Sovereignty.

As the Kingdom of Christ is over this world, even so Christ, whose Kingdom is
not of this world, yet has a Kingdom in this world.

If you peruse the Gospel, you cannot but find that even then, when the major
part, and prevailing party was most against him; even then, this Sovereign had
some Loyal Subjects, he had in his lowest condition some, who though
timorously, yet most cordially stuck unto him; so that he always had a
Kingdom, even in this world. And this is apparent from that last solemn prayer
of his, where when he prayed for these, for these who were Loyal and true of
heart, his Petition runs thus, Joh. 17 15.
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world: Out of the world he
would not have his Subjects taken, for though not of the world, he was
resolved, and does to this hour preserve a Kingdom in this world.

And this the Jews, his Adversaries, did too well perceive; for such was his
goodness, such his meekness, such his charity, that he did indeed draw all
men after him.

Whilst he was yet at liberty, and the people might have access unto him,
they flocked unto him from all places, Mat. 19.
and he healed them; Multitudes followed him, and he without respect to what
part they took, touched and cured such as came unto him. In so much that his
Malignant persecutors are not ashamed to vote what was done, digito Dei, with
the finger of God, to be done by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils: not ashamed to
say, Joh. 11.48.
If we let him alone, all men will believe on him. If we let him alone, the
people will leave us; if we let him alone, he will recover his king^ome; if we
let him alone, what will bec^me of us? So apparent it was, (...) to his Jews,
that he had a party, (...) he had a Kingdom in this ^^^ld.

and indeed a Kingdom he has in this world, a Kingdom whereof it concerns
every one of us to be a Subject* for those only who have been Zealous of his
Laws, and Loyal to his person, Those only are they who shall sit upon Thrones,
those they who shall reign with him hereafter.

Indeed we have now amongst us a Generation of Saints, who reckon much upon
that old Millenary error, who believe those thousand years are now approaching,
in which the earth shall abound with peace, plenty, pleasure, in which the
Saints shall reign, rule, and enjoy what ever their souls lust after, in which
Christ shall descend, and manifest that he has a Kingdom in this world. And
unlikely it is not, but the conceit of this Epicurean paradise, may be a cause
that many run such mad couses as they do, confidently believing they shall
presently have a Kingdom in this world.

Job. 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day on the earth. Now if it must be the last day before our Redeemer
shall manifest himself, and stand upon the earth; Or if, as it is, Heaven must
receive him, until the times of restitution of all things: Act. 3.21.
How then can he be a thousand years with his Saints upon earth, before the
last day? Yea, how can he be expected to live upon the earth at all, whose last
coming is described to be not on the earth, but in an higher Element? 1 These.
4.16.
For, The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and with the Trumpe of God, -- And then observe the sequel,
-- The dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are olive and remain,
shall be caught up together with him in the clouds to meet the Lord -- Observe,
where not below, but in the clouds; not on the earth, but in the Air. We shall
be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; and then lest peradventure it might
be thoughts he would descend lower, and live upon the earth with us, it
immediately follows, And so shall we ever be with the Lord. Verse. 17.


As Loyal Citizens to entertain their long absent King, put on their best
roabs, and go out to meet him: Even so when Christ the King of glory shall
return, all, who have been Loyal Subjects, all, who have been obedient
Christians, all who have faithfully kept their Allegiance to this Sovereign,
all such they shall be caught up in the clouds, they shall go out to meet the
Bridegroom, yea, they shall ever be with the Lord their King.

Romans 8.17. If so be that we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with
him. Those who have stuck to their King in his low condition, those who have
been content to suffer for him, those who looking upon his bitter sufferings
have been moved by so patient an example to suffer with him, those also shall
fare as he fares, they shall be glorified with him.

Mat. 19.28. Verily I say unto you (says the King in my Text) ye which have
followed me in the Regeneration, ye who for my sake have been Sequestered from
Houses, Lands, and the comfort of wife and children -- When the Son of Man
shall sit in the Throne of his glory (then) ye also shall sit upon twelve
Thrones. The King has a special eye upon his suffering Subjects, he is
resolved to bring them to Honor, resolved, when he is upon a Throne himself,
to enthrone them also.

Whereas then our Savior and Sovereign told Pilate, that His Kingdom was not
of this world, yet you see most apparently, he has a Kingdom in this world,
he has Subjects whom he does most dearly tender, such whom he does intend
shall sit on Thrones and reign with him.

But for such a Kingdom as our new Saints imag^ine, for such a time, in which
all power shall be given unto them, and they shall rule as Kings upon earth;
that our King in this world has such a Kingdom, cannot I conceive stand with
this next position, -- My Kingdom is not of this world. My Kingdom is not
after the guise, pomp, and manner of this world.

Now for the better explicating of this main point, we shall consider of this
proposition, according to the double acceptance of the preposition, (...), de,
of, from.

1. My Kingdom is not de mundo, Not of this world.

2. My Kingdom is not (...), From this world.

First, My Kingdom is not de mundo, Not of the world.

There is a great deal of difference being of the world, and in the world.
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Holy men in those days. Peter, Paul,
Nathaniel, and all the Saints of their time; these were as much in the world,
as Cain, Esau, Manasses, Judas: Christ himself was as much in the world as any
sinner was, but of the world neither they nor he were.

In the world then, are all those who live in the world, whether good or bad,
whether Rebellious, or righteous: But of the world those only are, who conform
themselves unto the world; for as it is one thing to live in the Flesh, and
another worse thing to live according to the Flesh: Romans 8.
Even so it is one thing to live in the world, and a far worse thing to live
according to the World; for as they who live according to the flesh, deny
nothing to themselves which the flesh requires, but satisfy their lusts in
the desires thereof: Even so, such as live according to the world, such who are
men of this world, they so live unto it, that they know no King but the world*
For, they will obey nothing, profess nothing, defend nothing, but what
pleases the world; Let their King be never so much vilifyed and dishonored,
let him be assaulted with Swords and Staves, let him be arraigned, condemned,
and nailed to a Cross; The men of this world they are resolved to hold their
own, they are resolved they will not part with their interest for his Honor.

Whereas then our Savior and Sovereign tells Pilate, My Kingdom is not of
this world: The meaning of this expression clearly is, my Subjects are not men
worldly minded, my Kingdom is not of such who are wedded to the world. As if
he had thus said to Pilate, -- Whereas I stand here accused for the affectation
of a Crown, and for being no friend to Caesar; the truth is, there need be no
such jealousies, or fears of me; for nor do I, nor mine, affect such a Kingdom
as he has, My Kingdom is not of this world. My Kingdom is not of such, who
study either for the Honor, the Pleasure, or the Profits of this world: My
Kingdom is only of such, who prefer me their King, even before themselves: My
Kingdom is only of such, who as I my self, by patience and sufferings make
their way to glory.

Mat. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself. And whosoever
will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake,
shall find it.

He who here says, My Kingdom is not of this world, he teaches his Subjects
a Self-denying Ordinance, teaching them as so many resolute Soldiers, to
renounce and dye unto the world. So that indeed the Kingdom of Christ is of
such only, who look neithe upon life nor livelihood, when the honor and glory
of their Savior and Sovereign is at stake.

Those then who violate his Statutes by their Ordinances, those who prefer
their Votes to his Laws, those who counterfeit his Seals, subvert his
Fundamental Government, and make his Sacraments of no effect, such as these
are not only in, but of the world. Such may be Rebels in, but not Subjects of
his Kingdom; for he who said, My Kingdom is not of this world, he in so saying
excludes all Rebellious, Malicious, Refractory, and Worldly people.

Secondly, As our Saviors and Sovereigns Kingdom is not de mundo, of the
world, so neither is it (...), neither is it from the world; for as Saint Paul
in the Front of his Epistle writes himself Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither
by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father: Even so our glorious and
gracious Sovereign in the Text, he may write himself Jesus Christ the King, not
of the world, neither by the world, but by God the Father; not of the world, I
have showed you, not from the world, will as readily appear.

Harding.
That which was of old the Popish Position of Parsons the Jesuit, is now grown
the Darling Doctrine of these Times, viz. That Kings have their Authority from
the People, as if the People were the Center, and the King only a Ray or Beam
of Majesty.

Sure I am, with the King in the Text it was not so, he neither had, nor would
have any suffrage from the people. My Kingdom (says he) is not of this world.
That I am King, it is not from any Aid or Assistance the world can give. Regnum
meum non est hinc, My Kingdom is not hence. And indeed, not only himself, but
his Father also bears witness to this Truth: For, I have set my King upon my
Holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.6.
I (says the Lord) I, whose the Hill of Sion is, ego constitui Regem, as
Vatablus, I have appointed, or, I have set up my King, not from the World, but
from the Father, he holds his Kingdom. And indeed it is remarkable in the
Gospel, that when the people in a grateful mood would needs have made a King
of him, our Savior by all means declined it: For, Joh. 6.15.
When Jesus perceived that they would come, and take him by force, to make him
a King, he departed again into a mountain himself alone. He would rather live
as a Sparrow upon the housetop, alone upon a mountain, then be a King of the
peoples making; yea, he so abhorred their assistance to Regality, that the
Vulgar Latin renders it Fugit, he not now as at other times only withdrew
himself, but he fled away: and therefore no wonder to hear such a King say, --
My Kingdom is not of this world, or, My Kingdom is not hence. Which the
better to conceive of, we will pass to the proof of this Assertion, in these
words, If my Kingdom (...) of this world, then would my servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews.

From which words we shall deduct and proceed upon these three Observations:

1. The Kingdom of Christ has no need of a Sword to set it up.

2. Where there is such a King there is no Co-ordination, no Medium between
Christ and his servants.

3. How far Subjects are servants, viz. to defend their Sovereign from injury
or imprisonment. My servants would fight that I should not be delivered to the
Jews.

First for the first, The Kingdom of Christ has no need of a Sword for to set
it up; for in this the Kingdom of Christ differs from the Kingdom of this
world. A King and Kingdom of this world, the Subjects and servants thereof must
fight for: But, says our Savior to Pilate, My Kingdom is such an one, that
you see I have not a man so much as to plead or fight for me. And indeed it is
the singular and great glory of Christ's Kingdom that i^ has planted it self
without a Sword, and made a Conquest of the world without Blood.

1 Chronicles. 22. When David in his prosecution of his pious intendment had made
large provision toward the building of a Temple to the Lord, he calling to his
Son Solomon told him, My Son, the Word of the Lord came to me saying, Thou have
shed blood abundantly, and have made great War; thou (therefore) shall not
build a house unto my name, etc.

God would not that the very Type and Figure of the Kingdom of his Son should
be erected by a Swordman; yea, though he was otherwise a man after Gods own
heart; yet because a Warrior, because a Fighter, though but of the Lords own
Battles, God will not have an house built by him; Solomon, the man of Peace,
he it is that must do it.

Certainly then, the way to set up Christ upon his Throne, the way to enlarge
his Kingdom, and advance his Scepter, is not to enter into a Conspiracy, to
swear a Covenant, and to take up Arms; for if it so were, then were Christ's
Kingdom of this world; for it is the way of the men of this world, by force
and fighting, to manage their Designs, so that they who would put such a Form
upon Christ's Kingdom, which never ^in any place under heaven, but by So^^tion
and the Sword got sooting, They are like to those insolent Subjects, who
conceit they may give Law unto their King, or like those rebellious Servants
who in stead of fighting for, do fight against their Master.

Indeed, the King of this Kingdom, our blessed Lord and Savior, he has an
Army, but it is of Martyrs: he has Servants, who strive, and who do defend his
Kingdom, but it is by their own and not by the blood of others: he has
Soldiers, and fighting Ministers, but it is not with carnal weapons: he has
Laws, and Statutes, and Seals, and Ordinances, but none of these More Hominum,
after the vain manner or humor of men, and therefore very well might say, My
Kingdom is not of this world.

1 Cor. 1.23. Christum praedicamus Crucifixum, we preach Christ Crucified. Did
ever any Subject, who desired to make his King glorious, and his Kingdom
eminent, publish the infirmities and preach the shame of his Sovereign? Did
ever Ambassador for the glory of his Master, report in forain parts how his
Subjects had sold, vilifyed, banished and imprisoned their Sovereign? (All too
true.) Is it not rather the custom of the world to magnify his power,
amplify his greatness, and extol him at least for an high and mighty
Potentate?

Now behold, and see the wonder: He whose Kingdom is not of this world, by a
course clean contrary to the world, he has made himself the most glorious
Kingdom in the world; For, not by the Arm of flesh, but by the Foolishness of
preaching; not by glorying in his Victories, but in publishing of his
Sufferings; not by the Sword, but by his Cross has he been highly exalted,
Phil. 2.9.
and got him a Name above every Name: we preach Christ crucified (says the
Ambassador.) Now look upon all the Kingdoms of the World, and tell me of any
one King, who without a Sword, has captivated and subdued a People: Whereas if
you look upon the King in my Text, you shall scarce find a People under Heaven,
which first or last he has not conquered; for His sound is gone forth into all
Lands. Romans 10:18.


All Lands, those who had the strongest and the most mighty Princes, those who
had the most learned Doctors, and the most famous Orators, those who had the
best settled Laws, and the most religious Customs; all these veiled and threw
down their glory, all these (and that without a Sword) gave way unto the
Cross, so that the opposite and clean contrary erection of this Kingdom might
move and warrant this King to say, My Kingdom is not of this world.

Indeed if we look into the beginning of his Reign, we shall find Swords enough
drawn against his Subjects: for to have been a Christian, to have professed
Loyalty; it was Malignancy enough, 'twas Capital, 'twas indeed All. Bonus vir
Cajo-Sejus, modo Christianus; Cajo-Sejus was a good man, only he was a
Christian: and indeed the worst Tyrants had to object in those days; it only
was their Allegiance, only because they protested, and according to
protestation stuck close to the Lords Anointed.

Now here again is the wonder of this Kingdom, that lex nova non vindicat se
ultore gladio. These poor oppressed Subjects, they did not combine and make an
Army, they did not associate and make an head, they did not whet their Swords
and make ready their Arrows, but they laid down their lives, they resigned up
their bodies, they neither feared nor cared what man could do unto them. Et sic
crevit Ecclesia. And hence it was that this Kingdom became so ample, hence it
was the world became so full of worthies, and hence it was that Christ came to
have a Kingdom that is not of this world.

A Kingdom and Generation of Subjects who are resolved to drink of the same
Cup, and to be baptized with the same Baptism wherewith their King was. A
Kingdom and Generation of Subjects, who either long to be where their King is,
or extremely desire that he may gloriously return to them: A Kingdom and
Generation of Subjects, who joy in nothing like their King; A Kingdom and
Generation of Subjects, who are readier to be sacrificed then to rebel against
a Sovereign. So that

The Motto of both King and Subject is, Vincit qui pa^itur. The patient abiding
of the meek shall not for ever be forgotten. And indeed the Triumphs, Trophies,
and Conquests of Patience are to be found no where but in the Annals of this
Kingdom. This is the only Kingdom, that without a Sword gets victories: And
therefore most emphatically, and above all Kingdoms is it here said, My
Kingdom is not of this world: Sufferings, not the Sword, has set up Christ's
Kingdom. Pass we therefore to the second Observation; which is,

Where there is such a King, there is no Co-ordination, for no Medium in the
Text between Christ and his Servants. If my Kingdom were of this world, my
Servants would do their duties, my Servants would fight for me.

Since Authority has been disputed, though the Word has been kept, the Power
of a King has been much eclipsed, so that now we may admit of this
distinction; a King Nominall, and a King Real, a Person so called, and a
Personage that is so indeed.

Theopompus King of Sparta, Lib. Moral. Tract. Against an unlearned Ruler.
to take off the Odium of absolute Royalty, brought in (as Plutarch observes)
those five Members called the Ephori, and these (as is observed) so ordered and
molded the Lacedemonian State, that (after) Kings had nothing left but the
Name only: And indeed with such, with Nominall Kings, a Co-ordination may very
well be; but then they cannot take up the words of my Text and say, My
Kingdom, My Servants, or my Subjects, But, our Kingdom, our Servants, and our
Subjects will fight for us: For indeed no Nominall King can be the only
Supreme, nor has any Nominall King more then his share, and his personal
interest in the Government.

Now such a King was not the King in the Text, he was not only in Name, but
most really, and in power a King: God his Father, who set him upon the holy
hill of Sion, he joined none in Commission with him, he appointed no Ephori, no
five Members, no Committees for to over-see him; to him was given (...) the
whole Authority, Mat. 21.
all Power. The Government was settled upon his, and his only shoulder: He and
he alone was Princeps pacis, Isa. 9.6.
the Prince of Peace: He and he only it was that could settle his Kingdom in
peace: so that with such a King as he, impossible it is there should be a
Co-ordination; as possible to have two Saviors of the world, as two
Sovereigns of one and the same Kingdom, so that he might very well say, My
Kingdom, for he had no compeer, no fellow in it: he might very well say, My
Servants, for no Coequall, he had to fight for him.

Indeed it is most apparent, our King in the Text he had a Council, a great
Council, a Council inspired with the holy Ghost: He had twelve Apostles, yet
though there were twelve of them, he was Vniversis major, he was greater then
his body, for Colos. 1.18. He is the head of the body; Col. 1.18.
he is the Head of his Church.

And indeed, as the head of no man is said to be the head of the Arm, or the
head of the hand, or the head of any particular member, but the head of the
whole, the head of the body; even so the King in my Text, he who is said to be
the head of his Church, he is not head of this or that particular Member, or of
every personal body, but he is the head of the whole, as they make one body.

It is most true, every Member may say, this is my Head, and every subject may
say, this is my King; but it is the Head, and the Head only, which can say,
This is my body; the King, and the King only who can say, This is my Kingdom.
So that there may be as well two Heads to one Body, as two coordinate Supremes
in one Kingdom. The King in my Text (it is most clear) approves no such, where
he has to do; for he says peremptorily, my Kingdom, my Servants, all but my
self are Inferiors, all but my self are Subjects; If my Kingdom were of this
World, my Servants would fight for me.

Indeed, if we look upon the great Council of this King, if we look upon the
Apostles, we shall find they are in an hot contention, and make great debate,
who should be the greatest among them. For when the King in my Text told them,
Luke 23.22. Truly the Son of Man goes -- It presently follows, There was
strife among them which of them should be counted the greatest. Coordinate
powers they will justle: Take away this one King, and we shall find none. For
as plur^litas Deorum est nullitas, As he who makes many, makes no God, even so
he who in one Kingdom makes more then one, makes indeed no King at all. For
Mat. 26.31. Smite the Shepherd and the Sheep shall be scattered. Take away the
head, and the body, like the limbs of Medea's Brother, they will lie useless,
and scattered about the Kingdom. For when the King in my text was but
apprehended, and taken away by Soldiers, you shall find even of his dearest
servants, and of his Bosom Counselors there was not a man stuck unto him.

So that indeed a Kingdom admits no other then of this Division, Sovereign
and Servants, King and Subjects; for take Sovereignty from the King, and the
World shall soon find he will grow a Servant quickly; for as the Disciples,
even so al Co-ordinates, they are ambitious to write this style, my Kingdom,
my Servants. And so to the last considerable.

How far Subjects are Servants, which according to my Text has this extent,
Servants to defend their Sovereign from both injury and imprisonment: For,
says the King in my Text, If my Kingdom were of this world, my Servants would
fight; and then adds for what, That I should not be delivered to the Jews.

1. They would fight.

2. They would fight in this cause, that I should not be thus abused, that I
should not be thus delivered to the Jews.

1. My Servants would fight.

Our Blessed Sovereign being to make his Plea before a Pagan Judge, before one
who regarded neither Moses nor the Prophets, uses not Scripture but Reason to
convince him, and that such a Reason as the very Law of Nations had agreed
upon, viz. That Subjects ought to fight for their King: And therefore concludes
negatively, In as much as none fight for me, my Kingdom is not of this World,
for if it were, my servants would fight.

My Servants. This word Servant it may have a Despicable, and it may have an
Honorable estimate; It may imply a Subject and somewhat more, or it may imply
a Subject and somewhat less.

In that phrase of Scripture, Servants obey your Masters; The word Servant
there, it implies somewhat less than a Subject, one who is either a Slave, or
serves for Hire, or is under despicable and mean commands. But in these places
of Scripture, ^^mb. 12.7. Psa. 78.70. Hag. 2.23.
where it is said, My servant Moses, David my servant; O Zerubbabel my servant;
Here Servant is more then a Subject, for it is an Honor even to Kings
themselves to be Gods Servants.

Whereas then it is said in the Text, My servants, that is, such who as I am
not their Master, but their King, relate unto me: By Servants we are not to
understand such who are under a Despoticall, or Magisteriall, but such who are
under a Paternall and a Regal Go^ernment, My servants, that is, My Subjects.
As if it were said; If my Kingdom were of this world, my Subjects would fight
for me.

Indeed if we look upon the King in the Text, as we are Christians, we cannot
but acknowledge that His Kingdom, it is of all Kingdoms the most absolute, in
so much that Kings, our Sovereigns, they are but his Servants. Yea, Angels and
Devils, Heaven, Earth, and all that therein is are his Subjects, and all (if he
please) ready to fight for him, according to that, Judge. 5.20. The Stars in
their courses fought against Sisera; Or, according to the saying of his at his
apprehension, Mat. 26.53. Where for his King he might have had more then twelve
legions of Angels. But being (as you have heard) his Kingdom is not of this
world, we are to look upon this reason of his, only as it relates to the Kings
of this world, for upon that supposition, does he make this inference, Then
would my Servants fight for me.

My Servants would fight. My Servants, They must be the Servants of a Royal
Master, the Servants of a King, or no fighting; for Fighting it is the ultimate
and last refuge, in so much that not the Sword, but the Laws must decide all
private quarrels: No fighting where an Appeal lies, and appeal we both may and
must, till we come to the Supreme. But when the Supreme is violated, he may
take up the phrase in my Text, and say, Then shall my servants fight.

Mat. 26. When St. Peter in defense of his Master drew his Sword, the King in
my Text (to show that his Kingdom was not of this world) commands, Put up
again thy Sword into its place, verse. 52. As if he had said, Verse. 52.
let the Sword rest there, till some temporal King commands it: And then adds
this reason. For, All they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.
All those who are not (as the Text implies) Regis Ministri, the Kings Men, the
Kings Servants; All such for drawing their own Swords, deserve to perish by the
Sword, by his Sword who may say in the words of my text, for as much as I have
a Kingdom in this world, my Servants shall, and will fight for me.

My servants would fight. To fight is to hazard Life and Limb, the dearest
things of this World. To fight, it implies the leaving of Wife and Children,
house and home, and to go where the Fight is: So that it may very well be
doubted whether those servants have done their Duties, or those subjects
discharged their Allegiance, who have lost only the paring of their nails, or
the Hair of their head; I mean nothing but their extraordinaries, nothing but
their wonted wantonness and fullness for the Redemption of their Sovereign.

The King in my Text tells us, The Servants of a distressed King, 2 Samuel 11.11.
they should rather be Commanders then Compounders, they should resolve, as did
good Vriah, whilst The Arc* and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord
Joab, and the Servants of the King are encamped in the open field; so long they
will not joy in their own houses, they will not eat and drink and lie with
their Wives. If my Kingdom were of this World (says our Savior) then would
my Servants, (not plot how to save, restore, and secure themselves) but my
Servants would fight. Those who are able and have hearts, they should not spend
only their Breath, but even their Blood, not only their Estates, but even
themselves; when the case is so sad, that if they fight not, the King must
suffer. Were my Kingdom of this world, my servants (says our Savior) would
fight, yea (...), they would fight even to an Agony, rather then permit me thus
to be delivered to the Jews.

And so we pass to the last particular -- the cause which may both move and
warrant for to fight, and that is injuries against Royal Majesty. Subjects
must rather fight, then see their Sovereign delivered up to Jews.

2. My Servants would fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews.

The Jews considered before they proved Rebellious, and did despite unto their
King; they were the most glorious Nation under Heaven, Gods people, a people
Honorable at home, and Feared abroad: but when they had so far degenerated as
to fall foul both upon Gods Prophets, and Gods anointed, when they Stoned the
one, and Blasphemed the other; from that time even unto this day they are
become the most hateful and odious people under Heaven, a people into whose
hands rather then a King should come, my servants would fight, says the King
in my Text.

By Jews in the Text then we may aptly understand not only the people of the
Jews, but people of any Nation or language whatsoever, that shall be so Jewish,
as to endeavor to make their King odious, so Jewish as to assault, Arraigne,
and Crucify their King; Subjects or Servants ought to fight, rather then to
suffer their King to be in such hands.

Maximilian the Emperor passing his censure upon four great Kingdoms, R.
Regu^ Hom. Asin. Diab.

Germany, Spain, France, and England. He makes the King of England to be worse
then Rex Judaeorum, then King of Jews, for he plainly calls him, Rex
Diabolorum, the King of Devils, conceiting that none but Jews or Devils would
lay hands upon Gods Anointed. So that indeed were it only to avoid this
Scandal, only to prevent the Dishonor and Curse, which Rebellion brings upon
a Nation, Subjects ought rather to fight, then to see their King delivered up
to the Power and Malice, either of Jews or Devils. My servants would fight that
I should not be delivered to the Jews, says the Text.

Would fight. Fighting I have showed, and we all know it is the hazard of our
lives, a hazard that may not rashly and for every punctilio be undertaken: A
man who would fight and die as a Christian, he must first sit down and consider
whither his soul shall go, if he die in that fight.

It is well known there are in the World, who will sooner fight for a Mistress
(I had almost said a whore) then for a King; who are hotter in vindication of a
lie, then of ten thousand lies put upon a Sovereign: who will sooner draw upon
refusal of the Kings health, then to keep a Kings Head upon his shoulders:
rather upon a Rescue (though for just debt) then for the Redemption of a King,
suffering even for their Liberties. But for these and the like fights,
Scripture has no warrant, for these and the like quarrels no good King would
say, Then shall my servants fight.

To speak then only a word of so great a point, I conceive this is a sure
foundation [No man may fight, or venture his life for that, which in cool
blood, judgment and right reason is not dearer then life] and of this nature
there are not many things in the World. No profit, no pleasure can be this
good; for skin for skin, and all that a man has, he ought in right reason to
part with, rather then his life; for of all things pleasant and profitable,
Life is the dearest.

Indeed Bonum Honestum, that good which is Honest, Honorable, Religious, for
those there are cases in which a man may dare to die; for Virtue, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Piety, and public goods, they may be dearer then life it self; for seeing
godliness has not only a promise of this life, but also of that which is to
come; a life lost or laid down for it, may have what this World cannot give, an
heavenly recompense.

Romans 5.7. Peradventure for a good man some would dare to die. The Rule of
Charity is, Love thy Neighbor, as, not better then thy self, so that indeed
to lay down our life to save another, unless there be in that other some
excellency which may counterpoise a life, we may not be so far wanting to our
selves as to lay down a life. So that in a word, to give issue to the present
point; I conceive, according to the Tenor of my Text, it must be a public
person, a person exalted either by Majesty or Piety above his Brethren, a
person whose life is of more consequence then are many particulars, for whom
many particulars may dare to lay down their lives, for whom many particulars
may dare to fight.

In the Body natural, right reason tells us we ought to venture any Member
rather then the head, for as much as the head, it is the guide, the Governor,
the preserver of the whole: even so in the Body politic, for as much as all
but the head are Members; for the Head, for the Supreme, for the Protector, and
Defender of the whole, there is not a Member but may dare to fight, yea not a
Member (which is able) but when that is in peril must fight. For according to
the vote even of all Nations, says our Savior unto Pilate, were I such a King
as you take me for, my Servants would take up Arms, my Servants would not
suffer me thus to be delivered to the Jews.

Act. 4. The Jews (you may find) w^ere so averse unto their Sovereign, and so
extremely bent to destroy his memory, that their great Council, the Sanhedrim,
forbade all further addresses to him, straightly commanding, verse. 18. That the
Apostles should not speak at all, or teach in the Name of Jesus: They would
have nothing done in the Name of their King.

Now here began the trial of his Subjects, here was the experience of the
loyalty of his Servants; for when it was now grown capital, and deemed as
Treason to speak in the Name of their King, when they were straightly commanded
to take no Commission in his name, nor to teach in the Name of Jesus: Behold
even then, Act. 8.28. They filled Jerusalem with their Doctrine, not fearing to
charge the very Council with the blood and infamy of their King, ver. 30.
saying, whom ye slow, and hanged on a Tree.

Now as the spiritual Subjects of Christ were thus tried, when Christianity
was at stake, even so then are secular and temporal Subjects tried, when
Monarchy and Regality is in question: As then Christians, by suffering, must
uphold the spiritual, even so Subjects by fighting must uphold the temporal:
for were I a temporal King, says our Savior in my Text, before the Jews
should thus insult over me, my servants would fight. My Servants for a Royal
and a public would not spare to lay down the lives of their private persons.

2 Samuel 21. The men of David swear unto him, Thou shall go no more out with us
to battle, that thou quench not the Light of Israel. They would spend their
own lives rather then see the light of Israel put out; they will much rather
venture their own persons, then the person of their King; yea, they plainly
tell him, and that to his face, 2 Samuel 18.3.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us. So that you see in right reason to defend a
King, to defend him upon whose person depends the peace and prosperity of a
Kingdom, to defend him who is worth ten thousand, that is all of us; there is
(I say) in conscience and right reason, cause and warrant enough, that the
servants of such an one fight, yea, die for him.

Instances might be given (and those not a few) even of Pagans, who, albeit
they had no after-hopes, as Christians have, yet for a public good, for the
peace and safety of a Kingdom they have dared to die. Codrus the Athenian,
Curtius the Roman, both gave themselves up for the good of their Country. And
indeed, whether it be to King or Country, none of us are upon the trial, none
of us can be said to be well affected till we are even upon our peril; when
the King is in danger to be delivered to his enemies, then is the time, then
must his servants fight. Were my Kingdom of this world, now, even now at this
time, (says the King in my Text) my servants would fight, for they would not
now I should be thus delivered to the Jews. To close this point.

That same distinction, which Chancellor Elsmore in his days pronounced
dangerous, and Judge Cook in his pronounced damnable; even that which those
Patriots would not pass for Law, some Divines of late have past for Gospel,
preaching it lawful to fight against a King in his personal, so they fight
for him in his politic capacity.

I confess I cannot make this to agree with my Text, for my Text it speaks
only of that capacity, in respect to which, a King may be taken, delivered up,
Arraigned, Condemned, Crucified; my servants would fight that I should not be
delivered to the Jews, says my Text. Now how our Savior could be delivered in
any but a personal capacity, how he could be bought, and sold, apprehended,
and nailed to a Cross, but only in a personal capacity, imagine I cannot. And
in this, and this only capacity the Text requires, that his Subjects fight for
him; my servants would fight, that I (that this very person of mine) should not
be delivered.

In a word, to draw up all, Every man, who fights, should seriously consider
whether God will reward him for so fighting; consider whether in the face of
God he can say with St. Paul, I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7.
for without a good fight no Crown.

He who fights for his own ends, and his private interest, he who kills men (as
some do beasts, for their skins) for their estates, he who without any regard
to the Cause, fights on; such as these can hardly say, I have fought a good
fight.

The good fight, which St. Paul fought, Romans 7.2^
it was against his Rebellious Members; the War he waged, it only was to
reduce them into subjections, and to bring them into obedience to the Mind. And
indeed, the good fight supposed in the Text, it is against Rebellious Members,
it is against Traitors, it is against such who violate Sovereignty, and are
vexatious to the Lords Anointed. For against such (says our Savior in my
Text) against such would my servants fight, who would deliver me to the Jews:
Then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews.

Well, to the Jews he is delivered; they had him: yea, says the Scripture,
they hanged him, they made him away, they did him all the despite that Devil
or Malice could invent; yea, it is recorded that they gave money, and bought him
for this end. And shall we leave him in their hands? Truly no.

Act. 3.13.
For, The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and Jacob, The God of our Fathers has
glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up. He who was basely and
perfidiously bought and sold, and delivered to the Jews, him, says St. Peter,
has God glorified. Though then as he did his Son, God may for a time permit
even a good and a Righteous King to suffer, yet even then, when his Servants
either cannot or will not fight for him, then shall the God of his Fathers
glorify him.

Hos. 1.7. I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them, (I
beseech you observe the manner how) Not by Bow, nor by Sword, nor by Battle,
by Horses, or Horsemen, but I will save them by the Lord their God. When there
is no servant to draw a Bow, no Subject to manage a Sword, no Army to fight a
Battle, when there is no visible appearance of any force, then is Gods hour to
show mercy upon the house of Judah.

And indeed till mercy comes to Judah, there is little hopes of it in the
meaner Tribes: Yea, it is most evident in the Gospel, that curse, which for
betraying and murdering their King, is fixed upon the Jews: this cannot be
taken off, till they strive and study to restore their Sovereign. No Act of
Indemnity, but from him; No Messiah, no deliverer, but him, whom they have
thus vilified, no Salvation till they make addresses, and return unto this
King.

Hos. 11.1. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the Children of Israel be
gathered together, and appoint themselves one head. When Judah the Royal, and
Israel the Rebellious party, when these shall both accord under one head, then
shall they be gathered, when they acknowledge and submit unto their only head,
their King, then shall they be happy. And indeed the happiness of us all
depends upon the glorious return of our gracious Soveraignn. For,

Col. 3.4. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in Glory. When Christ our King shall return in glory, then, and
not till then can we be glorious; that then we may all be glorified, so come
and come quickly Lord Jesus. To whom as being King of Eternal glory, be all
honor and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

Sit Deo omnis gloria.
THE GRAND CONSPIRACY OF Jews against their King. A SERMON Preached in January,
1649.

JER. 26.14, 15. As for me, behold I am in your hand: do with me as seems
good and meet unto you. But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye
shall surely bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this City, and
upon the Inhabitants thereof, etc.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1654.

SERMON. III. Preached, 1649.
JOHN 19.15. Pilate says unto them, Shall I crucify your King?


IN these words we have two Persons of remarkable Cognizance, the President,
and the Prisoner; Pilate, and the King. And indeed we cannot well understand
the Text, before we consider how the President dealt with his Prisoner, how
Pilate behaved and carried himself toward the King; Act. 3.13. you may read,
St. Peter sharply checking the Jews for denying him in the presence of Pilate,
when he was determined to let him go; when Innocence and Majesty stood at the
Bar, Pilate, though a Pagan President, had so much honesty, so much
Conscience, so much Compassion, that he studied rather to give an Absolution
then a Sentence, he was determined, says the Scripture, yea (...), from
thenceforth, or a^ some of the learned, for this caus^ because a King, and
because innocent, Pilate sought to release him Pilate was so far from being
ambitious to pass sentence upon a King, that he assayed and tried many a way
to put it off. I shall name four which are evident; 1. By proposal of his
Innocence. 2. Of his Sorrows. 3. Of his Majesty. 4. Of their own Credit, and
Reputation.


First, He would have put off the Sentence, because indeed there wa^ nothing
worthy a Sentence in him Behold I bring him forth to you, that (...) may know I
find no fault in him, v^ No fault, no sentence: yea, and as (...) it were an
indignity for less then (...) King to judge a King, he sends him to his Peer,
to Herod, Luke 13.7* he would have King Herod^ verdict, before he passed his
own; yea, h^ presses his judgment for to quit him, I find no fault in him, no
nor yet Herod. But whom Malice delivers up, Innocence must not acquit; for Envy
like Rebellion has always a design against the person; yea, the more worth in
the person; the more eager is his Persecution, Joh. 7.46. when the Officers
sent to apprehend him, brought this answer, never man spoke like this man; his
wisdom and sufficiency so astonished them, they were now more then ever set
against him; when they saw such was his perfections, that he was ready to
convert and draw all men after him, as it is in Joh. 11.50. then as Cajaphas,
so they, it is expedient for us that he die the death for us, who cannot reign
if he live; for us, who cannot live, if he do; for us, whose design has been
against his government; for us, it is expedient that one, yea, this one should
die; his Wisdom, his Innocence, his Perfections, his Integrity; all his
excellencies we are to look upon, as so many perils, and therefore to Pilates
proposal of his Innocence and Integrity, the chief Priests Officers return
this Acclamation, Crucify him, Crucify him.

Secondly, As by proposal of his Innocence, even so also of his sorrows,
Pilate sought his delivery: for whereas in most men, there is so much natural
compassion, that when we see a very Malefactor in bitterness of spirit, our
bowels yerne, and we grow tender; Pilate thought to produce an Innocent in such
a plight, to show one who had not deserved a stripe, even to satisfy them so
scourged, that his blood might become a mantle to him. Pilate, I say, thought
this, this if any thing might save his life, and therefore in this plight he
says, Behold the Man: but no sorrows which are not mortal, no sufferings
which are not deadly, no blood but the heart blood can satisfy the malicious;
and therefore albeit crowned with Thorns, and flayed with Whips, they still
cry, Execution, Execution, let him be Crucified, let him be Crucified.

Thirdly, Not only by proposal of his Innocence and his sorrows, but as he was
a King, as he was the seat of Majesty, as he was Royal, so also Pilate sought
his deliverance, and therefore in the verse immediately before the Text, he
says unto the Jews, Behold your King, ver. 14. Of the same person of whom he
said, Behold the Man, he now changing his style says, Behold your King: as if
he thus said, if his sorrows as a man move you not, behold him as a King:
Behold a King deprived of all his comforts, spoiled of all his goods, sold by
his Brethren, apprehended by his Subjects, scourged as a Villain, derided as a
fool: Behold a King, who has no other use of Majesty, but to aggravate his
misery. Behold a King, whose sufferings are as transcendent as his person.
Behold a King, who has suffered things bitterer then death. Behold a King,
yea, your King, how he has suffered even every thing but death. And will not
this satisfy and content you? No, even all this will not do: For as some
timorous fools, who though an Eele be flead, fear it while it yet stirs; and as
cowards think no safety while life appears, even so the Rebellious Jews, as
if their King might have outlived his wounds, recovered his losses, and turned
his Reed into a Scepter; when Pilate said, Behold your King; as if King were
the bitterest of all Corrasives, they cry out more fierce then ever, Toll,
Toll, away with him, away with him, Justice and Execution both, Crucify him,
Crucify him: And so we are brought to my Text, which was the last attempt; for
when Pilate saw that neither his innocence, nor his sorrows, nor his Majesty
could prevail, he then urges even their own credit: As if he had thus said, If
neither his being without a fault, nor his being in so heavy a plight, nor yet
his being a King; yet for your own respects, and for your own repute spare the
Sentence; for what is done unto your King will fall upon your selves, it will
be dishonorable to you, and the whole Nation, when it shall be said, your King
was Crucified. And thus you have the coherence and the reason why Pilate said
unto them, shall I Crucify your King?

Now for the methodicall and better handling of the words, we shall consider of
these two points, 1. To put a King to death, is against the judgment both of
Jew and Gentile, Pilate and the chief Priests. 2. What Jew and Gentile do
against Judgment and Conscience, that they do most barbarously, Crucify a King

1. To put a King to death is against the judgment both of Jew and Gentile.
Jew and Gentile, it was the old division of the World; and thus St. Paul takes
it, Romans 2.9. where says he, Tribulation and anguish upon every Soul of man
that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; that is upon every
soul, upon all men; so that indeed the judgment of Jew and Gentile, it is the
judgment of the whole World. Now that the judgment of Jew and Gentile were
against this damnable and most horrid act, the putting of a King to death, this
is evident, should we go no further then the present verse; for Pilate the
Representative of the Gentiles, the chief Priests, and Heads and Rulers of the
Jews, both these in this very Text declare against it. First, besides all that
has been already said, these very words in my Text argue Pilates disavowing of
it, Shall I Crucify your King? Shall I pass Sentence of Death upon a King?
Shall I deal with your King as with a Rogue? Send him to the Gibbet? Shall I do
this? not I, ver. 6. if you will deal so with him, do it your selves, and
therefore Pilate says unto them, take ye him and Crucify him; his Judgment
and his Conscience abhorred the cruelty. And indeed no wonder, for if, as a
Roman Historian, Quintus Curtius.
Regium nomen gentes, quae sub Regibus sunt, pro Deo colunt: If the Gentiles,
who lived under Kings, esteemed the very name of a King as a deity, no wonder
to hear a Roman President startle at the Sentence of a King. No wonder to hear
Pilate say, Shall I Crucify your King? For they who thus had the very name,
they must needs have the person in veneration. Now as the Gentiles, so the very
Jews in Judgment abhorred the very fact, abhorred the putting of their King to
death. For when Pilate said, Shall I Crucify your King? Mark what immediately
follows, the chief Priests answered, We have no King but Caesar: we have no
such King, he is no King of ours; were he our King, we would not conspire his
ruin; were he our King, we would not have apprehended and arraigned him; were
he our King, we would not thus prosecute him: The chief Priests answered, We
have no King but Caesar.

The Jews then it is evident, not in his regal, but in his personal capacity,
did persecute our Savior, not as King, but as Jesus of Nazareth they brought
him to his block. For in the 19. ver. when Pilate had made this inscription, J.
N. R. J. Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews, the chief Priests became suitors
to him to change the title, and to write, he said I am King of the Jews, ver.
21. they would not by any means he should be crucified under the notion and
title of a King. Indeed as of one aspiring to it they would have had it, but
that they should be such cursed wretches, as to bring a real King unto a
Cross; this even the Jews abhorred, write him not King, but that he said I am
King. And indeed no wonder, for if we search the Scriptures, and observe but
how highly, and to what end the Spirit of God uses the Name of a King, we
shall find the Jews had very good reason to reverence a King. For to show
that the person and style of a King implies a full confluence of excellencies,
when the Spirit of God makes an extraordinary allusion, you shall find he
usually borrows from a King. Judge. 8.18. When Gideon asked Zeba and Zalmunna,
What manner of men they were whom they slew at Tabor? They answered in the 18.
verse. as thou art, so are they, each one resembled the Children of a King. The
high expression for ornament or beauty it is borrowed from a King, as the
children of a King. Psalm. 45.14. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within:
yea, and without too, for in the 15. v. She shall be brought unto the King in
raiment of Needle-worke. When the Spirit of God speaks of Grace, and glory,
both allusions relate unto the King; yea, so are the styles of God and King
interwoven in holy writ, that God is pleased not only to be called by theirs,
but to allow them to be called by his Name. Psalm. 10.18. The Lord is King for
ever and ever, the Lord our God he is a King: And as God is a King, even so the
Jews knew it was no blasphemy to call a King a God; for I have said, ye are
Gods, says the Lord: yea the most odious and highest accusation that could be
forged against poor Naboth, was in 1 King. 31.10. Thou did blaspheme God and
the King. Whereas then the Jews were in the Book of God thus instructed of the
Majesty, and excellency of a King, Exodus 2.28. Their Law forbidding them to
revile their God, or so much as in thought to curse the King, Eccles. 10.20.
it is no wonder to hear them disclaim their Sovereign, and to deny him their
King, whose life they hunted after; Shall I Crucify your King, says Pilate?
The chief Priests answered, We have no King but Caesar.

Though they destroyed and made away him who was indeed their King, yet they
would not subscribe, they would not as King own either the butchering or
betraying of him, so that you see both Pilate and the chief Priests, both Jew
and Gentile, they would both wash their hands from this foul offense, they
would not, did not put a King to death. The Judgment both of Jew and Gentile
was against it.

The Application of this point shall teach us, to take heed that we do not
betray our Consciences, that we do not either for fear, or favor, for
covetousness or malice go against our own Consciences, do against our own
Judgment. Most true it is that of the Poet, Nemo repent fit turpissimus, No
man at the first mounts to the height of wickedness; but he who declines his
Judgment, and he who can stretch or shrink his Conscience, as advantage
admonishes, such a one is preparing to all manner of enormities.

Pilate and the chief Priests in my Text, they are fearful examples of this
truth, for when Fear sat upon the Bench, and Malice stood Solicitor at the
Bar; the poor King with all his Innocence, and for all his wisdom, was sure
to miscarry in the trial: Mat. 27.24. When Pilate saw that he could prevail
nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water and washed his hands,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: See here in Pilate, how
Affection and Judgment, how Fear and Conscience struggle: his Judgment that
tells him the person was just, the blood innocent, the King faultlesse, and
therefore as if the washing of his hands would have cleared his Conscience, he
calls for water and does that; but him, whom his Judgment and Conscience
pronounced innocent, him whom as a just person and a King, he would have
delivered, even him, when fear suggested the fury of a multitude, when fear
suggested a complaint to Caesar, when fear startled him with the hazard of
himself, then I say, even him whom Judgment acquitted, Fear condemns; him,
whom Conscience pronounced just, Fear delivers up him, who as a King, he was
loath to Crucify, even him, though a King, and a just one too, he will rather
send to a Cross, then venture a Cross himself. So that indeed not only the
King in my Text, but even Pilate, the Lord President himself, he had in stead
of a Scepter, but a Reed, a Reed shaken with the wind, a Reed not able to
stand in judgment, a Scepter that must bend as fear would have it.

When Caiaphas sat in Council on the King in my Text, you shall find he did
not consider what was just, but what was safe; John 11.49. Ye know nothing at
all: as if he had said, if ye move upon Principles of Right, Law, and justice,
ye can do nothing, by them ye cannot take him away; but if ye consider the
exigences of State, the safety of our selves, the security of the people, then
expedient it is that one should die, ver. 50. And indeed which of us is there
that has not a Caiaphas in his bosom? Which of us is there that does not
rather consider the expediency then the justice of an Action? which of us do
not consider whether what we do be not rather secure, then conscionable? much
more poising an outward broile, then an inward peace; and is not this the way
to become as so many Pilates? Men who will sacrifice both Judgment, Loyalty,
Conscience and all honesty to avoid an inconvenience. When Pilate gave ear
unto his fears, he fears not with the same lips to sentence, whom but now he
pronounced without a fault.

Now the good God grant that there be not a curse impending over this Land,
even for such Judges; for such who have rather steered by their Fears, then by
their Consciences; for such who have rather for expediency then Justice,
condemned the Innocent.

Again, as Pilates fear, even so the Pride, the Ambition and Malice of the
chief Priest, these also perverted judgment, and these made the Conscience
pass what they pleased: Mat. 27.18. Pilate knew that for envy they had
delivered him, the persecution of the King was a mere piece of envy; they had
nothing to lay to his charge, nothing could they prove, nay, nothing did they
pretend but some State and forged suggestions: John 11.48. If we let him alone
all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our
King and Nation. Because they were jealous of the Romans, therefore must he be
taken away, whereas indeed the Romans were reserved to be the avengers of his
blood. The Romans came not till that time was come, in which his blood was
required of them and their children, verse. 12. Sometimes his charge is, he made
himself a King, whereas indeed he was no admitted, no elected, but a native
King, born King of the Jews, Mat. 2.2. yea in verse. 7. He ought to die, because
he made himself the Son of God; see the peevishness of envy, they accuse him
for being what he could not but be from all eternity, the begotten of the
Father, and no sooner born, then born a King; and yet because the Son of God,
and because a King, he must die the death; yea, yet it is worth the time to see,
how when Envy and Malice persecutes, so the person falls, they care not by what
means; care not to ruin themselves, so they see but his fall: The chief
Priests in my Text, those who pretended their King must therefore die, because
if not, Venient Romani, the Romans will come in, even these, rather then he
shall not die, will lay down even their own necks to the Roman servitude; for
as if they were the fast friends, and greatest honourers of Caesar, who but
they cry out, We have no King but Caesar? Crucify Christ, destroy Jesus, for
behold we are for the Roman party, no King but Caesar.

They who know any thing of the Jewish story, cannot but know Caesar, the Roman
foraine power, those were to the Jews the most hateful things under Heaven:
and yet to glut their spleen, and to satisfy their envy, behold Caesar
preferred to Christ, and a foraine jurisdiction before their own King: to such
a madness are men brought, when leaving judgment and conscience, they follow
the wild byas of corrupt affections.

I shall conclude this point with that of the Prophet Isay, Isa. 8. 6. For as
much as the people refuse the waters of Shiloah that go softly, for as much as
this people, for as much as the Jews, would not have him to reign over them,
who like the waters of Shiloah, was meek, calm and quiet, behold what the Lord
threatened, and they found, now therefore says the Lord, verse. 7. I will bring
upon them Waters of the River, strong and many: they who could not be content
with a calm, behold the Lord threatens to send them a tempest; they who must
needs make away a quiet and a peaceable King, a King of their own, upon such
the Lord threatens, and has sent the waters of the River strong and many, and
these, as it is in the same verse, shall come up over all his Channels, and go
over all his banks. And indeed what is juster then an inundation, even of
blood it self, to sweep away such a people who have broken down all the banks,
violated all the muniments, and loosned, all the ties of Religion, Law, Reason,
Conscience? for thus did Pilate, and thus did the Jews, when the one for fear,
and the other for envy, delivered to death the Lord of life: for as you have
heard, the Judgment and Conscience of both concluded it was not lawful, it
was not warrantable to Crucify a King.

And so pass from their Passion to our Saviors, from their judgment, to
their Execution, and shall thence evidently prove this second General; That
what Jew and Gentile do against Conscience, and Judgment, that they do most
barbarously Crucify a King. Judgment, Reason, Conscience, are those lights
and gifts by which men are exalted and dignifyed above Beasts; so that indeed
when Men degenerate from these, they became as Beasts, making as they do, only
their Lusts and Passions to be their guides: and hence it comes, that whereas
every man should be homo homini Deus, as a God and helper to another, most men
are as the inverted saying, homo homini Lupus: speak I of Job? of David? or of
the Lion? In my Text we have an example when the Superior falls in (...) the
hand^ of the Inferior; Asperius nihil est humili quum surgit in altum, Exalted
beggary makes the exactest Tyrrannie* Satis est prostrasse Leoni, To the
offended Lion, to injured Majesty, submission may pass for satisfaction; but
if the Lion himself chance to be brought under, then as it is in the fable
Calcat jacentem vulgus, The very Ass will find a heel to kick him. Job.
29.25. Job, who when he dwelt as a King in the Army, when it pleased God to
suffer him to be Plundered, Sequestered, and brought low, you shall read, whose
Fathers he disdained to set with the dogs of his flock, Job 30.1. even these
had him in derision. King David, though a good man, and a good King, yet in
Psalm. 35.15. In mine adversity, says he, they rejoiced, they, who? It
follows, the Abjects, the very scumme of the people, gathered themselves
together against me; and would you know how they used him? they did tear him
and ceased not. But what speak I of Job? of David? or of the Lion? In my Text
we have an example surpassing all; for when the Lion of the Tribe of Judah fell
into the hands of the Beasts of the people, when the King of the Jews fell into
the hands of his Subjects, when God himself yielded up himself unto the power
of men; never was there such a piece of cruelty, as was then committed; never
did Wolf so use a Lamb, as the Lamb of God was used; for, which is the sum and
Catastrophe of this woeful Tragedy, they Crucified their King.

Pilate who as you have heard, had the examination of the cause, when he had
sifted and scanned all he could; when he heard all that could be said, and
examined all that could be proved, his conclusion is, he could find nothing
but envy in the whole: Pilate knew that for envy they had delivered him, Mat.
27.18. And indeed this envy, though it grew not mature and to the height till
now, yet we find it begun even in the beginning of his reign: for what was it
but envy which moved Herod to make him run before he could go? what but
ambition to the throne made him to seek his life? and indeed run through all
his reign, and you shall find it was only the envy of his graces, that
occasioned all affront^ and disgrace unto him: For in the very hour and power
of darkness, such was the luster of his innocence, that the President
evidently saw it was for envy they delivered him: Genesis 37. you shall find how
when Joseph the type of the King in my Text was envyed and hated of his
Brethren (though they knew no evil in the World by him) yet they could not
speak peaceably unto him, ver. 4. Envy is the bitterest persecutor in the
World, Dan. 6.3. for as much as in Daniel there was an excellent spirit, the
Princes who envied him (though they could quarrel at nothing but his piety)
never left plotting against him, till they brought him to the Lions, v. 16. Our
Blessed Lord the Sovereign in my Text, when envy took him to task, it never
gave over till it brought him to the grave; nor would envy bring him thither
but after an envious manner, Crucifying and killing him, even all the day long,
exactly verifying this our second observation, that what they did against
Judgment, and Conscience, they did most barbarously. A glimpse of it I shall
endeavor to give you under these two heads:

1. The Nobleness of the sufferer, A King.

2. The ignoblenesse of his sufferings, They crucified him.

First, Let us look upon the Nobleness of the sufferer, A King. It is a ^a^
much commended in this La^ of ours, that no man shall be tried but per Pares,
by his equals, by his Peers; and indeed there may be an excellent reason
couched in it, for it is only Peers, only Equals, only such who are liable to
the same casualties, who are truly compassionate, and thoroughly sensible of the
like miseries.

Indeed sometimes, as the Father toward the Children, even so pater patriae,
the Father of his Country, the King and Ruler of his people, he is touched
with, is tender and sensible of the grievances and pressures of his people; and
for this very end it was, the King in my Text was born, for this very end it
was he dyed, he was both the Savior and Martyr of his people.

But so rare is a reciprocal Sympathy from the people to the King, that it is
not improbable, therefore the King is above their Judgment, because amongst
his Subjects he can have no Peers, none of his own rank, no equals, and
therefore no impartial Judges of his sufferings.

And of this there can be no greater President, then the person in my Text; for
as there was never any sorrow like his sorrow, even so never less regard then
he had; for behold a King upon the Cross, and his Subjects reviling, mocking,
and deriding of him: so that indeed before we can be truly and thoroughly
sensible of this passion, of the passion of a King, we must put on higher then
ordinary affections, we must be exalted, and through the grace of his blood,
Rev. 1.6. we must be made Kings our selves, that is, men of more high and
royal conceptions; we must take it into a very serious consideration, how
great a person, how Noble, how Royal he was that suffered for us.

I know there are some in the world, who are ready to say, what is a King but a
man? As if there were nothing more in a King, then in an ordinary capacity:
whereas to any man minding the book of God, it is evident, the King is far
above his People, as the Hill above the Vale, or the Bramble below the Cedar:
Genesis 17. When God renewed his Covenant, and promised a blessing extraordinary
unto Abraham, he tells him, that he will not only make him exceeding fruitful,
but he would add this blessing also, Kings shall come out of thee, verse. 6.

Now if to be the Father of Kings were no more, then to be the Father of
ordinary men, God in saying, Kings shall come out of thee, had said just
nothing; and yet God, you see, as a special and singular favor, after the
promise of a numerous issue, even of whole Nations, adds, as more then all
that, Kings shall come out of thee; so that Kings in Gods esteem are more then
ordinary men, more then whole Nations. As God, so the man after Gods own heart,
he thought, and knew so highly of a King, that he taxes it as one of the
greatest favors upon Earth, to be allied to a King: 1 Samuel 18.23. Is it a
light thing to be Son in Law to a King? Yea, that cursed wretch Jesabell, who
though she was full of blood and iniquity, yet says Jeh^ (then acting by Gods
Spirit) in 2 Kings 9.34. Bury her, for she is a Kings Daughter.

So that indeed, if we should weigh Kings in the balance of the Sanctuary, it
will be found that Kings will weigh much more than ordinary men: Whereas then
it is said in my Text, Shall I Crucify your King? We shall betray the passion,
if we take not serious cognizance of the Subjects.

When Divines meditate, and speak of the Incarnation, we think it no mean
portion, of that great blessing that God has pleased to send, not some new
Creature, not an Angel, not a Seraphim, but his Son, that the Son became
flesh, that God blessed for ever, would become a Babe, this it even astonished
apprehension.

Now as it is not possible we should conceive as we ought, of the Incarnation,
unless we consider who was Incarnate, and who it was took flesh upon him: even
so of the Passion, Agony, and bitterness of his sufferings, we can never take
any tolerable estimate, or any valuable proportion, unless consideration be
first had of the nobleness, and who was the person that did suffer: God ( qui
omnia disponit suaviter) who sweetly disposes all things, though he had been
pleased his Son should be borne, yet had not his wisdom had use of this
relation, he would never have had him been born a King; or had he been born a
King, he would never have taken such order for the proclamation of it; he would
never have brought wise men to Jerusalem, to proclaim him King, neither would
he ever have so guided the pen of Pilate, as to write upon the Cross, Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews; but that his will was and is, we should look upon
him a King, as well as a Savior.

Amongst us men (even the most envious of us) we look upon the fault and
failings of Kings, as the most eminent wickedness. A wicked King, a Tyrant, a
Murderer, we think the most execrable of all sinners; as some thought of
those, on whom the Tower of Siloe fell, Luke 13.4. even so men generally hold
of wicked Princes, even that they are sinners above them, that dwell about them.

To apply this then to our present purpose, if it be so that the eminency of
Princes, and the excellency of Kings so dignifie and exalt their persons, that
the same crimes in them are much more abominable, then in meaner persons;
certainly then as their crimes, even so their sufferings must be proportionably
aggravated by their persons the sufferings of a King must needs be as far
beyond the sufferings of a Subject, as are the sins of a Prince beyond the sins
of a Peasant.

Whereas then the person in my Text is a suffering King, we must not look upon
his Sufferings as the sufferings of an ordinary person, for look by how much
his person, by so much does his Passion exceed the Sons of men; for if it be
(as doubtless it is) a great amplification of Gods goodness, that he who
suffered was a Son, it must yet be more that this Son was a King: for as an
extraordinary favor of God to his people Israel, as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
136.17, 18. He smote great Kings, and flew mighty Kings for their sakes.

When Kings suffer, Heaven has a great hand in it, 2 Samuel 18. The people of
God, the Children of Israel, would not let David their King go out to battle
with them, because say they in the 3. ver. Thou art worth ten thousands of us:
The Sufferings of the King must have at least this valuation, for as God knows
how many thousands suffer in a King, even so we may as soon count the Stars, as
say for how many millions of men this King did suffer.

A reason then why this Son of God, blessed for ever, was not only born of a
Virgin, but born a King, and dyed a King; A reason of this may very well be,
because he was to suffer the bitterest of all torments, because he was to
suffer sorrow beyond Parallel, because he was to suffer such sorrow, like to
which there was no sorrow; and this as man he could not have done, had he not
been put into the most high and most honorable condition. For whether we look
upon the tenderness of his constitution, the exquisiteness of his torture,
the anguish and duration of the whole; all this had it been in the relation of
a Subject, all this had it been in him, as a person of low condition, could not
have amounted to what he did; for neither tenderness nor torture, neither pain
nor shame, neither smart nor sorrow, is so considerable and so valuable in any,
as a Royal Subject.

Whereas then, the Sufferer in my Text, is not only a God, but a King also; not
only a Savior but a Sovereign, in what capacity soever we look upon him,
whether it be as God, or wether it be as Man: He was the only Supreme, and
Sovereign sufferer in the world.

Pass we then from the nobleness of the Sufferer, to take a glimpse of the
ignobleness of his Passion, employed in this word Crucify, they Crucified their
King, ver. 11. It was said of old, Multorum manibus grande levatur opus, many
hands make light work; but if we would piercingly and exactly look upon this
Passion, upon this murdering of a King, we shall find many hands indeed, but
for work the heaviest that ever was read of; and how could it well be other,
when the miseries of this poor King was to satisfy the malice of two parties?
Mat. 27.1. When the morning was come, all the chief Priests, and as the Greek
has it* the lay-Presbyters, or the Elders of the people, took counsel against
Jesus to put him to death; they who prepared, plotted, and purposed their Kings
destruction, they who raised an Army, and sent Swords and staves to apprehend
him, these were (you see) an Assembly of Priests and Elders, yet these were not
they that did the deed, these were not the Executioners, these Voted, but these
did not Crucify: Now in verse 27. of the same Chapter, you shall find the
Soldiers of the Governors took Jesus into the common Hall, and gathered unto
him the whole band of Soldiers, and they stripped him, they fooled him, verse
28. they crowned, they mocked him, they spit upon him, verse 29. and when they
had sported enough at his sorrows, then in the 35. verse of the Chapter, They
Crucified him; they (not the Presbyters or Elders) but the Soldiers brought
him to the block, they Crucified him. Not barely and simply put him to death,
but they put him ad mortem erucis, to the death of the Cross; and indeed this
had not been Envies Masterpiece, had it not been so, had they not clothed him
with shame* as well as macerated him with pain; had they not put him as well to
an ignominious, as an irksome death, Envy would have seemed too dull, and too
cool a persecutor.

And therefore to express the zeal and activity of their cruelty, it is not
said here, they slew, but they Crucified him, that is, they inflicted on him
the extremity of shame, sorrow, death. To a person of Honor, and especially to
the fountain of Honor, to a King, shame and dishonor, it is bitterer then
death: so that indeed it is hard to say, whether the disposition to, and manner
of his death, was not more affliction to the King, then death it self: for if
we look upon these three particulars (though we must pass over a thousand
bitternesses:)

1. What was done before they brought him to the Court of Justice?

2. What was done there?

3. What after Sentence? we shall find there was nothing done, but what speaks
Tyranny and Malice.

For first, to take off the appearance of their Envy, and to make Malice seem
zeal unto the public: behold the King must be brought as a Prisoner to the
Bar, and as a Malefactor before the Court of Justice: but if we observe the
Trial, we shall find nothing but envy and Malice in it.

For in a place I now cited, Mat. 27.7.

I showed unto you how the Priests and Elders took counsel against Jesus to
put him to death, before ever they brought him to the Court of Justice, before
ever any Process drawn, or witnesses found out, the Priests and Elders had
resolved upon the question, they sat in Council, and had agreed, the King
must die, the President must and should give the Sentence of death upon him: So
that indeed the bringing him before a Judge, the bringing the King before
Annas, Caiaphas, Herod and Pilate, this his appearance at four several Courts,
it was only to put a fair Face upon an ugly Sentence, it only was, by the
mockery of justice to cloak the cruelty of malice; for before ever he came
thither, the Council had determined, Jesus their King must die.

Secondly, see the carriage of the business when it came there, and we shall
find that he was not tried by any course of Law, or by any legal principles:
for if we look upon him as before Caiaphas, before the chief Priests and the
Elders, Mat. 26.59. we shall find that all his Judges were parties, for the
Scripture expressly says, the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Council
sought false witness against Jesus, all the Council, all that sat his
Judges, or that did rise up in Judgment against him, they conspired and plotted
how to put their King to death; or look we upon him as he stood before Pilate,
before the President, and we shall find it was the Multitude, it was the
Tumult, it was Voices, not Law, that carried the cause against him. When Pilate
saw that he could not prevail any thing, but that rather a Tumult was made,
Mat. 27.24. then he released Barabbas, and delivered Jesus to be Crucified;
Tumult and Votes, not Law or Justice, brought the King unto his Cross.

Indeed in the 25. ver. of the said 27. Chapter of St. Matthew it is written,
Then answered all the people, his blood be on us, and our children; the chief
Priests and Elders, the prime and close managers of this design, they interest
and entitle the people to it, as if this had been an Act of the whole people,
as if it had been the peoples desire to have their King cut off, all the people
said, his blood be upon us, and upon our Children. Whereas indeed if we look
close into the story, we shall find, that had the people been let alone, they
would have been as they were some five days before, all for the King, they
would have prosecuted their former engagement, and have brought their King to
his City with safety and honor; they were more inclinable, as it is in Mat.
21. to cry Hosanna, then Crucify, and had rather have strowed their garments
in his way, then have imbrewed his in blood: Mat. 27.20. The chief Priests and
Elders persuaded the multitude, the Leaders and Commanders they overruled the
people; yea if it were as hard to get into Pilates, as it was into Caiapha^
Court, there might then be more, or at least but few present at his trial* but
such who were the Creatures and followers of the chief Priests and Elders; for
you shall find in the 18. of Saint John and the 17. verse, That the door was
shut, and Saint Peter got not in, but upon the interest of St. John; and no
wonder if they spoke as they were taught, Crucify him, Crucify him: yea, St.
Peter in Acts* 3.17. imputes it to the ignorance of the people, which Pilate
flatly lays to the fury of Rulers* and indeed, no People, nor Rulers, but were
extremely ignorant of what they did, when they did this, the foulest of
attempts, Crucify their King.

Thirdly* as you have seen what they did before they came unto the Court, and
how things were carried there, even so if we look upon what was done after
Sentence, we shall find nothing but Cruelty, nothing but a studiyd mixture of
Infamy and Sorrows.

And this will appear from these two things, 1. The place. 2. The Instrument of
his death.


First, the place, Jerusalem, the Royal City, the City of David; and must it
not needs be an aggravation of shame, and sorrow for the Son of David, for
the King of Sion, there to lay his head upon the block, there to wear a Crown
of Thorns, and there judicially to be put to death, where he, and he only
should have sat upon the Throne? Indeed it was not done before his Palace, it
was not done before his own doors, but it was done in Occidentali part, it was
done in the West part of the City, it was there done where it might bring most
disgust and distaste upon him. Man's Calvariae, id est decollatorum, Mount
Calvary, that is, according to Jerome, the place of common Execution, the place
where Malefactors were beheaded; now there where that same day a couple of
thieves were to be put to death, there, and in the midst of them (as if he had
been like to one of them) as a Tyrant, a Traitor, a Murderer, and a public
enemy, they Crucified their King, and they put to death even the Lord of glory:
So that indeed, not only the place, but the very instrument of his death, that
he should be nailed to the Cross, be numbered among transgressors, and dye a
Malefactor, this is to a King, to a righteous innocent King, a thing bitterer
then death.

Secondly, And in a word then to conclude this point, when the Jews were so
Rebellious as to conspire and attempt the Killing of their King, they added
this wickedness above all, they killed him after the most ignominious way,
after the most irksome and tedious invention, that those times had.

They were not so merciful as to lay an Axe unto his throat, or a Sword unto
his Heart, but in the places most remote, in the Hands and Feet, where they
might multiply anguish, and not hasten death; where they might wound, but not
kill; where they might afflict, but not dispatch; there they tormented, there
they tortured, there they studied to grieve and vex his righteous Soul: So that
of all the sad spectacles under Heaven, of all the cruelties that ever the
Beasts of the people presented to the world, there is none like to oppressed
Majesty: never is Ambition, Envy, Malice, or what brutish affection soever so
predominant, never is Rage and Fury so highly, and so full fed as when it
drinks the blood Royal; So that the saddest object that was ever yet recorded,
it was this in my Text* the Betraying, the Buying, the Arraigning, the
Deriding, and the Crucifying of their King.

Pilate abhorred and yet gave way unto it, the Jews denied and abju^^d it* yet
did it; they were ashamed to own* yet not afraid to act the villainy, Shall I
Crucify your King? says Pilate, and do you think we would? say the Jews. We
have no King but Caesar. A plain evidence that it was Fear, Passion, Envy,
which against all Conscience, Law, Right or Reason, thus barberously used a
King: So that all now remaining, is to see what use we should make of it, and
that I shall dispatch under these three heads.

1. It should teach us to be patient. 2. It should teach us to be charitable.
3. It should teach us to be penitent.
First, it should teach us to be patient, looking in all our crosses and
troubles on a Crucified King. Well known is that Motto, Bona agere, and mala
pati Regium est, To do good, and suffer evil, it is a Royal, and Kingly part;
and indeed never did any King so act this part, as the King in my Text; for if
we look upon his concessions, and acts of grace, we shall find that they were
beyond all that were ever granted.

And on the otherside, if we look upon the injuries and indignities he
suffered, if we look upon the provocations, and vexations, the Insolence and
Malice, Jealousies and Fears did heap upon him, we shall find him a Patient
beyond President, so that indeed it is hard to say, whether this King did more
good, or suffered more evil for us; such good he did, that except the
integrety of his soul, he Sacrificed all the rest.

Such evil he endured, he lost but all which man could deprive him of; such
good he did, that preserving what might make him a Savior, he gave up even
all, as he was a Sovereign; such evil he endured, that those very wretches,
for whom he suffered, triumphed in his miseries, and (though his Subjects)
gloried to insult upon him. So that indeed there cannot be an exacter piece of
patience then this harrowed and Crucified King: 1 Pet. 2.2. Christ suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.

Our King not only suffered for satisfaction, but also for imitation; so that
indeed we are not only to look upon him as a Savior, but also as a sufferer;
not only who suffered for us, but also as one who made himself an example to
teach us to suffer* and indeed in what can we suffer, in which we have not him
for an example? Honor, Freedom, Estate, Friends, Life, these are the darlings
that we dote upon; and in which of these can we so deeply suffer in, as our
King did? In Honor we cannot, for his is the Throne, and ours but the
Footstool; he the Fountain, and we but the wast of his fullness. And yet in
point of Honor never was such a sufferer as he was, and indeed they could
never have made him such a sufferer, had they not first wounded, and divested
him of his Honor: we shall see in Number. 16. that grand and first conspiracy of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, it began with aspersions, and calumniating
authority, verse. 3. Ye take too much upon you, they endeavored to make Moses
and Aaron appear Tyrants, and usurpers upon the people: even so when the Jews
had a design and a desire to Crucify their King, the first thing they
endeavor is, to make him odious, and to lay (they care not how false, so
prevalent) Treasons, misdemeanors, or any things hateful to his charge, John
2.17. of whom it is there written, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, even
him they accuse and traduce unto the people, as one who would destroy the
Temple. He of whom it was written, By me Kings Reign, he who gave it in
express charge, Matthew. 22.21. To give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
yet even he, Luke 22.2. stands there indicted for forbidding tribute to be paid
to Caesar, and for being no friend to Caesar. He who indeed was ipsa veritas,
Truth it self, him they charge as an Impostor, or a Deceiver; He in whose mouth
there was found no guile, he who was as a Lamb with out spot, even him as a
Malefactor and a Villain, they deliver up. He who was the only one to save, him
they traduce, and charge for the perverter of the people. Now I beseech you,
which of us should not with al^ patience hear, and bear the calumny of the
people? which of us should no arm against accusations, slanders* and evil
Tongues, when you see the King of Glory, the King of Righteousness, the King
of Peace, he had his honor laid in the dust, and had those things, which he
never thought* much less did, laid to his charge. Are we accused for Popish
perverters of Religion, and as a Roman party? It is no more then our King was,
who was charged to destroy that Temple, of whose least profanation he was
extremely zealous. Are we defamed, reviled, persecuted, and undone, for what we
never either thought or did* It Is but our Kings cafe. Should we be mocked as
fools, spit upon as Jews* whipped as rogues, boxt as boys, and all this
injuriously too? Yet in all things we have a Royal President, a King, and the
best of Kings suffering all this. So that in point of honor, never was a
greater violation then what he suffered; first the Funeral of his Honor, and
then the Obsequies of himself.

Again, as Dishonor, even so Restraint, it is a pressing grievance, especially
when the estate that should sweeten, and the Friends that should comfort, are
taken also; and yet if it please God to put us to it, it is no more then his
own Son, no more then his own Anointed, no more then the King endured. In the
18* of John, ver. 12. The Band, the Captain, and Officers of the Jews, took
Jesus, and bound him; the Soldiers not only took, but bound the King; not only
so, but so disquieted him, that as if they had a desire to have distracted him,
they suffered not his eyes to sleep, nor the Temples of his head to take any
rest: Yea, not only so, but they crowned him with thorns, and so amazed him
with cruelty, that had not he been more King of his Passions, then of his
Subjects, miseries and sorrows would have prevented the Court of Justice.

Nor do they only take his Freedom, but his Revenue also, dividin^ his
garments, as it is in the 23. verse* and casting lots for his coat. As for his
allowance, we can read of nothing but gall, and vinegar; they fed hi^ with
nothing but reproach, scorn, an^ the bread of affliction; yea, where^ ordinary
and common prisoners have the comfort of their friends, of the twelve, till
after Sentence we find no^ so much as one, (not so much as (...) Chaplain with
him.) So that inde^ as a great aggravation of his misery and as a considerable
augmentatio^ of his sorrows, the Prophet in hi^ person says, Isa. 63.3. I
have trod (...) winepresse alone, and of the people the^ was none with me: none
who would carry comfort were suffered to have a^cesse, or address unto him. So
that indeed, there was never such a captivity, never such a restraint, as this
poor King had.

And therefore, should any of (...) come to that sad condition, as to lo^^
Freedom, Estate, and which is bitterer, the consolation of our Friends; let us
still remember the Son of God, ^he Son of David, the King of glory ^ndured all
this.

And yet there is a greater evidence ^f his patience, then all this; and that
is, in this last act, in his so patient ^ubmitting to an unjust Sentence, in
^he meek resignation of his sacred Majesty to the stool of wickedness: ^ohn
18.6. He no sooner said to the ^arty that came to look him, I ^m he, ^ut for
all their Swords and Staves, ^hey went backwards and fell to the ^round: a
plain evidence that he ^ad power within to have blasted their enterprise; but
when he saw it was Gods will that those Savages should be his Instruments, when
he ^new his hour was come, then see his patience, he drinks the cup, carries
^is own Cross; and when he came to Calvary, when he came to that West where
the Sun of righteousness was ^o set, he laid his head upon the block,
^^retching his arms at length, and so (...) a Sheep to the slaughter, yields
without murmuring to be made a Sa^rifice: So that if this example will ^ot, I
know not what can move us to ^e patient.

Mat. 10.24. The Disciple is not above his Master, the Servant above his Lord.
If then the King be bound in chains, why should the Nobles murmur at linkes of
Iron? If the King, the Royal Heir, be cast ou^ of his Inheritance, out of
Kingdome^ Why should Subjects repine and fre^ at meaner losses? If the King
were left comfortless, and trod the Wine Press alone, what sorrow can befall
us which is not of meaner consequence? In a word if the Heaven^ have joys and
recompense enough for a suffering King, if to go from a corruptible to an
incorruptible Crown, be an advantageous change* there can then be neither
Pleasure* nor Honor, nor any profit in thi^ World so desirable, but it may an^
ought to be patiently lost, for God glory, and the preservation of a goo^
conscience. For therefore also might our Savior die a King, to teach u^ that
no person is too great to suffe^ for Gods sake; no Glory, no Reve^nues, no
Treasure, no not the Crow^ it self but is inferior to a Conscience: St. Paul,
Heb. 12. after he ha^ ^pent a long series of examples as the most prevalent of
all Presidents, heat ^ast brings in the sufferings of the King; exhorting in
verse. 2. To look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the
j^y that was set before him, endured the Cross despising the ^^ame.

And indeed it was to no end after ^im to bring any, for he was the su^reamest
of all sufferers; so that what ^olomon* Eccles. 2.12. says of the Action, ^he
same may I say of the Passion of a King, what can the man suffer, that ^uffers
after the King?

Behold then a Suffering King, ^uffering in the strength of his years, (...)
umbilico terrae, So says Beda of Calva^y.
in the midst of the World, in the midst of his King^omes.

Behold John and Mary, and what ^riends he had helpless spectators, ^ehold in
Luke 23.48. All the people that came together to that sight, be^olding the
things which were done, ^^ote their breasts: and yet behold or all that, some
of his Subjects such ^nsolent revolters, that they exalt and triumph over their
King, living, dying, dead; living, as you have heard, they accused him for a
Malefactor, and what not? dying they upbraided him, and mocked, saying, Mat.
27.42. If thou be a King, show thy self: dead, they insulted, saying, ver. 63.
Impostor ille, We remember that that deceiver said while he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise.

Come then in these sad times what cross may come, be it the loss of credit,
freedom, goods, friends, life, we have a pattern, and we are bound to look
upon it; for, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.3. Consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners; consider what the King suffered, and be thou patient.

The second use, as the consideration of a Crucified King, should move us to be
patient, the Disciple not being above his Master; even so, if we survey the
Patient, we shall find an example as full of Charity as of Patience, Luke
23.34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Love and Charity, St. James calls them, (...), James 2.8. The Kingly, the
Royal Law; and indeed the King in my Text, as an employment truly regal,
fulfilled it to a title, and for proof I shall need appeal no further, then to
these his last words, Father forgive them; them, who? those even under whose
Tyranny I now suffer, those that have been the causes, and contrivers of my
death, those who have flead my skin, those who have furrowed my back, those who
with Thorns have crowned my head, those who with their nails, wounds and
Crosses, have brought me to this present extremity, even them, forgive them, O
my Father. Nor only does he pray but plead for their forgiveness, for he not
only says, Father forgive them, but therefore forgive them, because they know
not what they do.

Should we look into our own souls or almost into any but a Royal breast, we
shall find another account, another temper; for we do not use to extenuate,
but to aggravate our injuries, we do not use to excuse but to accuse our
adversaries; what was done casually, we are apt to say was done purposely, and
what was done ignorantly, we are apt to say was done wilfully: Whereas if you
look upon the carriage and charity of the King, you shall find him so far from
heightning, that he lesseneth all his injuries, forgive them, for they know not
what they do; what Pilate attributed to Envy, the King extenuates and imputes
to ignorance, forgive them, for they know not.

And indeed Subjects do not know what it is to take away a King, Virg. Georg.
lib. 4.
-- Rege incolumi men's omnibus una est, Amisso ruper^ fidem: Look what the Poet
says of the King of Bees, the same is as true of the King of men, in his
safety lies theirs; for though the Crown be to him that wears it a wreath of
cares, yet to the Subject it is vinculum pacis, his bond of peace: the Hive, so
long as the King of Bees reigns, it abounds with Honey, abides in safety,
every, even the poorest Be enjoyes its Cell; no plundering Droans, no
sequestring Hornets, no dissension while he is in power, but ( amisso) take him
away, then it just happens to the poor Bees, as it did to the Subjects of this
despised King: Mat. 26.31. Smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be
scattered; Crucify the King, and farewell the Kingdom; so that very well might
the Sovereign say, they did not know what they did, when they thus barbarously
murdered and slew their King, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do.

And have not we here a lesson well worth the learning? Shall God and the King
be charitable, and shall not we? Shall they forgive, and we persecute? Shall
they be Merciful, and we Tyrants one to another? It was worthy a King, and a
King worthy our remembrance, who said, I thank God, I never found but my pity
was above my anger.

Had not the King in my Text been a King, whose wrath was much below his pity,
of all men we had been most miserable. If so then we would have that in us,
which we commended in others, that in us which we glorify in our King, we must
then not only magnify, but imitate our King; we must judge charitably, forgive
heartily our very enemies.

Our late Kings charity persuaded him, that it was not his person but his
errors, which his Subjects Rebelled against; it was not their malice, but their
scruples that put them upon it; just like the King in my Text, rather to
weakness then wilfulness, rather to infirmity then to obstinacy, rather to
ignorance then envy, he imputes the high miscarriages against him, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do.

I shall conclude this point with that Heroic, Plu. Mor. p. 422.
and remarkable death of Phocion in Plutarchs Moralls, who when his Citizens
had brought him to his last draught, a little before he took off his Hemlocks,
they asked him if he had any thing else to say? whereupon addressing his speech
unto his Son, he thus said, I charge thee, and beseech thee, not to carry any
Rancor and Malice in thy heart to the Athenians for my death; he charged him as
a King, and besought him as a Father, to bury all injuries in the grave with
him: His last Memento, his last remembrance to his Son, was, remember thou
revenge not.

Now if Magnanimity in a Heathen did this, what should charity in a Christian,
especially being animated with such Royal Presidents as we are? Though our
blessed King in my Text, suffered such indignities, even the foulest that
malice could impose on Majesty, though they spit upon him, Whipped him, and upon
his very Cross derided him, yet in the bitterness of that pain, behold his
charity, Father forgive them.

And so I pass to the last use of this point, and that is, that it should make
us penitent; for it will appear, that it was not his, but our sins; not his,
but our Enormous crimes that Crucified the King: 1 Samuel 12.25. the Prophet tells
the people thus, If ye shall do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both you and
your King; not only ye, but your King, so that you see the wickedness of a
people may be the cause of a Kings destruction: If you do wickedly, not only
you, but your King also shall come to ruin, ye and your King shall perish.

And indeed, which of us that is a Christian, does not know that the King in my
Text, was not only slain by, but even for his Subjects: Isa. 53.3. He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, yea in verse.
7. He was cut off from the Land of the living, but still it was for the
iniquity of his people, for i^ straight follows, for the transgression of my
people was he stricken; yea, not only of this King in my Text, but also of that
good young King Josia: in the vulgar Latin it is thus written, Lam. 4.20.
Cap^us est in peccatis nostris, The Anointed of the Lord is taken in our sins,
for the sins of the people God took away their King. So that the loss of King,
and a good King, may very well call for penitence.

That sad book of the Lamentations, it is conceived to be principally penned
for the slaughter of their good King Josiah, for it is said, 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
Behold they are written in the Lamentations, the Lamentations made for their
good King they are upon Record, for indeed his loss was, as it appears in the
next Chapter, the forerunner of the loss of all.

The King in my Text (our blessed Lord and Savior) when he had his Cross upon
his back, he was more troubled with the foresight of the misery of his people,
then with his own death; and therefore says, in Luke 23.28. Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves; weep not for me, says
the King, for I am passing unto glory; where I go, no disturbance can be, no
distu^bance in the World, but to you the daughters and Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, to you my death is the ^arbinger of many deaths. For in the 29.
verse. Behold the days are coming, in the which barrenness shall be held a
blessing; in which you will hold it easier to lie under the weightiest
mountain, then under the burden of my blood. You will rue the time, that ever
you Crucified your King: And therefore, Weep not for me, but for your selves.
And indeed, good Kings are sure Survivors must feel their loss: good Kings are
sure they pass to peace, but seldom or never leave peace behind them. And
therefore the taking away of a King, a good King, calls for penitence, and
especially the taking away of this King.

In the fourth verse of our present Chapter, Behold says Pilate, I bring him
forth unto you, that you may know I find no fault in him; a faultlesse King
cannot be put to death without a fault: would you know then whose fault it was?
It was Pilates fault, it was the Jews fault, it was the Gentiles fault, yea,
which is more, it was thy fault, and my fault, it was the fault even of us, who
live at this day, our sins as well as his Subjects voted him to death.

It was our Pride that brought him into derision, our Covetousness made him
poor, our Pomp that stripped him, our Wrath that wounded him; It was our
Drunkenness that made him thirst, our Lust that procured his thorns, our Riot
that drew his blood: so that indeed it concerns not only the Jews, but even us
also to be penitent; it concerns not only his immediate persecutors, but even
us also to be humbled, and be cast down for the death of our King; for not his
Enormous crimes, but the Rebellion of his Subjects brought him to his end: Act.
3.19. when Saint Peter had laid before the Jews the murder of their King, he
exhorts them in these words, Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out; no way to be delivered from the blood of their King,
but by penitence: they must repent that ever they voted, repent that ever they
apprehended, repent that ever they Arraigned, Condemned, and Crucified their
King.

Pilate in all em^nent languages proclaimed their guilt, Hebrew, Greek and
Latin spoke their shame; but not a Declaration in all the languages under
heaven, not all the oratory in the world, no not any thing in the world but
what St. Peter specifieth, nothing but acknowledgement, nothing but repentance
can purge this guilt; Repent therefore and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out.

The way to change our guilt into an Interest, the way to avoid the curse, and
procure the blessing of this blood, it is to be truly penitent, to be heartily
sorrowful, to be grieved and pricked at the very heart, that we have done
that, for the which Royal and Divine Majesty did so deeply suffer. Nor only
must we repent, says St. Peter, but convert also; that is, we must set the
King upon his throne, we must, as Saint Paul renders it, 2 Cor. 10.4. Pull down
all strong holds, cast down every imagination, and bring every thought to the
obedience of our King. For he who was despised, rejected of men, even he was
the beloved, the Anointed of the Lord; he who was insolently* triumphed over,
and trampled upon by his Subjects, yet even he was more then Conqueror; yea
he, who was cut off from the Land of the living, even he yet lives, and lives
the King of glory.

So that indeed, unless we be converted, unless we suffer him to reign over
us, unless we kiss, reverence, and obey the Son, we perish from the right
way, we cannot avoid the guilt of his blood.

In a word, to conclude all with that in Romans 8.17. If so be that we suffer
with him, we shall also be glorified with him; if the King could not but by
sufferings enter into his glory, why should we dream or reckon upon a smoother
way? If he through Thorns and shame, through anguish, sorrow, and shameful
death; if he through blood, even his own blood, was forced to march unto his
throne; how can we hope to sit on thrones, unless we will trample on thorns?
No Cross, no Crown. It is enough for the Servant to be as his Lord, enough for
Christians (since their King before was not) even after death to be glorious.

And indeed, did we as he so look upon the joy that is set before us, as to
spurn at the splendid vanities of this World, had we an Eye piercing into the
Heavens, we would then, as did he, endure the Cross, and despise the shame; we
would not then to go to God much fear or care what man can do unto us. Let us
then in all our sorrows, all our sufferings, in all the changes and chances of
these sad Times, remember we are the professed Servants of a Crucified King; of
a King, who as to the immaturity, injustice, shame, scorn and cruelty of his
death, suffered more then we can fear, and all this to take away the sting of
our sufferings, to teach us looking upon him not to fear to suffer; to teach us
that his sufferings are the sanctification of ours; to teach us not to value
our blood in his cause, who was pleased to shed his upon the Cross for us. To
that King then, who bore our shame, let us asscribe al honor; to that King
that bare our sorrows, let us give all praise; to that King who gave his life
for us, let us give up our lives; so shall we, who believe him Crucified,
behold him glorified, and out of his fullness receive such a glory, as shall
never be taken from us. Which he vouchsafe, who was Crucified for us, Jesus
Christ the righteous. To whom be all honor, and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

THE GRAND CONSPIRACY OF Jews against their King. A Demonstration of the
highest insolences proceed from men of the lowest and most base Extractions.
THE Husbandmen Kill the Son. Vine-dressers Kill the Heir. Peasants Kill the
Lords Anointed.


Virg. Aen. 12. v. 236. Nos patria amissa Dominis parere superbis
Cogimur --
Herc. Oet. ad fin. Act. 2. O quod superbae non habent unquam Domus,
Fidele semper Regibus nomen --
LONDON, Printed by E. C. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1654.

Herc. Oet. ad fin. Act. 2. (...) --
Homer. Iliad. 7. de foeminis Capt. (...).


I. SIns of Ignorance, sins of Knowledge, some wittingly and some unwillingly,
put the Heir to death. II. Persons eminent either for Honor, or Holiness,
they are the most liable to Envy, Spleen, Hate and Malice. The Heir in whom
Honor and Holiness met in a most eminent degree, him above all others, did
the Husbandmen put to the most Ignominy, and most affliction: Lam. 1.12. III.
Since Covetous and Ambitious persons fear no difficulties, the Conscientious
and Religious should much less do it. IV. All Conditions are comprehended
under Coloni, to teach that all have somewhat so to Husband, as they will
answer it to God himself. V. Combined wickedness and united Malice produces
strange villainies, what great great things then might united Devotions, and an
associated piety bring about? VI. Deliberation and reasoning within our selves,
and among our selves, more requisite in Religion, and what concerns God, then
in Rebellion and murdering of the Heir. VII. Sin must be nipt in the bud, for
incredible even to sinners themselves are the mischiefs, to which a prevailing
wickedness may bring, witness Hazael, David, the Husbandmen in my Text.
SERMON. IV. Preached, 1649.
LUKE. 20.14. This is the Heir, come let us kill him, that the inheritance may
be ours.


IN this Parable you have the Character of as good a Lord, and of as
ungrateful a people as ever lived; a Lord, who for the good of his Vineyard,
and for the welfare of his people, did all that could be done: And a people,
who for the Ruin, Dishonor, and Disadvantage of this good Lord, most
unthankfully did no less, then even all they could do.

The good endeavors of the Lord, you may read in these words, Isa. 5.3, 4.
O Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and
my Vineyard; Sermon. 4.
what could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done to it? The
good Lord, though indeed our God and our King, He puts himself upon his people,
he would have the Vineyard, to say whether he had not done his part! And
indeed, for a thriving Vineyard, or for an happy people, what had he not
provided? What had not he condescended to?

A good Soil, Heaven watered not a better: A good fence, for no Nation better
Laws: A strong Tower; no Church better Ordinances. And, (to keep a right
understanding between him and his) Messenger after Messenger, Prophet after
Prophet, yea he sent his own Son to compose all differences.

But see the Rebellious ingratitude of an ungodly Nation; That Lord, who
crowned their Earth with fatness, him they crown with thorns: That Fence,
which for their security this good Lord planted, they pull up; That Tower,
which this good Lord fortified, they dismantle: Those Messengers which this
good Lord sent, them they Murder; yea, to himself, who gave them Wine, they
give Gall; and even him who kept every one of them peaceably under his own
Vine, even him they Maliciously and Treacherously cast out of his own Vineyard;
for so it is in the very next verse, They cast him out of the Vineyard, yea
they said -- This is the Heir, come let us kill him, etc.

In which words these generals are considerable; 1. A Confession. This is the
Heir. 2. A Combination. Come, let us kill him. 3. An Ambitious instigation.
That the inheritance may be ours.


In the confession these particulars.

1. Who this Heir was? Christus Domini, -- The Lords Anointed.

2. What he was Heir to? A Kingdom at least -- Rex Judeorum.

In the Combination.

1. The quality and condition of the Combiners, Agricolae. Coloni.
Tenants. Husbandmen Farmers.


2. The manner of their Combining -- They associated -- Come.

3. Their Consultation -- They reasoned among themselves.

4. Their conclusion. Let us kill him.

In the Ambitious Instigation.

1. An acknowledgement of the Heirs just Title -- No Feoffee in Trust, no
Elective owner but an Inheritance.

2. A Resolution to make themselves Successors to what he was Heir -- That the
Inheritance may be Ours.

First, We are (...) to begin with the Confession, This is the Heir.

Whether we look into the Acts, or into the Epistles of Saint Paul, we shall
find there was in this great business, in the making away of this Heir, and
in the making away for his Inheritance, two sorts of people; one whose
Original design it was, and others who merely through Credulity and Ignorance
were engaged in it.

1 Cor. 2.8. Had they known it, they would not have Crucified the Lord of
glory: And I wot (now Brethren) through ignorance ye did it, Act. 3.17.
as did also your Rulers.

Whether we look upon the Princes and Lords of Israel, or whether we look upon
the Vulgar and Commons of the Land, some of both the Apostle doubts not to
say, through ignorance they did it, some of either knew not that that was the
Heir.

But as some knew not, even so my Text positively affirms of other some, they
knew it well enough; for they could directly say, -- Hic est Haeres, this is
the Heir; This is the person that is most considerable, this is he that must be
removed, this is he that must be caught. Our plots are vain, the Dominion and
Inheritance cannot be ours, unless this, this the Heir be taken away.

Ignorance, and that there are sins of Knowledge; sins of Infirmity, and
sins of Obstinacy; some wittingly, and some unwillingly killed the Heir. Some
resolved to do it, though they knew it; some others indeed did it, but they
knew not what they did.

Now it would seriously be considered, whether the sins that we do commit, yea
and have committed even against the Heir, Gods Anointed, be sins of Ignorance,
or sins of Obstinacy? Whether we sinned against this Heir, as not knowing of
him to be our Sovereign, or because we knew to do our duty, might be a crossing
of our Lusts, and an undoing to us.

Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, these both knew and were well enough
informed, that this was the Heir, they knew he was the King of Israel: But such
was the fear and awe of the Jews upon them, that they durst not appear for
him. They durst not confess and say, this is the Heir, Luke 23.51
for though Joseph consented not to his death, yet we never find that in his
life he durst show himself clearly on his party. Indeed Nicodemus once gave him
a visit, but it was in the night, as if it had been a work of darkness to
adore the light, or an act of Rebellion to do homage to his King. The Rulers,
Lords, and Council of State, what by his Declarations published by his
Prophets, Treaties with him, and Answers from him, they were so far convinced,
that even at their very Councell-Table, they were forced to say -- If we let
him alone, all men will believe on him; Joh. 11.47.
yea so great and clear was the manifestation of his worth, and wisdom, that so
far were the people undeceived, that even they cried out, Mar. 7.37.
Been omnia fecit; he has done all things well. So that though ignorance in
some might abate more then in some others, yet so clearly were most convinced
this was the Heir, that the guilt of wilful Murder it came heavily even upon
the whole Nation.

It would then by us be seriously and timeously considered, whether those sins
will be allowed as sins of Ignorance, which we act against Knowledge? or those
sins of Infirmity which we act merely to save a penny, or to satsfie a Lust?

This is the Heir. As the ungrateful Husbandmen could not but confess, this
whom we intend so much mischief to, and dishonor against, is the Heir. Even
so, which of us is it that cannot say, this is the will of God, thus God will
have it; and yet for all that, as the Husbandmen against the Heir, even so we
Rebel and engage even against Gods will.

This is the Heir, and this Heir he was Christus Domini, the Lords Anointed,
for this is that Heir of whom it is written, Heb. 1.2. In these last days he
has spoken by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things. This is
that Son and Heir, who is said to be the Lord, the Christ, the Anointed of
God; Act. 4.26, 27.
And indeed his being thus, his being Gods Anointed, his being such an Heir as
had no superior but his Father, no equal upon earth; His being such an Heir,
as was next and immediate under God, such an Heir as was not simply the
Landlord, but the King of the Vineyard, The Covenanting and Combining and
making an head against such an Heir: This, this is the Treason, the Villainy,
and the abomination in the Text. So that the point for instruction may be this,

Honor or for holiness, they are (of all other) the most liable to Envy,
Spleen, Hate and Malice. Vncti Domini, The Lords Anointed, Priests, and
Princes, they are of all conditions most hated, and (to their power) most
abused and scorned by Vulgar people.

Psalm. 98.1. Dominus regnavit, iraseantur populi, The Lord has reigned (and as
St. Augustine infers) the people are vexed, and angry at it. They would not that
God himself should be a King; for the most part, the people are of their
seditious temper, Numb. 16.3.
who cried out, All the Congregation is Holy, all as fit to rule as Moses and
Aaron.

Homines nulli magis repugnant, quam illi contra quem sentiunt imperium tenere.
Vid. Keck. in Politic. page 173.
Xenophon long since (though he excepteth Cyrus) told the World, men are so
averse to none, as to him they find to hold the Reins, and to bear rule over
them. And Plutarch in a Tract of his, Omni populo inest aliquod Malignum, and
querulum in imperantes -- People are generally Malignant and querulous against
their Governors; yea, says Seneca -- quamvis id agat princeps, ut ne quis
merito te oderit, erunt tamen semper qui te oderint. Though thou being a
Prince, do nothing whereby any one should deservedly hate thee, yet for all
that there will be always some that will hate thee. And though our English
Translation does not speak it out -- Tremelius as a Text of Gods own word thus
translates it, -- Non esse finem ulli populo de ullo qui praesit ipsis, The
people are never content with their Governor: And then in his Comment adds,
Eccles. 4.12.
-- Populus, ne quidem in Sapiente principe, sive Rege, acquiescit, The people
will not be content, no not with a wise King. And indeed we have had evidence
enough, yea, too much of this truth; For though the Heir in my Text was Gods
own Son, of the same Essence, Wisdom and goodness with the Father, yet
content he could not give you, such discontent the Abjects, and his Subjects
took at him, that they feared not to say, This is the Heir, this is he that
stands between us and a Kingdom, come let us combine, and kill him. So averse
to Honor and Authority, are an undisciplined Multitude, that though God send
them a King from Heaven, send down his own Son to be their King, they will
not Reverence, nay they will not suffer him so much as to live among them. This
is the Heir, come let us kill him --

Secondly, as I have showed who this Heir was, Christus Domini, the Lords
Anointed, we must now consider what he was Heir of. And for that, to any one
who please to peruse his writings, there will appear evidence enough; for
whether we consider his Birthright, or his Inauguration; whether we consider
what he was born to, or what he was invested with, we shall find he had a
Princely, yea, a Royal Inheritance.

His Birthright, that we have in these words, Mat. 2.2.
Where is he that is borne King of the Jews? He was borne a King, but indeed it
was but a petty Kingdom he was born to. The Land of Jury, and the Kingdom of
the Jews, it was but a small Dominion. But if we consider his Inauguration,
and the Additionalls to his Birth right, we shall then find him an Heir of
great Consequence; For though where his Birthright is spoken of, he is only
styled King of the Jews, yet if we look upon his Investiture, and Gods
Designation, we shall find it was not only the Land of Judea, but even the
whole World was his inheritance. And therefore it is written, Heb. 1.2.
The Son (who though born only King of the Jews) yet Haeredem constituit, He
has appointed, and made him Heir of all things. And, Ask of me and I will
give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, Psalm. 2.8.
and the utmost parts of the Earth for thy possession. So that as the Poets
fondly entitled a Goddess of theirs to three Dominions, Diana upon Earth, Luna
in Heaven, and Proserpina in Hell; even so really and truly this Heir had just
title to Three mighty Kingdoms; To Heaven, and the Inhabitants thereof, by
Creation; To Earth, and people thereof, by purchase; To Hell, and the vassals
thereof, by Conquest; for it is written, Jesus knew that the Father had given
all things into his hands. John 13.3.
And yet against a King of three Kingdoms, behold a Conspiracy, This is the
Heir, come let us kill him. Whence the point of Instruction may be this,



Behold in my Text a Prince of Power, a Solomon, yea a greater than Solomon;
and yea behold the Covetous and the Ambitious; They neither fear his Power,
nor Reverence his Wisdom; neither Regard his Majesty, nor fear his
Judgments; But on they go, yea on they so industriously did go, that
notwithstanding he was Gods Anointed; notwithstanding their King,
notwithstanding so True, and so Right an Heir, they kill and cast him out of
his own Inheritance.

Shall now Rebellion be thus active? and shall Religion be dull and sluggish?
Can Covetousness and Ambition so heat and heighten the Spirits, that men
attain to base ends, will venture through a Sea of Blood! yea, to unthrone a
King! Certainly then, to attain the Kingdom of Heaven, to be a co-heire with
the Heir in my Text, and to gain a glorious and Righteous Inheritance; This
should move the Conscientious, and the Religious to Master all Difficulties.
For, if the Husbandman spared nothing they could do, to take away the Glory,
and to take away the Inheritance from him, whom they knew and confessed to be
the undoubted Heir; What should not we, who are listed under his name, what
should not we who glory to be called Christians? what should not we do to
restore the Heir unto his own, and to recount unto Christ all glory possible?
I am even ashamed to say it, and yet most true it is, thousands and ten
thousands take more pains, and are at more cost to descend to Hell, than the
most of Christians are to ascend, and get to Heaven. So that they who injure,
wrong, and abuse the Heir, they who killed and cut off the Lords Anointed,
they did and do it a great deal more heartily, than do we who profess to
Honor, Worship, Glorify, and be loyal Servants to him.

Romans 8* 29* Whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to
the Image of his Son -- To the glorious and Beatificall Image of the Son, to
this we all would and desire to be conformable: But to the Passionate Image, to
the suffering condition of him, to be cast out of our own Vineyards for him, as
he has been for us, this we have not Christian patience enough to hear of.
Phil. 3.10.
And yet this (witness St. Paul) even the Fellowship of his sufferings, a
Conformity to his death, as well as to his glory, is to be expected by us.

God forbid, God forbid, we should have such Difficulties between us and
Heaven, as necessarily are between Husbandmen and a Kingdom: And yet, as it
follows, the Husbandmen did so combine, and so associate, they mastered all
their Obstacles. And therefore if we would have a Kingdom, and that a Heavenly
one, we must so resolve, as to Master all lets, which the better to encourage
us in, we shall pass from the Confession to the Combination, to see whether
this their Industrious mischief will not shame us into an Holy Industry. For
that Husbandmen, Men of Earth, Terrae filii, that such as these should be able
to undermine such an Heir; This must needs enforce an unwearied Industry.
Pass we then to a survey of it, in these words, Venite, Occidamus, Come let us
kill him. And here I premised these four particulars,

1. The quality and condition of the Combiners, Coloni, Husbandmen.

2. The manner of their Combining, -- They associated. Venite, Come.

3. Their consultation. They reasoned among themselves.

4. Their Conclusion. Let us kill him.

First, of the quality and condition of the Combiners, and that you have in the
beginning of this verse, -- When the Husbandmen saw him.

By Husbandmen we must here understand even people of all Conditions, and
indeed people of All Conditions are accessory to the Murder of this Heir.
First, that by Husbandmen we are to understand not only Coloni, but as the
Italian, Colonelli, not only the base, but the Honorable, not only Clowns but
Colonels, not only the people, but also the Priests, this is apparent, for it
is written, Verse. 19.
-- The chief Priests and the Scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him
-- And that (as it follows) for this very reason, because they perceived He
had spoken this Parable against them -- They perceived that they were in the
account of these Husbandmen.

Secondly, not only chief Priests and Scribes, Lords and great ones, but also
vulgar and mean ones, the very s^umme of the people were also concerned in it.
And therefore you shall read, Verse. 9.
-- He began to speak this Parable, ad plebem; He spoke it to the people, to
the Vulgar, to the Meaner sort. And indeed he very well knew it was their
madness, that was to complete this mischief, and their many hands that were to
divide this Inheritance.

Coloni, Husbandmen. That is, every one of us has somewhat so to Husband, as
we will answer the Husbandry of it, to God himself.

Bern. super Cant. sermon. 63.
Viro sapienti vita sua est vinea. Every wise man's life and Conversation, is a
Vineyard, whereof the Heir in my Text is and ought to be the Lord; So that
indeed unless we bring forth fruit to him, unless we yield to him the due
Harvest of Tribute, Honor, and Obedience, unless our lives be such as speak
his glory, we can scarce avoid the very guilt in my Text, which is the casting
him out of his own. For, though the Heir in my Text, and the Lord of our
Vineyard, is now taken away and in the Heavens, yet he may be, and daily is,
cast out of his Vineyard; For if we obey not whom he has appointed to succeed
him; if we obey not his Laws, and so order our lives (which are his Vineyards)
as he has given in command, what do we but cast him out of his Vineyard? If
our obstinate wills, like those Rebellious Citizens, cry -- No^umus hunc
Regnare, we will not that he rule over us, but we will be Laws unto our selves,
are we not then resolved to be the Lords, Luke 19.14.
and no more the Husbandmen?

Again, that all conditions are couched under this homely Appellative, Coloni,
Husbandmen; This should teach us, that the proudest, and the highest of us are
but in a subordinate condition; we are not Pares, we are not Peers, we are not
Equals, we are not Coordinate with the Heir of the Vineyard; for we are
Coloni, the Husbandmen, but the Heir he is Dominus Vineae, He is the Lord of
the Vineyard.

Lastly, Whereas the Lord when he spoke this parable directed his speech,
(...), to the Plebeians, to Commons, to the Vulgar; a reason of this may be,
because they are commonly sensible of no^ injury but their own, at least of
none above their own. Like that rich Churl Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.5.
they are ready to say, who is David? Though David Gods Anointed, was a
Protection, and a Wall of Defense unto him, Verse. 16.
yet when David was in distress, so little was this Clown affected with the
Sufferings of a King, that you shall find he prefers his Sheep shearers before
a Sovereign; Verse. 11.
he would not spare of what he had provided for them, to give part unto a King.
And just so it was with the Hinds, and Husbandmen in my Text; Of the Heir, and
of his sufferings; of the Lord, and of his losings; of the Son and of his
losses, the Husbandmen, the Farmers, the Occupiers and Tenants to the Vineyard
they had no regard. Lam. 1.12.
Yea, as if the very Demand of Rent it self had been a grievance, when the
Heir came in Person to demand his Due, they presently combine and say, come,
come, this is the Heir, come, Now, this is the Time; Now we have the Heir in
our power, now or never is the time to make us a Free People. And this is the
second considerable in the Combination, They associated, Venite, Come.

And indeed without an association it could never have been done.

For so just an Heir, one who could do nothing to forfeit his Inheritance; so
great an Heir, one who had no Judge upon the Earth above him; so strong an
Heir, as had the power of Kingdoms in his hand; so wise an Heir, that they
Trembled to Treat with him; Luke 2.47.
being (as it is) astonished at his understanding, and Answers, -- Such an
Heir could not be robbed of his Birthright, nor deprived of his Inheritance,
but it must be done with violence, and that violence could never had hands
enough, without an Association.

Lessius de Jure and Just. cap. de Magia. 45.
Of the Devil himself it is observable, though he be the Prince of Darkness,
and has in himself, a very powerful Malice, yet, even he, unless united,
cannot do nigh so much mischief, as in Conjunction. And therefore when he has
any notable Villainy to bring about, when he would effect and do such a
Masterpiece, as this in my Text, to disinherit an Heir Royal, or subvert
Kingdoms, he then does, just as the Husbandmen in my Text did, He associates;
He says to the discontented and disaffected Sons of Men, Venite, come; Come
and join but your Hands to my Head, and we will have our wills, such and such
shall not reign over us. And indeed to such an Associate and combined Malice,
where the Devil is the Counselor, and Man the Actor, God permits a great
deal more mischief to be done, than he will to a single Malice. Yea, without
peradventure, to an Association of Villainies (though all men) God permits much
more than he will to any single Tyrant.

Act. 4.25. The Apostles speaking of the very Association in my Text, speaking
of the people says -- The people imagine vain things. But when there was to
the people an Association of great ones -- when as it follows -- The Kings of
the Earth stood up, Verse 26.
and the Rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his
Christ: Then, as follows in my Text, the Father gave such way unto this
Malice, that they took, yea they killed the Heir.

The use we are to make of this point is, to take heed that we do not engage,
and associate with the Devil, that we do not strengthen his malice; for he was
not more busy to bring the Heir to his death, then he is at this hour to
suppress his Kingdom; he would not by any means that Christ should rule, or
live within us; and yet sure we are, if we associate not, Mat. 16.18.
the Gates of Hell cannot prevail.

Again, Is it so, that an Association and a Combination in wickedness
strengthens the hands, and impowereth malice? what then would an Association in
godliness and good things do? Indeed Religion it self, if we attend the Word,
it is only an Holy Combination, a Religation or Obligation to the things of
God. Should we then but change that wicked Venite in my Text to that holy
Venite of the Church; Did we but so come, and so worship, and so fall down
before the Lord our Maker, as it behooves penitents, and a chastised people;
such an Association it would move even God himself to be our Helper; such an
Association it would preserve every man in his Vineyard, and restore the right
Heir unto his own. And so we shall pass from the Summons, to the Meeting,
from the Association to the Consultation.

They reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the Heir, Come.

They reasoned among themselves. Their first meeting it is (as the French)
Parlar, to parle, to consult, to lay the business; And indeed as there were
many Hands to do it, so there was a need of many heads to plot it. And yet if
you observe it, they were selected Heads, Inter seipsos in secreto consilio.
Capit. super. Mat. 21.
(...), They reasoned (not before others of another judgment, or before such
as were true of heart, but) (...). They reasoned among themselves, when there
was none with them, but such as themselves* when they were as in a close
Committee, then they reasoned upon this matter, then they took it into debate
what should be done with the Heir.

The point then put to the question, and that which they were to reason of, we
may find by the connection of the precedent to this present verse; for, says
the Father there, Verse. 13.
I will send my beloved Son: and then follows to what end, and that is to
see whether they will reverence him, or no? Now upon this they meet, upon this
they consult, and in the negative they conclude, and vote they will not
reverence. So that their debate and reasonings, was probably upon these two
heads:

1. Upon what they had done.

2. Upon what they were resolved to do: And both these we have within the
confines of our parable.

First, an Epitome of what they had done, we have in the 10.11. and 12. verses;
and that briefly is, A contempt of their Lord, in the abuse of his Messengers.
Mat. 21.35.
And indeed the first step to pull down the Master it is to trample upon the
Minister; They beat, they put to shame, yea they put to Death such as were sent
unto them. Not only did they deny their Duties, to pay their Tribute, and to
send fruit; but as if those whom the Father sent, had been so many Evil
Counselors, they take, and hang them up as Male-factors. Yea, and that they
then do, when indeed all their messages were messages of peace.

Now having been not only rebellious in denying their Obedience, but also
ungrateful, even unto blood, in the slaughter of the Prophets* The Husbandmen
might very well fall a Reasoning what was now to be done, whether Reverence, or
Resistance, whether a Submission to the Heir; with an Act of pardon and
Oblivion? Or a proceeding to higher mischieves? which was to Revile, Rebel,
and to cut off even the Heir himself* It is Resolved upon the question they
will own no guilt; They will confes^ no fault, what they have done, whether in
Usurping the Vineyard, Denying their Dues, or Butchering the Messengers, they
will acknowledge nothing. Yea, as if the Heir had necessitated, and put them
upon all these villainies, they Resolve further, they will be Avenged upon the
Heir, and that is the second point they Reason, and consult about -- They
Reasoned among themselves, saying, this is the Heir, come -- let us take some
order with him, let us so deal with him, that the Inheritance may be ours; so
deal with him, that he may be countable to us, not we to him; In a word, they
Reasoned, saying -- This is the Heir, come let us kill him. So that the second
and maine part of their Reasoning was how to dispose, and order what was
requisite to this end; And indeed this required a great deal of Reasoning too.
For, if we look but upon verse. 5, 6. of this Chapter, we shall find they stood
in such Awe of the people, that they durst not pass a rash judgment, no not
upon the Baptism of John, much less upon the Heir in the Text. And therefore
they first reason among themselves how to take off the people, and how to make
him despicable in their esteem. And indeed, to sum up that long work in a
word, this they did by taking his Revenew and his Honor from him. For take
from the Heir his Vineyard, take even from Majesty it self what should
support it, Reverence and Revenew, and then the Heir will be looked upon more
like a Carpenters Son, than the Lord of a Vineyard; so that in denying to
reverence the Son, they raised a Scaffold for the ruin of him: And that is
the Consequence of their Treaty, after they had reasoned among themselves, they
conclude, -- Occidamus, Let us kill him.

Rebellion, no not upon Oppression, nor Murder, but they would first meet,
reasoning not only (...), but also (...); reasoning not only within
themselves, but also among themseves? Certainly then, either Acts of Religion
must be of less consequence than Acts of Rebellion, and the things of this
World more to be stood upon, then the things of God, or else Consideration,
Deliberation, and Reasoning both within our selves, and among our selves, is as
requisite in the ways of godliness, as in the ways of wickedness. Shall the
Husbandmen reason and deliberate how to do service to the Devil, and shall we
think what comes first, or what lies uppermost, good enough to give unto our
God? Certainly if an Assembly, Counsel, and Reasoning were found requisite for
the disinheriting, and dishonouring of the Heir, we cannot be too careful,
too curious, or too considerate when we are about those performances, which
must honor, and advance the Heir. The Husbandmen consulted, and Reasoned
among themselves how they might kill the Heir: much more then concerns it us
to Reason, Consult and study how to get this Heir to live and reign with us.
And so I pass to the last Act of this Horrid Combination -- and that is the
fatal and unparalled president and Conclusion -- Occidamus, Let us kill him.

When Cataline was deeply engaged in his Conspiracy, He concluded, His ills
were such, he could not be safe; but Audendo majora, by attempting greater. The
Husbandmen in my Text, they had committed so many outrages, and so many
enormous villainies against the Lord of the Vineyard, Hom. 69. oper* imperf.
that, as Saint Chrysostom observes, -- quum veniam peccatorum petiisse
debuissent, When they should have come humbly to have craved pardon for them --
just as seditious Cataline, scelere certant, they contend in wickedness, and
priora ultimis superare contendunt, strive by the last to exceed the former. As
Cain thought of his sins, even so thought these Husbandmen of their
exorbitances, such they were as the Heir could never forgive, and therefore no
safety but by his death, -- Occidamus, even in our own Defense we must kill
him. And indeed from the killing of Prophets, to the killing of Kings, is an
easy progress. For as God Almighty (for their protection) thus coupled them
-- Touch not mine Anointed, Psalm. 105.15.
and do my Prophets no harm, even so (in order to their Destruction) the
Devil thus: First he teaches to despise the Prophets, and to harm them; and
then, to Men th^^ flesht, flesht in the scorn and blood of Prophets, such they
shall make nothing to touch, yea to cut off Gods Anointed.

Luke 13.34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent unto thee. -- When Jerusalem was grown so daring as
to kill her Prophets, then when the Lord of the Prophets, when Gods Anointed,
when the Heir himself came amongst them, they fear not to lay hands upon
him, and to say, -- Hic est Haeres, This is the Heir, -- Occidamus, Let us
kill him.

Crocodile in the Egg, and that we permit not sin to grow and encroach upon
us: for incredible (yea, even to our selves) are these mischiefs which a
prevailing wickedness may bring us to.

2 Kings 8. When the Prophet Elisha told Hazael, that the time would come in
which he should fire the strong holds of Israel, slay the young men with the
sword, dash their children. and rippe up the women with child, Hazael was so
amazed with this, that he cries out, -- Is thy Servant a Dog that he should
do this? He thought it was not possible he should become such a Savage. And
yet when, like the Husbandmen in my Text, when he had destroyed the Heir, and
killed the King, when he had made himself Supreme, there was not a supreamer
Tyrant in the World. In this Nation of ours, how many Hazaels are there? How
many are there who have acted that, which seven or eight years ago, they
would have abhorred to have thought upon? Little did David when he first beheld
Bathsheba, think upon the murdering of Vriah, and yet when Adultery had
engaged him, then (as if necessity had no Law) Vriah must die to save his
Credit. Engaged sinners they know not what they do, they are just like to one
who would maintain a lie, and that cannot be done, but by multiplying of lies.

The Husbandmen in my Text, for as much as their proud souls would not
acknowledge and confess a guilt, there was no way in the World for them to
justify what they had acted, but to act it out; Their Swearing, Lying, Killing
and Stealing, could not be made good, but by Stoning, Killing, Undoing and
Murdering of all Gainsayers. As they dealt with the Prophets, so they were
forced to deal with the Son, this is the Heir, this is he who will Sentence us,
if we do not slay him, and therefore Occidamus, let us kill him.

Whosoever then would do his Duty, either toward God, or toward Man, he must
nip in the bud what ever he finds but putting forth against it. 2 Cor. 10.5.
The Apostle in behalf of the Heir in my Text, challenges length that every
thought be brought into Captivity; and indeed unless we there stifle it,
wickedness will soon grow to what we never thought it would.

Eccles. 10.10. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. Had the Husbandmen
observed this Rule, had the Husbandmen preserved their thoughts, had they had
the Son in Reverence there, Reverend thoughts would have been such a Religious
curb, they would never have proceeded to say, -- Occidamus, Let us kill him.
But when in stead of Reverence, Plutarch in Engl. p. 307.
Envy, Spite, Covetousness, Ambition, and the thirst after Kingdoms, had
filled their thoughts, when Husbandmen, like Agathocles, from making pots,
began to think of making Laws, and from the Forg^ began to think of a
Throne: No wonder then if they proceed to say This is the Heir, Venite,
Occidamus come let us kill him, that the Inheritance may be ours. And so we ar^
brought to the last considerable,

Their Ambitious Instigation, Th^^ the Inheritance may be ours.

And here are two points considerable,

1. An acknowledgment of the Heirs just Title -- No Feoffee i^ Trust, no
Elective owner, -- B^^ an Inheritance.

2. A Resolution to make themselves successors to what he w^^ Heir, -- That the
Inheritance may (...) ours.

First, here is an acknowledgement (...) the Heirs just Title, An Inheritance.

Inheritances they are looked upon as the best of Titles, as including the most
unquestionable of all properties. For he who is only a Feoffee in Trust, he
has only a relative Interest, and must be countable to those, for whom he is
entrusted: He who has only an Elective and Conditional property, of his
property the same may be said, that we proverbially say of Service, it is no
Heritage. But he who comes as Heir into a possession, he who holds what he has
as Inheritance; such an one we look upon as an absolute owner, as one who so
holds, that nothing but Treason or his own Exorbitances, can deprive him.

1 Kings 21. Poor Naboth, for as much as his Vineyard was his Inheritance, Ahab
(though a King) could neither Command, nor Exchange, nor buy it of him. Jezabel
her self was fain to lay blasphemy and Treason to his charge, yea, Ver. 10.
to take away his life, before the Vineyard that was an Inheritance could be
gotten from him.

Whereas then the Husbandmen in my Text, acknowledge the person whom they
killed to be an Heir, and his Vineyard to be an Inheritance. The point for our
Instruction may be this,

difficulties, so they stagger at no guilt. Those who are resolved to satisfy
such Lusts, they make no conscience of any ways, nor do they scruple at any
wickedness.

The Inheritance in my Text I have showed unto you, it was not less then a
Kingdom: Now in a Kingdom the two main things considerable, they are these,
Power and Profit; and both these the Husbandmen confessed were none of theirs:
both the Militia and the Reditus, both the Tower in the Vineyard, and the
Fruits of the Vineyard, they acknowledge to be the Heirs, yea, they acknowledge
it to be the Heirs Inheritance, to be undoubtedly his. And yet, so ambitious
are they of the power, and so avaritious and covetous of the profits, that
though his, and though his Inheritance, they thought it fit, and were resolved
they would have it from him. And when thus resolved, no Guilt, no Villainy, no
not Blood it self shall be scrupled at; Occidamus, let us kill him, that the
Inheritance may be ours.

The Poet could long since say, Juvenal. Satyr. 5. ver. 175.
-- Quae Reverentia legum,
Quis metus, aut pudor est unquam properantis avari?


The covetous, and such as are resolved to enrich themselves, they neither
reverence the Laws, fear God, nor have any shame or honesty in them. Just like
the Husbandmen in my Text, who though they knew the Heir, and knew his Title,
knew what was his, and how it was his, yet against all the Law of man, against
all the fear of God, yea, against all common shame and honesty, they are
resolved to cast him out of his Vineyard, to seize what they acknowledge his,
yea, his Inheritance, and to hold it as it were their own.

As Covetousness, even so Ambition, it drives thorough all enormities: For as
the Disciples, who that they might fit highest, and nighest unto the Heir in my
Text, resolved they would be baptized with any Baptism, Mat. 20.22
and drink of any Cup: Even so they, who are resolved to build their Neasts,
on high, they who are resolved to make themselves greater and higher then God
would have them; Oaths, Titles, Laws, Conscience, or what ever bars a good
Christian, they must all be held as Almanacks out of date, as Trifles, and not
to be stood upon by such as they are.

It is reported of Agrippa, the Mother of Nero, that she was so highly besotted
with the ambition of having a Son to be an Emperor, that she poisoned her
Husband, and cared not herself for to be killed; so he might reign. If now
ambition to make way for another, can make the wife to make away her Husband,
be content her self for to be murdered; no wonder then if the Husbandmen in my
Text, that they themselves might reign, and they themselves might have the
Inheritance; no wonder if they, that the Vineyard might be theirs, reasoning
among themselves, concluded, saying, This is the Heir, let us kill him, that
the Inheritance may be ours. Ambitious and Covetous wretches they know not
godliness, but gain, nor care whose that should be, which by craft, or power,
they can make their own. Be it an Inheritance, and be it known to be so, yea,
be it, his Inheritance, who is immediate Heir to the Almighty: be it the
Inheritance of Gods anointed, even the Son of God, yet even his Inheritance (be
the guilt what it may be) they are resolved to make their own; for though they
confess and acknowledge he had the Right and Title of Inheritance to his
Vineyard, yet they say, Come let us kill him, that the Inheritance may be ours.

The use we ought to make of this point is, That we be content (as servants
ought to be) to serve God, in what place, or office he please, and not proudly
to thrust our selves into such places and dignities as he never ordained for
us, or us for.

To be Husbandmen and Laborers in Gods Vineyard, Mat. 21.
to this we have a Call, to this we are hired; But of Laborers to make our
selves Lords, and from Husbandmen to make our selves Heirs: This is that we
cannot do, but by running (as the Husbandmen in my Text did) even through
hellish villainies.

Saty. 6.
Vos ego pupillos moneo, quibus amplior est Res,
Custodite Animas. --
Juvenal long since observed, when those who had the Wardship, and were only
Guardians to rich Heirs, had a desire (as the Husbandmen) to make the
Inheritance theirs: Then the next thought it was of Vipers, Mushromes, or some
dispatching poisons: They who cannot be content in the conditions in which God
has placed them; those who will ride as Princes, when it is Gods Will they
should walk as Servants; since they cannot reach their Ends, cannot feed their
Ambition, cannot satisfy their Avarice, but they must leave the ways of God,
and to gain what the Devil proffers, -- The Kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them, they must fall down and worship, that is, agree to do even
whatever he will have them.

1 Kings 21. When Jezabel without the usurpation of poor Naboths Vineyard could
find no convenience in a Kingdom, this pety covetousness it put her upon high
designs, for she issued out the Kings Writs, summons and calls, as to a Court
of Justice, the Elders and the Nobles, proclaims a day of Humiliation,
commands a Fast, Ver. 9.
calls Naboth as to a Trial, suborns Witnesses, overrules the Judges: And all
this only with the mockery of Religion, and Justice, to cloak the cruelty of
murder and oppression.

Now, if the thirst of such a petty thing as Naboths Vinyard, Ver. 2.
if the unjust desire but of a Garden plot, of a place only to sow Herbs in,
could move a King and Queen, Ahab and Jezabel, to wash their hands in the blood
of a Subject, what wickedness will they boggle at? What mischief will they
decline? Yea, what Abomination will they not act and dare, who strive to make
themselves Kings, and to share a Vineyard, which is rather a Kingdom of
Kingdoms, then a Garden-plot?

Venite, Occidamus, come (say the Husbandmen in my Text, in plain English) let
us Murder, make away, let us kill the Heir. For as he, who would have a Golden
Fleece, must not fear to pill, no, nor if need be, to kill the Lamb; so neither
must we the Heir, if we would have the Inheritance to be ours. And that is the
last considerable in the Text.

The Husbandmens Resolution to make themselves successors to what he was Heir,
in these words, -- That the Inheritance may be ours.

Forasmuch as the Inheritance in the Text is expressed by a Vineyard; Vineyard
in Scripture phrase denotes and deciphers a selected people, Ver. 9.
a people upon whom God looks, not only as men, but as men under such a
profession, so that Vineyard indeed signifies -- Ecclesia Dei, the Church of
God: For, though the whole world be the Heirs, yet only his chosen are his
Vineyard, only such as fear and serve him, they only are his Inheritance.

Whereas then, the Husbandmen in my Text say -- Let us kill the Heir, that the
Inheritance may be ours.

For the understanding hereof, we must consider of this Inheritance, or
Vineyard two manner of ways: 1. Spiritually. 2. Secularly.


Spiritually; the Inheritance of Christ being the salvation and redemption of
his Church; of this they could not rob him, that is such an Inheritance that
cannot be taken from him. And therefore, a little before they laid violent
hands upon him, the Heir gives thanks unto the Father, saving, -- Those that
thou have given me I have kept, Joh. 17.1^.
and none of them are lost but the Son of perdition: Though they had power to
take his Life, and shed his Blood, yet they could not deprive him of his Glory,
his spiritual Estate, and ghostly Inheritance, that they could not take from
him.

Indeed, secularly and temporally considered, his Kingdom in this world, his
earthly Vineyard, and his temporal Inheritance, that which he least esteemed;
this was that which they were most inflamed upon, therefore they reasoned,
associated, and resolved to kill the Heir, that his secular Inheritance might
be theirs.

Homil. 40. in Mat. 21.
St. Chrysostom in his explication of this very Parable, makes this
Observation, -- Postquam introivit in Templum, -- After our Savior entered into
the Temple, and began to purge the House of his Father from Sacrilege and
Profanation, when the Heir endeavored to bring Religion to its purity, when he
began to cast out those things, in quibus Sacerdotes avari delectabantur, in
which the popular and covetous Clergy took delight, tunc praecipue cogitarunt
eum occidere. Then, says he, even from that time, then when they saw the
people were like to be undeceived, and, as the Father goes on, -- Non erit
populus iste possessio nostra, that they no longer were like to have power over
them; then did they gather an Assembly, reason, and conclude, they must either
kill the Heir, or lose the People; so that if you would know what the
Inheritance was, which the Husbandman killed the Heir for; in a word it was --
the Power and the Profits of the people; or, to continue the Metaphor in the
parable; they killed the Heir, that the Towers and the Fruits of the Vineyard
might be theirs.

the Heir, and those who are spiritually his, they mind nothing to an Heavenly
Inheritance. Occidamus, let us kill, and take possession, says the worldly, --
Non habemus hic, -- we have here no continuance, says the godly; let us Eat
and Drink, Raunt and be merry, for This is our Inheritance, (say the men of
this World) let us take off our Hearts, let us wean our Souls, and, since the
Heir is killed, let us look rather for Crosses then for Crowns, say those of
his party. In a word, that Religious resolution, Hanc animam concede mihi, tua
caetera sunto; Spare the Soul, and take the rest: This must be the care of all
good Christians. No matter what becomes of these Earthly Tabernacles, can we
but assure the Heavenly Inheritance to be ours; and indeed, nothing can be so
ours, nothing can be durable and as an Inheritance to us, but that only; for
though the Husbandmen killed the Heir, and therefore killed him, that they
might seize and share the Inheritance; yet when they had thus done, when they
had thrown him out of his Vineyard, when they had cut him off from the Land of
the living, yet even then they could not say, The Inheritance is ours. For
though they all agreed to divide the Heir, to divide the Inheritance proved a
sharper business.

Let us kill the Heir, that the Inheritance may be ours. Ours? whose? Ours say
the chief Priests, Ours say the Elders, Ours say the men of War, Ours say the
Elders, for we are (...), we are the chief of the people, Ruling Elders; We are
those who plotted and laid the business; Ours say the chief Priests, for we
brought on the people, we raised an Army, we bought the Heir. Ours say the men
of War, for we did the business, we sought, we caught, we killed the Heir,
and therefore the Inheritance shall be ours.

And indeed, could we pierce deeply into the design, there was not an hand
lift up against the Heir, but it was for some Inheritance; so that if in such a
crying abomination, as the murdering of the Heir, there be any thing
condemnable, it is that the Husbandmen without any Mask of Religion, or cloak
of Godliness; without any pretense of freeing themselves from Tyranny,
Arbitrary Government, or any manner of oppression; They Declare clearly, (what
more subtle Rebels would not) that the reason they prosecute, bought,
arraigned, and killed the Heir, it merely was for his Inheritance -- That the
Inheritance may be ours.

the good God knows we intend not.

Among us of the Ministry, how many are there who cry out, the Gospel, the
Gospel; they must Preach the Gospel; when indeed they make that chiefly their
Gospel which will gain them an Inheritance? How many are there who have thrust
into, and invaded other men's Vineyards, Preaching this, and Praying that,
(merely as the Husbandmen kill the Heir) that their brothers Inheritance may be
theirs! How many are there who plead at the Bar of Injustice, under pretense of
Law? How many are there who lay their hand upon the Sword, under Colors of
Holiness and Religion? How many are there Protest, Covenant, Engage, and
tenter their Conscience, under pretense of this, and under color of that?
Whereas indeed, would they, as did the Husbandmen, confess and speak ou^ --
All they do, say or swear, it only is, that the Inheritance may be ours.

Ours, not his. Monarchy as founded in Unity, is an enemy to division; Luke
12.13
Anarchy as founded in Confusion, is as averse to Unity; as then the Heir would
not meddle with the Dividing of an Inheritance, so neither would he have had
his own Divided.

But the Husbandmen, who had none, unless they could get his, they who thought
it ill, that one should have so much, and they so little, one a whole Vineyard,
and they not a Cluster; They like worldly wisemen cry out, Divide and impera,
Not his, but ours.

question of our Saviors concerning the Baptism of John, Ver. 4^
into this, -- Whether for One to have Rule over Many, or for Many to take the
Rule and Dominion from one, be from Heaven, or of Men? Now the Text, it is
positive, for One, and for one only; one Vineyard, one Heir, one Lord of all.
Indeed this Lord was a Steward; but as appears in that Chapter, not the
Peoples, but the Fathers. Mat. 21.8.
He had power to call the Laborers, but the Laborers had none to call him to
an account. So that not from Heaven, but from Men, not vox Dei, but vox Populi;
It was not the voice of God, but the voice of Men; The voice of low and poor
conditioned men, the voice of laboring and Husbandmen, who said, Not one, but
many, not his, but ours.

Our Inheritance. They who endure not an Inheritance in the Heir, when
themselves have got it, then they could be well content to say, Our
Inheritance: But see how differently unjust men, and the just God account, for
that which the Husbandmen call ours, and our Inheritance; that the just God
makes to them as Jonahs Gourd, Jon. 4.7.
a thing of no continuance. So that the Husbandmen, when they cast out the
Heir, they were as far mistaken, as if the Mariners in Jonahs story, had in
stead of the Prophet cast out the Pylot. For whom they cast out was not the
cause, but must have been the calmer of the Tempest. One whose biding in the
Ship, one whose want in the Vineyard, was the utter Ruin of it. And therefore
it follows, Ver. 16.
The Lord ( in stead of confirming their title) shall destroy the Husbandmen;
and in stead of giving them Inheritances, He shall take the Vineyard from them,
and give it to others.

Ours; if we would have a durable inheritance, we must have a care that we come
righteously by i^ and that we spend what we have to Gods glory; for being the
sin of the Husbandmen was the denying to the Heir the profits of his Vineyard;
God will undoubtedly take that Vineyard from us, which we shall deny him the
fruit of.

There is a story of a certain Tradesman of Constantinople, Part 4. of Causins
Holy Court.
who gave all the wealth he had gathered in his whole life, to wear the
Imperial Crown but for an Hour, and so in an Hour became of a conceited King,
a real Beggar. The Husbandmen in my Text, or all, who as they did, by
Usurpation and unjust ways seek Inheritances, they perchance may, as did that
Foolish Tradesman, aspire, get and wear a Crown. But as he, 'twill be but for
an Hour. For never were the Conveyances of any sound and firm Title writ in
blood.

1 King. 21.23.
Jezabel drew up the Conveyances of poor Naboths Vineyard in his own blood, but
it was canceled quickly, and washed out with hers. Athalia (like the Husbandmen
in my Text) with the blood of Heirs, 2 King. 11.
with blood Royal writ her cl^^me. But for as much as blood will not as Ink
dry up, after few years it was blotted out again; Yea, the Lord himself
conplaines of some, Who built up Zion with blood, Mich. 3.10
and Jerusalem with iniquity; some it seems would have had the reformation both
of Church and State, Zion and Jerusalem, writ in Blood, and drawn up with
deceitful Hands, Hands full of iniquity; But then it straight follows,
Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a Field, Ver. 12.
and Jerusalem shall become Heaps, etc.

And indeed (would time permit) it were not hard to show these Husbandmen, who
by the Red Sea of the Heirs blood, thought to bring themselves to Canaan, in
stead of Canaan brought upon themselves a Miserable Desolation.

The Priests and Presbytery, those who first conspired, and plotted against the
Heir, those who reckoned upon large Vineyards, and golden Inheritances; even
these by their own stratagem, were frustate in their hopes, and deprived of
their Inheritance. For as they by pretense of Just and Holy men, sought to
undermine the Heir, Ver. 20.
and to engrosse the richest Vineyards: Even so another Generation, under
pretense of more zeal, and under pretense of more purity, Those whom Josephus
calls the zealous, they enter upon their possessions, and they cast even them
out of their Vineyards; yea both the one and the other, when the Romans came,
were themselves served as they served the Heir, they were killed, and were cast
out of their Inheritance; yea, it was made capital for any of these
Husbandmen, so much as to look toward their Inheritance. So that of whatever
shall be got by blood, Usurpation and unjust ways, of that God will not suffer
us to have an Inheritance, nor permit any of us long to say, This is ours.

Ps. 37.18.
To conclude all, The Lord knows the days of the upright, and their
Inheritance shall be for ever. Whosoever desires to have a durable Inheritance,
whether it be here or hereafter; the way to it is Righteousness and
Uprightness: He who would hold as an Inheritance, and have the blessing of God
to descend upon him and his, he must be sure there be nothing in his Estate,
which belongs either to God, to Caesar, or to the Poor, who has no Helper, no
Achan^ Wedge, no Devoted Treasure, no Naboths Vineyard, no Poor man's Acre, no
not the least parcel of the Heirs inheritance. For (as you have heard) those
who so highly dared, as to possess his Vineyard, and to call what was the
Heirs their own; in stead of being Heirs, the Father has made them Vagabonds
to this day: so that what the Heir in his persecution said of himself, the
same may to this day be said of those rebellious Husbandmen, The Foxes have
Holes and the Birds of the air have Nests but in that Zion, which they sought
to build with blood, and in that Jerusalem which they thought to establish by
iniquity; those, their children who slew the Heir, they have not where to lay
their heads. And so, Lord, let it be to all those who have evil will to Zion,
so to them who delight in blood.

Indeed, the Inheritance of the Saints, and that which all good men look after,
it was purchased with blood, and with the blood of the Heir too: But, 'twas not
purchased for such who delight in blood, for such who glory in their shame, nor
for such who still continue murdering of the Heir.

If so then, when this transitory Inheritance shall fail, we would be received
into everlasting habitations: If we would be Joint Heirs with the Heir in my
Text, and share with him in his incorruptible Inheritance: Know we must,
Transit Haereditas cum onere, This Inheritance passes to none, but carries
peculiar burdens and conditions with it, such as are -- Penitence, Faith,
Obedience, Charity, Meekness, Humilitity, and whatsoever is agreeable to found
Doctrine: So that in a word, I shall close with that of St. Paul, Romans 3.1.
If we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him. The way to be
joint Heir with the Heir in my Text, is not (as the worldly wise) to comply
with all Interests: but it is so to set our souls upon Conscience, and
heavenly Inheritance, that we esteem no worldly heritage, nothing that we call
ours, not our goods, not our blood, in order and relation unto it. For indeed,
if we respect the comfort and duration of it; we can Inherit, that is
absolutely possess as ours, nothing at all till we come to that; All then
remaining is, that we betake our selves unto our prayers, that so our guilt of
that Blood may be exchanged into the Merit of it, and that we for his sake may
be made Coheirs of such an Inheritance, as never shall be taken from us. Hear
us, O Father, for this thy glorious Heirs sake, Jesus Christ. To whom with thee
and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Deo Haeredi sit omnis gloria.
THE END.

