AN ABSTRACT of some few of Those Barbarous, Cruel Massacres and Murders, of
the Protestants, and English in some parts of Ireland, committed since the 23
of October 1641.

COLLECTED Out of the Examinations taken upon Oath by persons of Trust, in the
beginning of the Rebellion, by virtue of several Commissions under the Great
Seal of Ireland.

Which particulars are singled out of a multitude of others of like nature.
With the persons that acted those Murders, and Massacres, with time, place,
and other circumstances, are contained in the said Examinations.

Sent over to the Parliament in a Letter from the Commissioners of Parliament
in Ireland, and the General and Field Officers there. And Read in the
Parliament the 19 day of May 1652.

Imprimatur,

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.





LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane
end. 1652.


AN Abstract of some few of those Barbarous cruel Massacres and Murders of
the Protestants, and English in some parts of IRELAND. Read in the Parliament
19 May 1652.
In the County of KILKENNY.
ABout the twentyeth day of December One thousand six hundred forty two, the
Protestants were stripped naked at Kilkenny, and whereas some of those stripped
people with ropes of straw covered some part of their nakedness, the Rebels
set the straw on fire, thereby burning and grievously scorching them: six
Soldiers and two boys having quarter given them, were nevertheless hanged at
Kilkenny.

A young Girl stripped about Easter one thousand six hundred forty two in the
City of Kilkenny by a Butcher: her belly ripped up that her intrails fell out;
where the Mayor (upon complaint of the mother) bad, away with her, and dispatch
her, whereupon the Mother received seventeen or eighteen wounds, and her other
child was also extremely wounded, and all forced out of the City by men, women
and boys throwing stones and dirt at them; So as the two children died in a
ditch. The Aldermen of Kilkenny petitioned their Council, That Philip Purcel
Esquire might be punished for relieving of Protestants.

A woman and two children in the City of Kilkenny was by the Inhabitants
hunted, baited, torn with Dogs, stabbed with skeenes, one of her childrens
guts being pulled out.

At Kilkenny seven English men hanged, and one Irishman because he was taken
in their company.

Twelve murdered at Graige one of them (being a woman great with child) had
her belly ripped up, the child falling out alive, and a child of a year and
half old hanged, another of them named Robert Pine (being twice hanged up) was
cast into his grave, where he sat up saying, Christ receive my soul, and so
was buried quick.

And old man hanged, afterward dragged up and down till his bowels fell out.

Christopher Morley, and two English-boyes of Castle Comer hanged; one other
English-boy (eight or nine years old) had his head cleft, and before he was
dead hanged on his fathers Tenter-hooks.

About threescore men, women and children murdered at the Graige, many of them
buried alive.

County of Caterlough.
RIchard Lake hanged at Leiglinbridge, sixteen more hanged near that place,
two more murdered near Caterlagh, two women hung up by the hair of their heads
al night, the next day (being found still alive) they were murdered.

At or near Leighlin bridge, three men with their Wives, and Children
murdered. A woman newly delivered of two children, the one of them had his
brains beaten out against the stons, and after thrown into the River Barrow.
One woman and her daughter murdered. About forty English murdered therabout.
Almost all the English about Gowran, and Wels hanged and murdered.

County of Kildare.
RAlph Heyward (having turned to Mass) was murdered, his wife and two
children hanged, the one at her neck, the other at her girdle, a Dog, and a Cat
hanged with them.

Robert Woods shot to death.

John Morley and his wife and five children, and one John Pliny (after they
were turned to Mass) murdered.

County of Dublin.
ABout 28. December. 1641. The wife of Joseph Smithson Minister, was carried from
Deane Grange near Dublin, to Stillorgan from thence to Powers court, and there
she, and her Servant hanged.

At Balcothery, William Rimmer (a Packet Poast) and Mr. Pardoe a Minister
murdered, Mr. Pardoe being after cast upon a Dunghill had his head eaten with
Swine.

A foul murder committed on Derrick Hubbert of Holme-Patrick, in the County
of Dublin, Esquire the second of December. anno Dom. 1641.

County of Mead.
Near Navan, the son of James Wignall murdered about the last of November,
1641.

Mis. Heiglin, her daughter, and two children murdered by two men hired
thereunto, for two barrels of Wheat.

Four more hanged, and murdered, at the Navan.

Kings County.
Mis. Jane Addis of Kilcoursie (after their going to Mass) murdered at her
house in Fopes-country, having a child not a quarter old, the mutherers putting
the dead mothers breast into the childs mouth, bad it suck English Bastard,
and so left it.

Arthur Scot murdered at Listoony having twenty wounds given him, Another
Englishman hanged at the same place.

Henry Bigland, and eleven more hanged and murdered about Knocknemeis.

A woman (aged 80 years) stripped naked in frost and snow by two daughters of
Rory Coghlan of Fercalward, before whose door she dyed.

John Lorcan murdered and chopped to pieces.

Twenty two Widows, and several others stripped naked, and covering themselves
in a house with straw the Rebels lighted straw, and strew amongst them to burn
them, and they had been burned, had they not been rescued by others, who turned
them out naked in frost and snow, so as many dyed; the children dying in their
mothers arms.

Queens County.
JOhn Nicholson and his Wife murdered by Florence Fitz Patrick and his
servants. Mis. Fitz Patrick blaming the Murderers because they brought not
Mis. Nicholsons fat or grease wherewith she might have made candles.

Tho. Keys Esquire a Justice of the Peace of the said County (66 years old) and
Tho. Dubleday both hanged near Burrowes Castle, and Dubleday shot as he was
hanging; both being first stripped naked, and gored, and pricked in several
parts of their bodies.

Amy Manphins Husband murdered, and she compelled to stand in his blood; and
she being stripped naked, was drawn by the hair through Thorns, and after
sent away.

An English Girl half hanged and buried quick.

Six English hanged up by Florence Fitz Patrick (after quarter promised) about
23. January, 1641.

Near Kilfeckell in the Queens County an Englishman with his Wife and four or
five children hanged by coumnand of Sir Morgan Cavenagh, and Mr. Robert
Harpole, all afterward cast into one hole, and buried quick.

County of Wicklow.
AT Knockrath-Park, Edward Snape, and two others hanged about 20 November. 1641.

John the son of William Leeson stripped, and hanged at Baligarny, about 25.
November. 1641:

A young child (a year and a quarter old) taken from the mothers back, thrown
down and trod upon that it dyed; the mother and three other children stripped
naked so as the said three children dyed.

County West Mead
IN Kilbeggan, a Boy, and a woman hanged; one of them having a sucking child
desired it might be buried with her, knowing it would suffer afterward, but it
was cast out and starved to death,

William Sibthorpe (Parish Clerk of Mullingar) hanged.

Edmond Dalton, and Mr. Mooreheads son murdered.

County of Galway.
MR. Adam Nowell and six more hanged, and murdered by the Lord of Clanmorris.

Hugh Langridge murdered near Loughreagh, having received 16 wounds, and his
son having nine wounds, and left for dead, yet recovered.

Mr. Corbet an old Minister, had his head cut off by two young Cow-heards near
Loughreagh.

The son of an Englishman murdered; a child so beaten that it died within
three days.

Threescore and five Protestants (some say eighty, some ninety) many of them
Ministers (and amongst them the Bishop of Killalagh) for the most part all
murdered at the Bridge of Shreele very few escaping.

County of Longford.
MAny-ornelly murdered in Longford, after quarter promised.

William Steel and four others hanged at a Windmill which is near unto
Rackleen.

The wife of Henry Mead hanged, the said Henry himself, being placed in a ring
amongst the Rebels each stabbing of him, as he was forced to flee from side,
to side; and so continued until his Shoulder, and Breast were cut in two, with
a Bill-hook.

George Foster with his Wife. and Child, and the Wife of John Bizell murdered
at Ballinecor. One other drowned, Some children there buried alive.

County of Roscomon
SIxteen English hanged at Ballileague.

Nine murdered at Ballinefad, whereof four were children, and one woman great
with child, through whose belly the Rebels thrust their Pikes as she was
hanging, because the child should not live.

William Steward had Collops cut off him being alive, fire-coals put into his
mouth, his belly ripped up, and his intrails wrapped about his neck, and wrists of
his arms.

County of Sleigo.
THirty eight Protestants put into the Jail of Sleigo, all, except two or
three murdered there the same night, by diverse breaking in upon them at
midnight.

A Friar, with some Soldiers, undertaking to conduct Mr. Tho Walker, a
Minister, his man, and two Gentlewomen from Roserk to Abbey Boil, the Friar
riding away, they fell into an ambush laid for them, where Mr. Walker being on
his knees at prayers they cleft his scull to the mouth, killed his man, and
stripped the women naked, one of the women being afterward murdered at
Ballemoat.

Thirty five men, women, and children murdered near Ballesekerry.

Four murdered in the streets of Sleigo, and Isabel Beard, great with child,
pursued by one of the Friars men into the River where he murdered her, the
very childs feet appearing through one of the wounds be gave her.

Mr. William Ollifant Clerk stripped, and half hanged, and after dragged with a
rope about his neck at a horses heels up and down, because he would not turn
Papist. Another Minister the same time murdered.

At Ardneglasse and Skreene about thirty Protestants, men, women and children
murdered.

Ten men, women, and children buried alive near Titemple, alias Temple-house.

County of May.
ABout seven and twenty persons, besides children drowned in the Bay or harbor
near Killalagh by the instigation of the Friars.

Thirty or forty English (formerly turned Papists) driven, and forced into the
Sea near Lillalagh and drowned.

A young boy killed by one that had been his Schoolmaster, a man wouuded, and
buried alive, a Minister murdered after he had gone to Mass, another hanged
near Ballehen.

At the Moine fifty nine Protestants stripped naked, and after barbarously
murdered.

William Gibs, and his wife (both very old) murdered at the Moine.

One hundred and twenty men, women and children stripped naked, and after
murdered at Bellick.

About the 20. of November 1641. George Buchanon having received many wounds,
was after buried alive.

About August 1643. the wife of John Gardener of the Barrony of Carragh, having
leave, and two Irishmen for visiting her children at Belleck, was by the said
Convoy on the way cruelly murdered.

County of Tipperary.
FIfteen men and women Protestants were murdered at the City of Cashel, and
near Cashel were three or four children murdered by a Convoy.

Twenty four English at the Silver-mines, after they had revolted to Mass,
murdered.

County of Leitrim.
MR. William Lifton and Mr. Thomas Fullerton Clerks kept two days without
meat or drink then murdered near Manor Hamilton.

An English child taken by the heels, and its brains dashed out against a
block of Timber.

County of Clare.
CHristopher Hepdich, and sixteen more English Protestants murdered at, or
near the Castle of Inchicrony.

County of Tirone.
RObert Bickerdick and his wife drowned in the Blacke-water, James Carlisle and
his wife also murdered.

Thomas Carlisle put to death, and so were about fourscore and seventeen more.

Mr. John Mother, and Mr. Blithe, both Clerks, murdered in, or near
Dungannon, although Mr. Blithe had Sir Phelim Oneals protection* and threescore
families of the Town of Dungannon murdered.

About three hundred murdered in the way to Colraine, by direction of Sir
Phelim Oneale and Turlogh his brother.

In and about Dungannon were murdered three hundred and sixteen, between
Charlemount and Dungannon above four hundred murdered.

Drowned at the River of Benbarke, and the Blackwater two hundred and six.

Thirteen murdered in one morning by Patricke, Mr. Crew of Dungannon and two
young Revels did murder one hundred and forty women and children, the wife of
Brian Kelly of Loughgal murdered five and forty with her own hands.

At a Mul-pond in the Parish of Killamon, were drowned in one day three hundred.

Eighteen Scottish Infants hanged on Clothiers Tenterhooks, and one young fat
Scotchman murdered, and candles made of his grease. Another Scotchmans belly
ripped up, the end of his small guts tied to a tree, then he drawn about till
his guts were pulled out, that they might try (said they) whether a Dogs or a
Scotchmans guts were longest.

County of Ardmagh.
PRotestants in multitudes forced over the Bridge of Portadowne, whereby at
several times there were drowned in the River Ban above one Thousand.

Great numbers of Protestants drowned at Corbridge and Kinnard.

Mr. Fullerton Clerk, Mr. Awberry, Mr. Gladwich, murdered in the way toward
Portadowne.

Many others murdered, five murdered soon after the beginning of the
Rebellion; one hundred and forty, or one hundred and sixty drowned at
Portadowne, fifty murdered at Blackwater Church, twenty drowned near the water
of Callon, and several others murdered.

Mr. William Blundel drawn by the neck in a rope up and down Blackwater to
confess money, and three weeks after, he, with his wife, and seven children
drowned; forty four at several times murdered. A wife compelled to hang her
own husband, with several other notorious murders.

At Scaruah bridge, an hundred (some say an hundred and twenty) drowned more,
eighty more, sixty more, fifty more, sixty -- twenty; seven men murdered.

Twelve murdered, whereof Mr. Robinson the Minister, and his wife and three
children were part.

Many Protestants put into a thatcht house, and there burnt alive.

The Lord Caulfield murdered.

Many burned in the Church of Blackwater. The wife of Arnold Tailor (great with
child) had her belly ripped up, then drowned.

Thomas Mason buried alive. Seventeen men, women, and children cast into a
Bog-pit, many more murdered.

One thousand five hundred in three Parishes murdered; twenty seven more
murdered. Mr. Cambel drowned.

Three hundred Protestants stripped naked, and put into the Church of Loghall,
whereof about an hundred murdered within the Church, amongst whom John Greg
was quartered alive, his quarters thrown into the face of Richard Greg his
father; the said Richard was after there murdered, having received seventeen
or eighteen wounds, after cut into quarters in his wives presence; such as were
not murdered, were turned out a begging amongst the Irish naked, and into the
cold; most of which were killed by Irish Cripples, their Truls, and children.

One hundred and fourscore drowned at twice, at the bridge of Callon. One
hundred (some say two hundred) more drowned in a Lough near Baltinakilmorrogh
within two miles of Loughal.

Mr. Gabriel Constable, and his mother (righty years old) murdered.

To the number of five hundred forty eight families murdered in the Parish of
Killaman.

Three men had their brains knocked out with a hatchet within the Church of
Benbarb; eight women drowned in a River under the same Church. Christopher
Glover murdered.

By special Command from Sir Philem Oneile, Master James Maxwel Lieutenant,
was dragged out of his bed, raving in the height of a burning Fever) driven
two nules, and murdered, his wife, great with child stripped stark naked and
drowned in the black water, the child half borne.

Mr. Starkey (above 100 years old) and his two daughters stripped stark
naked; the daughters enforced to support, and lead their father, (he not being
able to go of himself) and having gone three quarters of a mile, were all
three drowned in a Turff-pit.

County of Donegall.
William Mac Kenny, and his mother in law, and his Wife (great with child)
murdered, his said Wife having her belly ripped up, and the child cut out of
the womb.

Robert Akin clerk, and thirteen more murdered at Castledoe.

Threescore persons that came in boats from Killalagh murdered by the Mac
Swines, and the O Boiles.

County of Down.
FOurscore forced to go on the Ice, at Lough Kearne till they broke the Ice
and were drowned.

Diverse murdered at Castle Island and Down.

Mr. Tudge the Minister of the Newry, Leiut, Trevor, and his wife, and 24 more
(some account 50) murdered, and cut in pieces at the pass of Ballonery.

A Scotch-man, an Englishman, and a Welch-man, imprisoned in the Stocks at
Newcastle, where they lay without breeches upon raw hides, that their joints
rotted; insomuch, that when two of them were afterward hanged, one of their
feet fell off by the ancle.

County of Cavan.
MAny Protestants forced over the bridge of Belturbet and there drowned.

Adam Baily, and several others murdered at Kilkelly.

William Rocket drowned near Belturbet.

Several Scottish families destroyed, two of the Hovies, and Abraham Jones
murdered several murders committed at Butlers Bridge.

A destracted English man run through with a Pike. he laughing the while.

County of Monaghan.
MAny Protestants hanged at Carick Magrosse. Sixteen Protestants at once
hanged at Clowns. Several others there also hanged, and sixteen women and
children drowned in a Turf-pit.

Richard Blany Esquire hanged.

Seven murdered in the Fewes, Ensign Lloyd and others murdered and one buried
quick.

John Hughes, and 24 more murdered,

At Tully threescore murdered after quarter given. Eighteen murdered

Seventeene men, women, and children drowned at Ballerosse. Many murdered and
four drowned.

Cornet Clenton and his Grandchild drowned, and many others murdered.

About thirty murdered in Farney, two of them so aged they went upon staves,
and another had at least forty wounds.

One Mac Maghon, Capt. of Monaghan sported himself by thrusting a wooden
broach into the Fundament of an English man, or Scotch-man, then driving him
about the Room, with a joint stool, being much affected at the miserable
gestures of the poor party so tormented. The said Mac Maghan and his
Confederates at a Feast* after dinner had an English man bound before them, and
at each health every one gave him a wound, after which they cast him upon a
dunghill where languishing he dyed.

County of Fermanagh.
ARthur Campin, and sixteen more with him murdered. At another time 24
murdered. At another time two murdered.

One killed, and fourteen hanged.

Seven hanged at one time, and diverse others put to death.

Fourscore men, women, and children, burned and killed in Lisgoole.

At Moneagh Castle eight murdered. At Tullough Castle, fourscore murdered,
near Cordiller three hanged, One more hanged.

Fourteen Protestants hanged.

Forty Protestants in the Parish of New-Town murdered.

Eighteen murdered.

Thirty murdered in the Parish of Clankelly.

Twelve murdered in New Town.

William Ogden murdered.

Sixty, (another says a hundred) murdered at Tully, after quarter given, or
promised them.

Fifteen hanged at Lothers-towne. Two murdered at Kinnally.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Men. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.


