THE DEMON OF BURTON. OR A true Relation of Strange Witchcrafts or
Incantations lately practiced at Burton in the Parish of Weobley in
Herefordshire.

Certified in a LETTER from a Person of Credit in Hereford.

LONDON Printed for C. W. in the year. 1671.

(...) bout the fire as before, and a continual noise of Cat heard all night,
but never seen.

Afterward the Tenant having in a Room a heap of Malt and another of Vetches,
the two percels were found next morning exactly mingled together and put into a
new heap.

Another time she had baked a Batch of Bread, and laid the Loaves over night on
a Table, next morning the Loaves were all gone, and after search made, they
were found in another Room hid in Tubs and covered with linen Clothes, and
all this while the Tenant had the keys of the doors in her pocket, and found
the doors in the morning fast locked as she left them over night; So also her
Cheeses and meat were often carried out of one Room into another, whilst the
doors were fast locked, and sometimes covey'd into the Orchard.

Then the Tenant having set Cabbidg-plants in her Garden, in the night the
Plants were pulled up, and laid in several forms, as Crosses, Flower-de-luces,
and the like, she caused them to be set again, and the Ground finely raked
about, to the end they might see if any footsteps might be discovered in the
morning, when the Plants were found pulled up as before, and no track or
footstep to be found or perceived; The Plants were set a third time, and then
they continued unmoved.

She had in her Cheese chamber many Cheeses upon Shelves and a Bag of Hops in
the same Room, one night the Cheeses were all laid in the Floor in several
forms and the Hops all strewed about the Room, and the Chamber door found fast
locked in the morning.

Another night in the Buttery there were several dishes of cold Meat left upon
a hanging Shelf, in the morning the Tablecloath was found orderly laid on the
Floor, and the dishes set on it, and most of the Meat eaten, only a manners
bit lose in every Dish; yet there were silver Spoons which lay by the Dishes
and none of them diminished.

At another time she had left half a roasted Pig, which was designed for
breakfast next day, when the Pig was called for, there was not one bit of
either Skin or Flesh left, but the Bones of the Pig lay orderly in the Dish,
and not one of them unjoynted or misplaced.

Whilst these and many other such pleasant tricks were played in the Rooms that
were locked to make a discovery of any deceit, if possible, the entrance of
the doors were all strewn with sifted ashes, and no footstep or track of any
thing was found in the morning, when such pranks were played in the Room.

One night the Tenant having bought a quart of Vinegar in a Bottel, she set it
in her Dairy-house, where there was six Cows Milk, In the morning she found her
Bottle empty, and her Milk all turned and made into a perfect Posset, with the
Vinegar*

And the Cheeses were sometimes convey^d by night out of the Cheese-chamber,
and put into the Trines of Milk in the Dairy-house.

The Tenant had likewise diverse of her Cattle that dyed in a strange manner,
among others a Sow that leaped and danced in several unusual postures and at
last fell down dead.

The Hagg having thus for above a month together almost every night acted the
part of Hocus pocus Minor, lay quiet for some months, and then began to act
the Major and do greater mischiefs; and to this purpose, one night as the
Tenant and her Maid were going to bed, and passing by the Hall, which was
dressed with green boughs, tied on the Posts, after the Country fashion, they
were all of a flame, and no fire had been made in that Room of a fortnight
before, nor any Candle that night; but the fire was soon quenched by throwing
water on it, yet an outcry being made the neighbors came in and watched the
House all night.

Not long after a Lost of Hay, dry and well Inned, was set on fire in the day
time and was most of it burnt, with the house it lay in, and no way could be
found how it should come to pass, but by the same black hand.

And after some time a Mow of Pulse and Pease was likewise fired in the day
time and all the grayn either burnt or spoiled, and in the middle of the bottom
of the Mow were found dead burnt Coals, which in all the Spectators Judgments
could not be conveyed thither but by Witchcraft.

After these dreadful fires, which did endanger the whole Village had they not
been at length quenched by a numerous company of the Neighbors, who came in to
the Tenants assistance, the poor Tenant dirst stay no longer in the House, but
quitted it, with all her losses, when one John Jones a valiant Welchman of the
neighborhood would needs give a signal proof of his British Valor, and to
that purpose undertook to lie in the House, and to encounter the Hagg, to which
end he carried with him a large Baskethilted Sword, a Mastive Dog and a
Lanthorn and Candle, to burn by him; he had not long lain on the Bed with his
Dog and Sword ready drawn by him, but he heard great knocking at the Door, and
many Cats as he conceived came into his Chamber, broke the Windows, and made a
hideous noise, at which the Mastive howll'd and quaked, and crept close to his
Master, the Candle went out, and the Welchman fell into a cold sweat, left his
Sword unused and with much a do found the door, and ran half a Mile without
ever looking behind him; protesting next day he would not lie another night in
the House for a hundred pounds.

I have omitted one Passage worth relating, the Tenant upon a Friday night
about Midsomer had bought a dish of Strawberies, which she set up in a pewter
dish in her Buttrey for next day, when she looking for them, found both dish
and Strawberies gone, they searched for them all Saturday and found neither
dish nor Strawberies; on Monday morning, when the Tenant was rising from her
Bed, she found the dish on the Beds foot, but no Strawberies.

Now Sir there is as yet no discovery what Feind it is that has acted these
Vilanies, but it is believed time will do it.

Whilst these things were thus acted hundreds of people, both Ministers,
Gentlemen, and others, came to the House to see and hear the passages.

These Particulars, with many others omitted, I received from eye Witnesses of
unquestionable credit, and reputation, and you may no more doubt the truth of
them, than distrust the affection of

Sir. Your most humble Servant. I. A.
Hereford 1 March 1670.
FINIS.

