AN ABSTRACT of Several Examinations Taken upon OATH, in the Counties of
Monmouth and Hereford.

And Delivered in to the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS: Reported by Sir JOHN
TREVOR Chairman to the Committee for drawing Reasons to be given to the LORDS,
at a Conference to prevent the Growth and Increase of POPERY.

Together With the Account given to the HOUSE of COMMONS the 12th, of April,
1678. By JOHN ARNOLD, And JOHN SCVDAMORE, Esqs

Of the Encouragement given to POPERY, in the Counties of MONMOUTH and HEREFORD.

London, Printed for J. C. by John Gain, and to be Sold at his House in
Merchant-Tailers Rents, at the Lower End of Moor-Lane, 1680.

Mercurij 27 die Martij, 1678.
Resolved, etc.
THAT a Conference be desired with the Lords, concerning the Danger the Nation
is in by the Growth of Popery, and for providing Remedies to prevent the same.

An Address with Reasons thereunto, of the 21th of February, 1670, to prevent
the Growth of Popery was Read.

Resolved, etc.
That a Committee be appointed to consider of the said Address and Reasons, and
thereout, and upon the Debates of the House, to prepare Reasons to be offered
at the said Conference; and it is referred

To
Sir Thomas Meers, Coll. Burch, Sir Charl. Harbord, Sir John Knight, Lord
Cavendish, Sir Tho. Clerges, Sir Adam Brown, Sir Francis Rolls, Sergeant
Gregory, Sir Trevor Williams, Mr. Vane, Sir John Trevor. Sir Tho. Lee, Mr.
Powel, Sir Tho. Littleton, Sir Rich. Temple, Mr. Vaughan, Mr. May, Sir John
Hotham, Sir Will. Wentworth Sir Gilbert Gerard, Sir Tho. Higgons, Mr. Hopkins,
Sir Eliab Harvy, or any five of them.
And they are to Meet this Afternoon at three of the Clock in the Speakers
Chamber, and have Power to send for Persons, Papers and Records.

Ordered,
That the Committee last appointed do summon Mr. Arnold and Mr. Sceudamore, and
take their Answers to the Papers now delivered in.

Will. Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

In the Speakers Chamber, Mercurij 27th. die Martij, 1678.
At the Committee appointed to consider of an Address, with Reasons thereto of
the 21th, of February, 1670, to prevent the Growth of Popery, and thereout and
upon the Debates of the House, to prepare Reasons to be offered at a
Conference, and to summon Mr. Arnold and Mr. Sceudamore, and to take their
Answers to the Papers delivered in to the House.

Sir John Trevor, in the Chair, Ordered,
The the said Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Sceudamore be summoned personally to attend
this Committee on Thursday the 17th, of April next, at three of the clock in
the Afternoon in the Speakers Chamber, to give their Answers to the Papers
delivered into the House before this Committee, having notice hereof, by
showing them this Order, signed by the Chairman of this Committee; and this
they are not to fail in but to observe and do in pursuance of an Order of the
House of Commons.

John Trevor.

Lunae 29 Aprilis 1678.
Sir John Trevor reports from the Committee appointed to prepare, and draw up
Reasons to be offered at a Conference with the Lords, concerning the Danger the
Nation is in, by the Growth of Popery, and for providing Remedies to prevent
the same, and to Summon Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Scudamore, and to take their
Answers to the Papers delivered to M. Speaker. That the Committee met several
times, and that they had perused several Papers, and Records, and had taken the
Answers of Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Scudamore, and the Informations of several
others, and had several Informations exhibited to them taken upon Oath before
Justices of the Peace. And that the Committee ordered him to make a Report
consisting of several Particulars disposed under three Heads, which Report he
read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table.

The First Head.
The Names of Popish Priests, by whom kept, the Chapels and other Places where
Mass is said, and resorted to in the County of Monmouth.

John Arnold of Lanvihangel in the County of Monmouth Esquire late Justice of Peace
there, by his Examination, says, That he has known Mr. David Lewis for seven
or eight Years, who has been for all that time and before reputed a Jesuit and
Provincial of the Jesuits in the County of Monmouth, That for several Years
past he lived at Lanternam House then in Jointure to the Lady Morgan, which by
her Death, about two or three Years since, came to Sir Edward Morgan, where the
said David Lewis publicksaid Mass as has been credibly informed by persons that
were present thereat, he likewise says that he has seen the Chapel, Altar
and Ornaments in the said House for the Celebration of Mass, that the said
David Lewis lives now near Lantarnam aforesaid, and does also, as he has been
informed, say Mass at a Pepish Chapel near Mr. Gunters House, in Abergavenny
Town.

Charles Morgan, Gentleman, by his Examination upon Oath says, that David
Lewis a Popish reputed Priest does often frequent the House of one Mr. Thomas
Gunter of Abergavenny.

William James, by his Examination upon Oath says, that he has known David
Lewis to be a Bopish Priest this Sixteen Years and believes him to be the
Superior of all the Jesuits in North and South Wales; he and his Wife have
received the Sacrament of him, has seen him administer to above an Hundred
Persons, has seen him Christen several Children, and Marry several Persons at
a Chapel in Lantarnam-House, and at the Houses of Andrew and Edward Williams,
that great number resort to Lantarnam to hear Mass, deposes further that he
has given several Angels to the said David Lewis, to pray for the Soul of his
Father-in-law after he was dead, and that his Father-in-law told him and his
Wife, that he was fain to give Fifty Pounds to the said David Lewis, to be
disposed to pious Uses, and that if he did not give it, he should neither have
the Sacrament, nor Absolution, and that he further says, that he knows William
Cornelius, who has officiated as Clerk at Mass to the said David Lewis this
Fifteen or Sixteen Years, and that the said William Cornelius was both a
Constable and Churchwarden for the Parish of Langattock.

Dorothy, the Wife of William James deposes that she has known David Lewis to
be a Popish Priest these twenty Years, has seen him say Mass at Lantarnam and
elsewhere, she and her Husband having received the Sacrament from him, and has
seen him administer it to several persons, and Marry and Christen several
times: She knows that one William Cornellius has officiated as Clerk to the
said David Lewis for fixteen years past and above.

Mr. Arnold faith, that he has known Captain Silyard four or five years; that
he has been Informed by the Minister of Lanarth and others, that he is a
Romish Priest and does openly say Mass in that Parish, to which great numbers
do resort, that most of the Parish are Papists.

Tho. Watkins Vicar of Lanarth upon his Oath Deposes, That one Silyard, a
reputed Popish Priest, resides in the said Parish.

Mr. Charles Morgan upon his Oath deposes, that the said Mr. Silyard a reputed
popish Priest, lives with Mrs. Jones of Lanarth Widow.

Mr. Arnold says, That Mr. Harris alias Price, is reputed to be a popish
Priest.

Tho. Watkins of Lanarth, upon his Oath deposes, that Walter Harris, alias
Price is a reputed popish Priest, resideth in Clytha a Hamlet in Lanarth, in
the House of Mrs. Christian Milbourn, that there are above Eighty reputed
Popish Recufants besides Children and Servants in that Parish, that he has
been Informed, that the said Price says Mass, Marries and Christens in the
said Parish, and has endeavored to pervert several of the Parish to the
Popish Religion,

Mr. Samuel Watkins, Vicar of Lantillio, Gressenny and Penrose, in the County
of Monmouth, upon his Oath says, that Mr. Walter Harris, alias Price, and
another Mr. Harris say Mass at William Pullens House, and likewise do often
Christen.

Mr. Aaron Lewis of Landegva in the County of Monmouth, upon his Oath says,
That several persons have informed him that Walter Harris alias Price, is a
popish Priest, and had Christened several of their Children, and that the said
Price said Mass publicly, and that he lives in the House of Mrs. Katherine and
Mrs. Christian Milbourn.

Alice the Wife of the said Aaron Lewis upon her Oath says, that she knows the
said Mr. Walter Price to be a popish priest, has seen him and heard him say
Mass forty times, has received the Sacrament from him, has seen him
administer it to a hundred more, has seen him often Marry and Christen, has
perverted several Protestants from the Church of England, to the Church of
Rome, as James Phichard and Katherine his Wife, Charles Walkins, and Margaret
his Wife, and the Wife of William Arthur, and several others.

She further says, that she has seen above a hundred at mass, and that the
crowd was so great, that the Loft was forced to be propt least it should fall
down under the weight; that she has confessed her sins to the said Price and
that he gave her Absolution.

William Lewis of Ragland, upon his Oath says, in the County of Monmouth, that
he has seen Mr. Price, who does or lately did live at the the House of Mr.
Milborn, say Mass, and preach in Welsh; that the said Price did earnestly
endeavor to turn him from the Church of England to the Church of Rome; telling
him he should never see the Face of God, unless he would be of their way.

Mr. Roger Seys upon his Oath says, that the said Walter Harris, alias Price,
is a popish Priest; and that he was present when it was proved before a Justice
of the Peace, that the said Price had said Mass.

William James upon his Oath says, that he knows Walter Harris alias Price
a popish Priest, and has seen him at Mass, and heard him say Mass, and that
he is entertained at Mrs. Milborns House in Clithia.

Mr. Arnold says, that he has been very credibly informed, that one Doctor
Pugh says Mass publicly in the House of Mr. Thomas Bodnam of Blackbrook, both
when Mr. Bodnam is at home, and when he is absent; that he has been informed,
that Walter James Esquire suffers one John Loyd a reputed Priest to say Mass at his
House at Treivor.

That he has seen a Chapel at Lanvair in the House of Turbervile Morgan Esquire
and an Altar and Ornaments in it, and he has been informed that Thomas Loyd, a
popish Priest says public Mass, Marries, Christens, and Buries in the said
Chapel.

Mr. Samuel Watkins of Lantilio Gressenny and Penrose, upon his Oath says
that Mr. Loyd, a reputed popish Priest says Mass at the House of Turbervile
Morgan Esquire in his Parish, that there are three other Houses in his Parish,
where reputed opish Priests are entertained, and say public Mass, and that
there are in the Parishes of Lantilio, Gressenny and Penrose Sixscore Popish
Recusants.

Mr. Arnold says, that he has been informed by the Ministers and several
Witnesses, that Mr. Scudamore of Penrose's Widow, suffers public Mass to be
said in her House, and that numbers resort thither.

Mr. Samuel Watkins, Vicar of Penrose upon his Oath says, That one Mr. Lloyd,
a reputed popish Priest is entertained at the House of one Mrs. Winefrid
Sceudamore, and that he has seen him there: and a great number of Popish
Recusants resorting thither upon Sundays and Holy Days, to hear Mass, as he
conceives, and he verily believes all her Children are Christened by popish
priests.

M. Arnold says that he has seen a public Chapel near the House of Mr. Tho.
Gunter a Popist convict, in Abergavenny, adorned with the marks of the Jesuits
on the outside and is informed that Mass is said there by Captain Evans a
reputed Jesuit, and by the aforesaid David Lewis, that very great numbers
resort to the said Chapel, and very often at Church time and he has credibly
heard that a hundred has gone out of the said Chapel, when not forty have
gone out of the great Church, that the said Chapel is situate in a public
Street of the said Town, and does front the Street.

Mr. Greenhaugh Vicar of Abergavenny and Lantilio Pertholy in the County of
Monmonth, upon his Oath says, That on Sunday and Holy Days he has seen great
numbers of Roman Catholics resort to the house of Mr. Thomas Gunter at
Abergavenny, and that the said Gunter entertaines one Captain Evans, whom he
supposes to be a Popish Priest; That there is the public mark of the Jesuits
on the outside of the Building, which is directly toward the parish Church,
and he is informed there is a Chapel, and that they have in that House all the
Formalities and ornaments belonging to a Chapel, with Mass on Sundays and
Holidays; he deposes, that there have been Marriages and Christenings in both
the said parishes by popish Priests; and further, that the said Thomas Gunter
told him, that in Olivers time of severity, he kept a Priest, and would keep
one now; that many times Corpse come to be interred with the Formalities of
white Crosses upon them, and endeavoring to hinder the said Superstition, he
has oftten been abused; that he has informed John Arnold Esquire and other
Justices of the Peace of public Mass there and other Enormities of the Papists.

William James aforesaid upon his Oath deposes, that he knows Phillip Evans,
commonly called Captain Evans a popish Priest entertained by Thomas Gunter at
his House in Aliergavenny.

Mr. Arnold says, that the Persons who go under the Names hereafter mentioned
do often change their names and are called by other Names, and are reputed
itincrant Priests in the Counties of Hereford and Monmonth, and do usually
offieiate in ten Miles eompass ( viz) Mr Drawcot, Mr. Elliot, Captain Pugh,
Doctor Pugh, Mr. Rider, Mr. Morgan, Mr. Loyd, Mr. Williams, Mr. Parry, Mr.
Jones, mr. Harriks who is said to be Superintendent of the Comb, mr. John Hall,
mr. Thomas Powel, mr. Harries alias Price, and mr. Thomas Andrews.

Thomas Watkins Vicar of Lanarth upon his Oath deposes that Thomas Andrews a
reputed Poish Priest says Mass very often at William David's House of Bettus as
he has been informed.

Mr. Samuel Watkins Vicar of Lantilio Gressenny upon his Oath depofeth that mr.
Andrews a reputed popish Priest, is entertained at mr. Anthony Powels at
Killough, where he has seen him, and that he says public Mass there, and
that mr. Hall, a reputed popish Priest is entertained at mr. James Pricards
House of Blaen Liman, where mass is publicly said; and has been Informed,
that another reputed popish Priest called mr. Laurance Watkings frequents the
House of, mr. Walter Powel.

Mr. Roger Seys upon his Oath deposes, that he heard it proved before several
Justices of the peace of the County of Monmouth, that Mr. Laurence Watkins was
a popish Priest, and did officiate at the House of Mr. Charles Scudamore
deceased, and further deposes, that Thomas Powel, a reputed popish Priest
lives at the House of the Lady Jones of Treowen which is distant abont a
quarter of a mile from the parish Church of Dingestow; to which Church as he is
informed, there do not resort above sixteen or rweuty persons or thereabouts,
when there do resort to the house of the said Lady Jones, threescore or
thereabouts, all which do pass and repass through the Church Yard of Dingestow
asoresaid at the Time of Divine Service.

Mr. Charles Morgan upon his Oath deposes that Mr. Williams a reputed popish
priest frequenteth a House called Lantrothy.

Mr. Arnold says that he has seen a hundred papists meet on the top of an high
Hill, called St. Michaels Mount, where is frequent meetings eight or ten times
in the year, as he is informed, Mass is said, and sometimes Sermons are
preached there.

John Scudamore of Kentchurch in the County of Hereford Esquire faith that he saw
very great numbers of people at their Devotion on the top of a high hill in
Monmouth shire called St. Michaels Mount, where there is a ruinous Chapel and
a Stone with crosses on it, which he took to be an Altar, and he has seen
people with Beads in their Hands kneeling toward the said Stone both within
and without the Chapel, and he has been informed that Mass is often faid
there, and some papists have affirmed in his presence that they have heard as
good Sermons preached as ever they heard in their(...)

Mr. Arnold says, that he knows that Comb House in Hereford-shire, and
several Lands belonging unto it, of a considerable value, is commonly reputed
to be a Covent of Jesuits, and he has heard some of the, Papists themselves
call it, the College of the Comb and he has been informed, that there are
commonly five or six Jesuits rosrding there, and there is a public Chapel,
and Mass constantly said therein.

Mr. Scudamore says, that at a House called the Comb in the County of
Hereford Several Priest are maintained and kept there and that it is commonly
reported that it is a House or College for that purpose.

William James of Langatock in the County of Monmouth upon his Oath deposes,
that he has heard several of the papish Priests say, that if they could not
live in those parts they would repair to the Comb in Hereford-shire, and
believes the said Comb to be a Covent, and that the Lands thereunto belonging
belong to the Priests; and that they do keep or lately did keep Husbandry there.

Mr. Charles Morgain upon his Oath deposes, that Comb House in the County of
Hereford near the dwelling House of Henry Milborn Esquire a Justice of the Peace is
reputed to be a popish Covent, where several popish reputed Priests Did latly
inhabit ( viz) Mr. James, Mr. Humphreys, Mr. Dracyot and Mr. Harris.

Three worthy members of this House living in or near Hereford-shire informed
the Committee that Combe-House aforsaid, and the Lands thereunto belonging is
commonly reputed to belong to the popish priests.

The second Head.
The names of Justices of Peace and others that are Papists or suspected
Popists and their proceedings in favor of popish Priests and popish Recusants.

Mr. Arnol says, That he know's Sir Edward Morgan of Lantarnam in the County of
Monmoth Barronet, that he has seen in his house at Lantarnam a popish
Chapel with Altar and Ornamenttherein for the celebration of Mass wherein
Mass is said, as he has been informed, by such as have bin present thereat,
that he heard the said Sir Edward Morgan affirm himself to be a Roman
Catholic, that he is yet continued in Commission of the Peace and is reputed
to be a Deputy Lieutenant.

Mr. Arnold says, That about ten years since he knew William Jones of Lanarth
Esquir, that he was a Justice of the Peace and Deputy Lieutenant of
Monmothshire, has bin infromed by worthy Members this House, that before and
at the time of his Death he was a Papish; he has heard some Papists bragg that
he dyed a Papist and that his Son is now bred in a College of Jesuits in
France, or else where in foreign parts; he says, that he has been informed
by the Ministers and others that most of that Parish are Papists (he says) that
though several Warrants have issued from the Justice to have accounts of
defaults for not coming to Church, no returns cold be had for these two or
three years last past, the Church wardens and Constables being Papists.

Mr. Thomas Watkins, Vicar of the Parish of Lanarth upon his Oath says there
are above fourscore reputed Popish recusants within his parish, besides
Children and Servants; three reputed Popish Priests resideing and Officiateing
there ( viz.)

One Sylliard, who was lately Tutor to Mr. Jones's two Sons, who are now beyond
Sea, as he verily believes: One Walter Harris residing at one Mrs. Milborn's
House in Clithia a Hamlelt of Lanarth, and Andrews at Bettus.

Mr. Charles Morgan upon his Oath, deposes that Mr. Sylliard, a reputed Popish
Priest, lives with Mrs. Jones of Lanarth, Widow to Mr. William Jones of
Lanarth, who was a Justice of Peace.

Mr. John Greenhaugh, Vicar of Abergavenny and Lantilio Portholy in the County
of Monmouth, upon his Oath deposes, that there is or has of late been one Mr.
Evans a reputed popish Priest entertained at the House of Charles Proger Esquire in
the said Parish of Lantilio, who is a Justice of Peace, and that he has seen
great numbers of Men and Women resort thither to Mass as he conceives.

Mr. Arnold says, that he has been informed, that Mass was very lately and
publicly said at Lantrothy, a House belonging to Rowland Prichard Esquire now a
Justice of Peace of Monmouthshire; where one Thomas Elliot, a Popish Priest
(formerly committed to Hereford Goal) as such, does officiate; that he
informed the said Mr. Prichard of it, and that it was dangerous to him, and
Scandalous to Religion to suffer it; the said Mr. Prichard answered, that he
had Ten Pounds Rent extraordinary for it; and that would do him more good than
the Scandal could hurt him; that Mr. Prichard is Nephew to Mr. Henry Milborn.

Mr. Charles Morgan upon his Oath says, that he has credibly heard that
Rowland Prichard Esquire has ten Pounds, per Annum more for his House at
Lantrothy, for suffering one Mr. Williams, a reputed Popish Priest to be there
sometimes.

Mr. Arnold says, that he knows Henry Milborn Esquire to be a Justice of Peace in
four Counties, whereof Monmouthshire is one, and that he the said Mr. Milborn
over since he came into the Commission of the Peace for Monmouthshire, has
kept Papists for his Clerks, who received and kept all Presentiments, one of
them called Bower, who was Indicted for treasonable words at Hereford Assizes,
of which the Herefordshire Members can give a more perfect Account.

The other named Peter Roberts a Papist convict; the said Mr. Arnold says, and
Henry Probert Esquire upon his Oath deposes, that they both as Justices of the
Peace for the County of Monmouth, on the 17th Day of April 1677, did often
tender the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to the said Peter Roberts, which
the said Peter with contempt did refuse to take; that they both did require the
said Mr. Milborn being then present to join with them in tendering the said
Oaths, and in committing the said Roberts, which he refused, whereupon the said
Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Probert did by Warrant and Mittimus commit the said Roberts
to one Hugh Powel one of the chief Constables of the hundred of Shenfrith to
convey him to his Majesty's Goal; whereupon the said Henry Milborn did lay
violent Hands on the chief Constable and pusht him away while the said Roberts
made his Escape.

The said Mr. Arnold further says, that he has often heard the said Mr.
Milborn at Privy Sessions both discourage Constables from presenting Popish
Recusants, and also declare, that it was contrary to Law to present them at a
Privy Sessions, and that the Law of Primo Elizabethae was not intended against
Papists, he also knows that the said Mr. Milborn at the End of last Easter or
Mid Summer Sessions, did procure an Order, that neither the said Henry Probert
nor himself should Act as Justices in the said hundred of Skenfrith, though no
Justice lived in the said hundred, and they live both near to it, and that the
said Mr. Milburn obtained another Order of the Quarter Sessions to vacate that
they had done at a Privy Sessions, where they had convicted above two hundred
Papists, the Copys of which Order were denied him by the Clerk of the Peace and
his Clerks, and he verily believes that the reason of making both their Orders,
was because the said Mr. Probert and himself did their Duty faithfully, and put
the Laws in Execution against the Papists.

Mr. Arnold says, that he knows, and Mr. Charles Morgan by his Oath deposes,
that most of the said Henry Milborn's Family and Household are Papists.

And Mr. Arnold says, that he was present when one Mr. Roger Seys did demand of
Mr. Milborn a Warrant to apprehend one Walter Prite, whom the said Seyes
offered to prove to be a Popish Priest, kept in the House of Mrs. Katherine and
Mrs. Christian Milborn Sisters to the said Mr. Milborn, which the said Mr.
Milborn not only refused to grant, but threatened the said Mr. Seys for
demanding the same; and lastly says, that he has been credibly informed,
that Mr. Milborn is a Trustee for many of the Papists in Hereford and
Monmouthshiers.

Henry Probert Esquire upon his Oath says, that Mr. Arnold with himself and others
kept a Privy Sessions at Lantilio Gressenny in the County of Monmouth, where
the Constables presenteda great number of Popish Recusants, but all the next
Quarter Sessions, there was an Order made, vacating all that was done at the
said Privy Sessions, though very little or nothing was done there but about the
Presentment of Papists; and further says that he does in his Conscience
believe that the said Mr. Milborn was the main Agent and Instrument of making
and obtaining the said Order.

John Scudamore Justice of the Peace of Herefordshire says, that having
desired one Mr. Henery Milborn Justice of the Peace of that County to join with
him in issuing out Warrants to levy twelve pence a Sunday on Popish Recusants,
he always refused so to do, affirming that the Statute of Prime Elizabethae
was never intended against the Papists, that he has been credibly informed,
that the greatest part of the Family and Household of the said Mr. Miborn, and
the greatest Part of the Parish wherein he lives, are Papists, that he has
known two of Mr. Milborns Clerks who received and kept all Returns and
Presentiments, and were both declared Papists; the Name of one being Joh. Bower,
who was tried at Hereford for treasonable words, the Name of the other was
Peter Roberts who is or was lately his Clerk.

Mr. Roger Seys, and Mr. Lewis Price, upon their Oaths, severally, depose that
they were present when John Arnold and Henry Probert Esquire did commit Peter
Roberts, Clerk to Mr. Milborn, for refusing to take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and that the said Mr. Milborn rescued the said Peter Roberts out of
the Hands of the Chief Constable, who thereupon made his Escape.

The said Mr. Seys further deposes, that he being Churchwarden, did on the
Seventeenth of April 1677, demand a Warrant from Mr. Milborn against Walter
Harris, alias Price, a Popish Priest, who lives with Mrs. Christian and Mrs.
Katherine Milborn, Sisters to the said Milborn, which Warrant Mr. Milborn
refused to grant, but threatened him with Opprobious Words, telling him he was a
busy troublesome man, and that he would be upon his Skirts.

Lambert Miles, upon his Oath deposes, that about the Years 1675, or 1676,
being petty Constable of Lantilio Gressenny; he went to Mr. Milborn a Justice
of the Peace, with his Presentment to be approved and subscribed by the said
Mr. Milborn, wherein several Popish Reonsants were presented for not coming to
Church, that the said Mr. Milborn struck out, or caused to be struck out
several of their Names, and the Oath, and that it was a true Presentment, was
omitted, he the said Miles refusing to take it, unless the Names of the said
Popish Recufants (struck out as aforesaid by Mr. Milborn, or his Order) were
asserted therein, that thereupon the said Miles never presented those struck
out any more, nor swore to any Presentment after, though he continued petty
Constable two Years.

Mr. Arnold says, that he has had it proved by Oath before him that Mr.
Isaac Williams who is a Coroner for part of the County of Monmouth, has his
Children Christened by a Popish Priest, and that his Wife is a violent Papist,
and have credibly heard, that Mass is very often said in his House, and that
very frequent Meetings of Romish Priests, and others of that Religion are held
there.

Mr. Roger Seys upon his Oath deposes, that he being Churchwarden, Isaac
Williams, one of the Coroners of the County of Monmouth did check him for
putting the Statute in Execution against Popish Recusants for not coming to
Church, and told him it was pirty to prosecute them, for they were honest
People, and in way of Discourse did hold many Alguments with him in vindication
of the Romish Religion.

Mr. John Greenhaugh, Vicar of Abergavenny, upon his Oath says, that Mary the
Wife of Mr. Lewis Jones, was the only Person in that Town, severely prosecuted
for a Roman Catholic, though there were many convict Papists of greater
Ability in the said Town, and that it was done after her Consormity and
Reconciliation to the Church of England, and that her Husband told him, that he
had paid to the Undersheriff nine pounds ten Shillings, notwithstanding the
Certificate under his Hand and Seal of her Conformity.

Mr. Scudamore says, that about five Years since, he apprehended one Mr.
Elliot, a Popish Priest, habited in his Scope and other Vests, in the Acts of
Celebration of Mass in a Chapel of Herefordshire, wherein he observed an
Altar, Lights, Papers and several Images, he asked the said Elliot how he durst
say Mass so publicly, there being at Mass above thirty Persons, being there
was a Proclamation to the contrary? Mr. Elliot answered that he knew of no
Proclamation, but demanded by what Authority he took him, telling him he should
have no thanks for apprehending him; Mr. Scudamore says, that he thereupon
committed Elliot to the County Goal, and the next Assizes caused a Bill to be
presented against him, which was found, but before his Trial he was taken out
of the Goal, and as the Undersheriff informed him, he was moved to the Tower
of London. It appears to the Committee by the Original Records and Papers
produced, that the said John Scudamore did by his Mittimus dated the 17th. of
September 1675, commit the said Elliot as a Popish Priest to the County Goal of
Hereford, until he should be thence delivered by due Course of Law, that by
Warrant Counter-signed by Mr. Secretary Trevor, dated the 24th of January
following, directed to Marshal Brigs Esquire high Sheriff of the County of
Hereford, the said Elliot was brought up to London in order to his Delivery
over to the Lieutenant of the Tower. That by Warrant, countersigned by Mr.
Secretary Trevor dated the 15th. of February following, directed to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, the said Elliot was committed unto the Tower until
further Order, and accordingly, the said Mr. Elliot was delivered by the
High Sheriff of Herefordshire into the Lieutenant of the Tower's Custody.

That by Warrant countersigned by Mr. Secretary Trevor, dated the 4th. of March
following, the Lieutenant of the Tower was commanded to enlarge and set at
Liberty the said William Elliot, first taking security from him to transport
himself out of the Realm, into some Parts beyond Seas within ten Days next
after his Enlargement, and not to return into any of his Majesty's Dominions,
without leave first obtained.

That according the said Lieutenant took a Bond in his Majesty's Name from the
said Elliot with two sureties in the Sum of five hundred Pounds, and thereupon
set the said Elliot at Liberty; that at the next Assizes and General Goal
delivered for the County of Hereford the 24th. of March following, the said
William Elliot was indicted for being a Seminary Priest, which Indictment was
found by the Grand Jury, and to which Indictment Edward Marriot, Joh. Gole, and
Arthur Lister were Wituesses, who by their Informations taken upon Oath, and
produced to the Committee by the Clerk of Assize, do severally depose the
apprehending the said Elliot in the Act of Celebration of Mass, as Mr.
Scudamore has set forth in his Examination aforesaid.

The said Mr. Elliot by his Examination and Confession produced to the
Committee by the Clerk of the Assize, and taken before Sir Edward Harly, John
Scudamore and William Gregory Esqs; Justices of the Peace, for the County of
Hereford says, that he was apprehended when he was at his private devotion, but
confesses that there was then with him in the same Room at Devotion, about six
or seven and Twenty Persons; that he was habited with a Surplice, and Vestment
over it, and being examined, whither he was a Priest in Orders from the Church
of Rome, he refused to answer thereunto, but said let it be proved against me,
I will not Accuse my self.

FINIS.

