A CATALOGUE of the Noblemen and Peers of the Kingdom of England, according to
their Birth and Creatic, in the Reign of CHARLES the Second, KING of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland.
portrait of King Charles II CHARLES II, Buy Grace of GOD King of England,
Scotland France, and Ireland, and
AEtatis suae 32
P.S ^xcudit


Dukes of the Blood Royal.
JAMES STUART Duke of York, by King Charles the 1. his Father. Henry called Duke
of Gloucester, died Sept. 13.1660. Rupert Duke of Cumberland and E.of
Holderness. Charles called Duke of Cambridge, died May 5.1660. by K. Charles the
2. his Uncle.
Dukes.
THomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, by K. Richard 3. William Seymor Duke of
Somerset, by K. Edw. 6. George Villers Duke of Buckingham, by K. James. Charles
Stuart Duke of Richmond and Lenox, by K. Charles 1. George Monck Duke of
Albemarl, Earl of Forrington, Baron Monck of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes,
by K. Charles the 2. 9 DUKES.
Archbishops.
DOctor William Juxon Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan
of all England, consecrated Anno 1633. Dr. Accepted Frewen Lord Archbishop of
York, and Metropolitan of England, Consecrated Anno 1634. 2 ARCHBISHOPS
Marquesses.
JOhn Pawlet Marquis of Winchester, Premier Marquis of England, by King Edward,
Anno 1551. Edward Somerset Marquis of Worcester and Beauford, by K.Charles 1.
William Cavendish Marquis of Newcastle, by K. Charles 1. Henry Pierpoint Marquis
of Dorchester, by the same King. 4 MARQUESSES.
Earls.
AUbrey de Vere Earl of Oxford, Premier Earl of England, by Hen. 2. Algernon
Piercy Earl of Northumberland, by K. Rich. 2. Francis Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury, by K. Hen. 6. H^nry Gray Earl of Kent, by K. Hen. 7. Charles Stanley
Earl of Darby, by K. Hen. 7. John Manors Earl of Rutland, by K. Hen. 8.
Theophilus Hastings Earl of Huntington, by K. Hen. 8. Thomas Writhesley Earl of
Southampton, by K. Edw. 6. Anno 1551. William Russel Earl of Bedford, by the
same King. Phillip Herbert Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery, by the same King.
Theophilus Clinton Earl of Lincoln, by Queen Elizabeth. Charles Howard Earl of
Notingham, by Queen Eliz. James Howard Earl of Suffolk, by K. James. Richard
Sackvile Earl of Dorset, and Baron Buckhurst. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury,
Viscount Crauborn. John Cecil Earl of Exeter, and Baron Burghley. John Egerton
Earl of Bridgewater, Viscount Brackley. Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester,
Viscount Lisle. James Compton Earl of Northampton, Baron Compton. Charles Rich
Earl of Warwick, and Baron Rich of Leeze. William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire.
James Hey Earl of Carlisle, died in 1660. Basil Fielding Earl of Denbigh,
Viscount Fielding. George Digby Earl of Bristol, Baron Digby of Sherbourne
Knight, and Knight of the Garter. Lionel Cranfield Earl of Middlesex, Baron
Cranfield. Christopher Villiers Earl of Anglesey, died in 1660. Robert Rich
Earl of Holland, and Baron Kensington. John Holles, Earl of Clare, and Baron
Haughton of Haughton. Oliver St. John Earl of Bullingbrook, and Baron St. John.
Mildmay Fane Earl of Westmerland, Baron de le Spencer. Edward Montague Earl of
Manchester, Viscount Mandevil, by K. Charles 1. Thomas Howard Earl of Barkshire,
Viscount Andover. Thomas Wentworth Earl of Cleveland, and Baron Wentworth.
John Sheffield Earl of Moulgrave, and Baron Sheffield. Henry Carry Earl of
Monmouth, dyed in June 1661. James Leigh Earl of Marlbrough, Baron Leigh.
Nicolas Rowles Earl of Banbury, Viscount Wallingford. Thomas Savage Earl of
Rivers, Viscount Colchester. Mountague Bartue Earl of Lindsey, Viscount
Rochford. Henry Carry Earl of Dover, and Baron Willoughby. Henry Mordant Earl
of Peterborough; and Baron Mordant. Henry Gray Earl of Stanford, and Baron Gray
of Grooby. Heneage Finch Earl oi Winchelsea, Viscount Maidstone, Charles Dormer
Earl of Carnarven, Viscount Ascot. Movntjoy Blount Earl of Newport Baron
Mountjoy. Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield, Baron Stanhop. John Tufton Earl
af Thanet, Baron Tulton. Hierom Weston Earl of Portland, Baron Weston of
Neyland. William Wentworth Earl of Strafford, Viscount Wentworth. Robert
Spencer Earl of Sunderland, Baron Spencer. Savil Earl of Suffex, Baron Savile.
George Goring Earl of Norwich, Baron Goring. Nicolas Leak Earl of Scarsdale,
Baron Dainport. Wilmot Earl of Rochester, Baron Wilmot; by K. Charles 2. Henry
Germyn Earl of St. Albanes, Baron Jermyn, by K. C. 2. Edward Mountague Earl of
Sandwich, Viscount Finchingbrook, Baron Mountague of Neotes; by K. C. 2. James
Butler Earl of Brecknock, and Baren Butler of Lantony in England; and Duke,
Marquis, and Earl of Ormond, Earl of Ossery, Viscount Thurls, and Baron of
Arklo, in Ireland. Edward Hyde Earl of Clarendon, by K. C. 2. Arthur Capel Earl
of Essex, and Baron Capel of Hadham. Thomas Brudenel Earl of Cardigan, Baron
Brudnel. Arthur Annesley Earl of Anglesey, Baron Annesly. John Greenvil Earl of
Bath, Viscount Greenvil. Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle, Viscount Howard of
Morpeth, Baron Dacres of Gilsland. 60 EARLS.
Viscounts.
LEicester Devoreux Viscount Hereford, Premier Viscount of England. Francis
Brown Viscount Mountague, by Queen Mary. Robert Villiers Viscount Purbeck, and
Baron of Stoak-Regis, by K. James. William Fynes Viscount Say and Seal, by K.
James. Edward Conway Viscount Conway of Ragley. Baptist Nowel Viscount Cambden.
William Howard, Viscount Stafford. Thomas Bellasis Viscount Fawconbridge, of
Feanchearle. John Mordant Viscount Mordant, by K. Charl: 2. 9 VISCOUNTS.
Bishops.
DOctor Gilbert Shelden Lord Bishop of London, consecrated October. 28.1660. Dr.
John Cosens Lord Bishop of Durham, consecrated December. 2. 1660. Dr. Brian Duppa
Lord Bishop of Winchester, Prelate of the Garter, consecrated 1638. Dr.
William Peirs Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, consecrated 1632. Dr. Robert
Skinner Lord Bishop of Oxford, consecrated 1636. Dr. William Roberts Lord
Bishop of Bangor, consecrated Anno 1637. Dr. John Warner Lord Bishop of
Rochester, consecrated 1637. Dr. Matthew VVren Lord Bishop of Ely, consecrated
1638. Dr. Henry King Lord Bishop of Chichester, consecrated 1641. Dr. Humphrey
Hinchman Lord Bishop of Salisbury, consecrated October. 28.1660. Dr. George
Morley Lord Bishop of Worcester, consecrated October. 28. 1660. Dr. Robert
Sanderson Lord Bishop of St. Asaph, consecrated October. 28.1660. Dr. William
Lucey Lord Bishop of St. David's, consecrated December. 2.1660. Dr. Benjamin
Lancey Lord Bishop of Peterborough, consecrated December. 2.1660. Dr. Hugh Lloyd
Lord Bishop of Landaff, consecrated December. 2.1660. Dr. Richard Stern Lord
Bishop of Carlisle, consecrated December. 2.1660. Dr. Brian Walton Lord Bishop
of Chester, consecrated December. 2.1660. Dr. John Gawden Lord Bishop of Exeter,
consecrated December. 2.1660. Dr. Gilbert Ironside Lord Bishop of Bristol,
consecrated Jan. 13.1660. Dr. Edward Reynolds Lord Bishop of Norwich,
consecrated Jan. 13.1660. Dr. (...) Jan. 13.1660. Dr. Nicholas Monck Lord
Bishop of Hereford, consecrated Jan. 13.1660. Dr. John Hacket Lord Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, consecrated December. 22.1661. 23 BISHOPS.
Barons.
JOhn Nevil Baron Abergevenny Premier Baron of England. by W. 2. James Touchet
Baron Awdley, Earl of Castle-haven in Ireland. Charles West Baron Delaware.
George Barkley Baron Barkly of Barkly. Thomas Parker Baron Morley and
Mounteagle. Francis Leonard Baron Dacre. Conniers Darcy Baron Darcy. Edward
Sutton, Baron of Dudley-Castle. William Stourton Baron Stourton of Stourton.
William Sands Baron Sands of the Vine. Edward Vaux Baron Vaux of Harrowden.
Thomas Windsor Hikman Baron Windsor. Thomas Wentworth Baron Wentworth.
VVinckfield Cromwell Baron Cromwell of Okcham, 31 Hen. 8. George Ewre Baron Ewre,
35 Hen. 8. Philip Wharton Baron Wharton of Wharton. Francis Willoughby
Baron Willoughby of Parham. William Paget Baron Paget of Beau decert. Dudley
North Baron North of Carthlage. William Bruges Baron Chandois of Sudely. John
Carry Baron Carry, eldest son of Henry Earl of Dover. William Petre Baron Petre
of VVrittle. Charles Gerrard Baron Gerard of Gerards Bromeley. Charles Stanhop
Baron Stanhop of Harrington, 3 K. James. Henry Arundel Baron Arundel of
VVarder; 3 K. James. Christopher Roper Baron Teinham; 14 K. James. Foulke
Grevile Baron Grevil of Beauchamp Court, 18 K. James. Edward Mountague Baron
Mountague of Broughton, 19 K. James. Charles Howard Baron Howard, eldest son of
Thomas Earl of B^rkshire. William Gray Baron Gray of Warck; 21 K. James. John
Roberts Baron Roberts of Truro, 22 K. James. William Craven Baron Craven of
Hampsted Marshal, 2 K. Charles 1. John Lovelace Baron Lovelace of Hurley, 3 K.
Charles 1. John Pawlet Baron Pawlet of Hinton St. George, 3 K. Chapter 1. William
Maynard Baron Maynard of Esteams, 3 K. Chapter 1. Thomas Coventry Baron Coventry of
Alseborough, 4 K. Chapter 1. Edward Howard Baron Howard of Escrick. Warwick Mohun
Baron Mohun of Okehampton. William Botiller Baron Botiller of Bromefield.
Piercy Herbert Baron Powys of Powys, 5 K. Chapter 1. Edward Herbert Baron Herbert
of Cherbury, 5 Chapter 1. John Finch Baron Finch of Fordwich, died in 1660. Francis
Seamour Baron Seamour of Trowbridge. Thomas Bruce Baron Bruce of VVorlton, and
Earl of Elgin in Scotland. Francis Newport Baron Newport of high Arcal, 18 K.
Chapter 1. Thomas Leigh, Baron Leigh of Stoneleigh, 19 K. Chapter 1. Christopher Hatton
Baron Hutton of Kerby, the same year. Henry Hasting Baron Loughborough of
Loughborough, the same year. Richard Byron Baron Byron of Rochdale, the same
year. Richard Vaughan Baron Vaughan of Emlyn, and Earl of Catherry in Ireland,
the same year. Charles Smith Baron Carington of Worton, the same year. William
Widrington Baron Widrington of Blankney. Humble Ward Baron Ward of Bromingham,
the same year. Thomas Colpepper Baron Colpepper of Th^rseway, 20. K. C. 1.
Isaac Astely Baron Astely of Reading, the same year. Richard Boil Baron
Clifford, Earl of Cork in Ireland. John Lucas Baron Lucas of Shenfield, the
same year. John Bellasis Baron Bellasis of Worlaby, the same year. Edward
Watson Baron Rockingham, the same year. (...) Baron G^rrard of Brandon, the
same year. Robert Sutton Baron Lexinton of Aram, the same year. Charles
Kirkhoven Baron Wooton of Wooton, by K. Chapter 2. Marmaduke Langdale Baron
Langdale of Holme, by K. Chapter 2. William Crofts Baron Crofts, by the same King.
John Berkly Baron Berkly of Stratton, by the same King. Denizel Holles Baron
Holles of Ifield, 20 April 1661. by the same King. Frederick Cornwallis Baron
Cornwallis of Eye, the same day and year; died 1662. George Booth Baron
Delamerre of Dunham-Mass ey, the same day and year. Horatio Townses and Baron
Townsesand of Lynne-Regis, the same day and year. Anthony-Ashley Cooper Baron
Ashley of Wymbourn St. Giles. John Crew Baron Crew of Steane, the same day and
year, by the same King. 70 BARONS.
176 Noblemen and Bishops in England.

The Degrees of England.
1 THe KING. 2 The Prince. 3 Dukes of the Blood Royal, as the Sons, Brothers,
Uncles and Nephews of the King in being, or of a deceased King, who have their
precedence of other Dukes only during their lives, by reason of their birth. 4
Other Dukes. 5 Marquisses. 6 The eldest Sons of Dukes of the Royal blood. 7 The
eldest Sons of other Dukes. 8 Earls. 9 The eldest sons of Marquisses. 10 The
younger sons of Dukes of the Royal blood. 11 The younger sons of other Dukes.
12 Viscounts. 13 The eldest sons of Earls. 14 The younger sons of Marquisses.
15 Barons. 16 The eldest sons of Viscounts. 17 The younger sons of Earls. 18
The eldest sons of Barons. 19 Privy Counselors, Knights who have been
Ambassadors, The Lord chief Justice of the Kings bench, Master of the Rolls in
Chancery, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer, with the other Judges and Barons of the Coyfe of the Kings bench,
Common pleas and Exchequer. 20 The younger sons of Viscounts. 21 The younger
sons of Barons. 22 Knights of the Garter. 23 Knights Bannerets. 24 Baronet. 25
Knights of the Bath. 26 Knights Batchelers.
Esquires and Gentlemen are but Additions only, and no Degrees.

Collected by (...) Alleyn.
LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1662.


