THE Whole Duty OF PRAYER, Containing DEVOTIONS FOR Every Day in the Week, AND
FOR Several Occasions, Ordinary and Extraordinary. By the Author of The Whole
Duty of Man. Necessary for all Families.

Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear Prayers unto thee shall all flesh come.
London, Printed for I. P. and sold by Ric. Ianaway, in Queens-Head-Alley, in
Paternoster Row. 1692.

THE Preface.
I Need not Recommend this small Manual to the World, since it hears the Name
of so Learned an Author, whose Works have given sufficient demonstration of his
Worth and Excellency, and will to his lasting Honor be venerated in all Ages.

This Pattern of Piety has lay concealed for many years, and was at first
Dedicated to the service of an honorable Lady, in whose Cabinet it has been
choicely kept as one of her precious Jewels; it was never designed for the
Press, by reason the Reverend Authors Modesty should not be offended.

Upon her Bed of Mortality, she was pleased to honor me so far, as to commit
it to my Care, with a particular Charge not to publish it; but one of her
Mercenary Servants, by their vigilant Industry, had Plagiary-like, got a
Transcript, and since this Pious and Honorable Persons Decease, did design it
for the Press, being unwilling so much Injustice should be acted against so
Worthy a Person, I was forced to Cancel my Obligation, and to hand with all
speed the Original to be Printed, that I might prevent any Surreptitious Copy.

What Alterations I was forced to make, was leaving out the Praying for our
Royal Ancestors, and placing in our Royal Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William
and Queen Mary, etc. Some additional Prayers I thought proper to insert, as
Thanksgiving for His Majesty's Safe Return, and the Success of his Royal Navy
and Armies, a Duty enjoined on the Church in Public, and ought to be the Duty
of every Christian in Private. Lastly, I have added some few Graces which may
be necessary for Minor Christians; I shall now conclude with the Words of St.
Paul to Timothy, 2 Epistle, 2 Chapter, Verse the 7th. Consider what has been
said, and the Lord give thee Understanding in all things.

G. B.

THE Whole Duty OF PRAYER.
What Prayer is, and the Parts of it.
PRayer is the Duty both of Soul and Body; it is an humble address unto God,
for whatsoever we stand in need of, either in relation to this Life, or that
which is to come: The First part of this Duty is Confession, which is the
acknowledging of our Sins in all Humility before the great Author of our Being:
Now Confession is twofold, general, and particular; the general is when we
Confess only we are sinful, without naming any particulars, which indeed
belongs to public Prayer, but the acknowledging our Sins to God is very
necessary, whether Public, or Private: Particular Confession is when we
express the several sorts, and acts of our Sins, and what ill habits we are
most prone to; this is proper for Private Prayer, and ought often to be used,
for we cannot repeat too often our soulest Sins which we are guilty of, nor
cannot enough bewail our own unworthiness in committing them.

THE next part of prayer is by way of Petition, which is begging of God
whatever we stand most in need of, either for our Souls or Bodies; first for
our Souls we must beg pardon and absolution for all our Sins, in the name of
Jesus Christ, who obtained it with his blood: Secondly we must earnestly
beseech the grace and assistance of Gods blessed Spirit to enable us to forsake
all sin and wickedness, and to live in obedience to him: then it will be very
necessary to beg all these particular graces, faith, hope, Charity, love, zeal,
purity, and repentance; if thou art proud, pray for Humility, if lustful for
Chastity, if guilty of gluttony pray for temperance, and so for all other
virtues thou stand most in need of.

IN Petitioning for our Bodies, we are to beg of God such accommodations of
life, as are necessary for us, but in such a degree and measure, as his
all-seeing Wisdom Knows is most suitable to our state, and Conditions the next
duty, and Third part of Prayer is deprecation, which consists in praying to God
to turn away from us either the evil of sin, or the evil of punishment; to pray
against the evil of sin, is to beg earnestly of God to preserve us by his Grace
from falling into any sin; and when we are under any great temptation, and even
ready to yield, then we must Humbly beseech him, either to withdraw the
temptation, or else by the Power of his Grace Strengthen us against it: next we
are to pray against the evil of Punishment, which are, two sorts, Spiritual and
Temporal; Spiritula punishments, are the wrath of God* the withholding of his
Grace, and Everlasting Damnation: temporal punishments, is loss of Friends,
goods or reputation, but in these things we must wholly Submit to the will of
God, unto whom all we have belongs.

A Fourth Duty in Prayer is intercession, which is praying for all sorts and
Conditions of Men, as Governors in Church and State, our Parents, Husband,
Wife, Children, or other Relations and Friends, for all those in affliction
either in Body; mind or Estate; nay even for our very Enemies according to the
example of our Lord and Master, who prayed for his very Crucifiers, Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do: The fifth Duty of Prayer is
thanksgiving, praising and blessing God for all his mercies Spiritual and
Temporal, Spiritual blessings are his sending his Son into the World for our
Redemption and his holy Spirit to Sanctify us, that we are born Christians and
are made partakers of his holy word and Sacraments: We are likewise to return
him thanks, for his patience and long suffering, in not Cutting us off in our
Sins and Follies: Temporal blessings, which we are to give thanks for may be
for the prosperity of a Church or Nation, and all diliverances which are
remarkable: Some belongs to our selves, as Health, Wealth, Food, Raiment,
Friends, with many other Mercies we daily receive from God, which whoever
receives the least blessing is indebted all his life time to Praise the author
and giver of all good things.

THESE forementioned parts of our duty in Prayer, are to be made use of both in
private and public, that is in the Church and in our Closet, but more
especially in the Church to which place there is a peculiar Blessing belongs,
which Christ has promised, that where two or three are gathered together in
his Name he will be in the midst of them: The second Duty of public Prayer, is
that in a family, and that indeed ought to be the Masters Care to provide for
the Souls of those that belong to him, as to provide food for their Temporal
Nourishment: Now if he neglects this Duty and takes no care of his Household in
this important affair that Man cannot well be esteemed a Christian, but a
Heathen.

PRIVATE Prayer is a Duty to be used in secret, where we can more particularize
our sins when alone then is requisite to be done in public: Next we are to be
frequent in Prayer, and not Complain we want leisure for so doing; for he which
is most busy may find some time to perform this Duty, else how can he expect
his Employment should be Sanctified; now it is a great advantage for Men to
seek God, at least Morning and Evening, if they expect a Blessing upon their
endeavors: Next, the advantages we reap by Prayer are many: First It is a
great honor, to speak freely to the Almighty: Secondly It is a great benifit,
for it brings down Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal to us; Thirdly it is a
pleasant Duty, it draws us nearer to God, which qualifies us for the joys of
Heaven, where Christ is, at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

NEXT we must take care that we ask nothing which is unlawful, but whatsoever
we stand in need of to ask it in faith, and great humility; Secondly we must be
attentive and mind what we are about, Considering that it is the Majesty of
Heaven we are to treat withal, and that our necessities cannot be supplied
without his Divine aid and assistance. Thirdly, Vigilance, Zeal, and Purity of
intention must not be omitted, for the Sacrifice of the wicked are abomination
to the Lord: Lastly what we Pray for, must be to a good end, that is, not to
Pray for Wealth, to Consume it upon our Lusts: Or for grandeur to exercise our
malice upon our Enemies; but whatever we do must be done to the glory of God,
through whom we have Redemption in his blood, even the forgiveness of our Sins.

Ejaculations at uprising.
AWake, O my Soul, and sing unto the Lord.

Glory be to the Holy and undivided Trinity for watching and preserving me this
Night.

I laid me down and slept, for thou Lord sustainest me.

Lord arise, and lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon me.

A Prayer for a Private Person in the Morning.
MOst gracious God, whose Mercies are rich and infinite, to all thy Servants
that call upon thee; accept I humbly beseech thee this my morning Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving which I now am to offer up unto thy Divine Majesty: O
Lord, in thee I live, move, and have my being; thou formdst me in the womb, and
have writ my name in the Book of Life, and that I might not be miserable, but
happy, thou sentest thy only beloved Son to dye for me and to redeem me from
all iniquity.

WHAT shall I render unto thee, O Lord, for all these thine inestimable
benefits, pour forth thy Grace upon me, I beseech thee, that I may abound in
Thanksgiving and Praise for them; Enlarge my heart with thy Love, that I may in
some degree Comprehend with all Saints, the measure of thine infinite Mercy and
goodness manifested to me, by thy dear Son and my alone Savior. To whom
therefore with thee and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed the whole glory of my
Creation, Redemption, Sanctification, and Salvation.

FORGIVE, O Lord, the manifold Sins which I commit daily and hourly against
thee, and grant that for the time to come thy restraining Grace may subdue my
unruly: inclinations, and distempered affections; and as I have been a Servant
of Sin, I may now become an Example of reformation: That so I may rejoice in
thee as my only Treasure, and rest in thee who art the Center of my felicity;
and be thoroughly convinced how good it is to draw nigh unto thee, accounting
all things but dross and dung in Comparison of the excellency of Jesus Christ
and my alone Savior and Redeemer.

O LORD, as thou in thy tender Mercy and Compassion have watched over me this
Night, and defended me from my Ghostly adversary, so I beseech thee, let thy
all-seeing Eye of providence guide me this day in all my Thoughts Words, and
Actions, whereby I may fall into no Sin, nor run into any kind of danger: But
that all my doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that which
is Righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior, in whose
Blessed name, and Words, I shut up these my imperfect Prayers in that most
absolute form of Prayer which he himself has taught me, saying, Our Father,
etc.

A Prayer at Departure from Home.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, who art the way, the truth, and the Life; look
down from thy Throne of Mercy to thy scorstcol of Compassion, and behold me now
betwixt the Assaults of the Devil, the allurements of the World, and my own
vain inclinations; I cannot look abroad, but they are ever ready to molest me;
but O thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep, thou most faithful and Almighty
guide, lend me thy hand, open mine Eyes, direct my steps, and cause me to walk
in thy fear.

THOU that did go out with Jacob from Beer sheba unto Padan aran, guiding him
in the wast-plains, and watching over him on his pillow of Stones, be not now
far from me; lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, make my Paths straight, and
strengthen my goings, that having finished my course here, I may sit down in
thy Kingdom hereafter, an inheritance undefiled, purchased for me with the
blood of my Savior, and thy beloved Son Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Ejaculations for the Evening.
LET not the Sun go down upon thy Wrath, Ephesians. 4. 6. Watch ye, for ye know not
when the Master of the House comes, at Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock
crowing, or in the Morning, lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping, Mark
13. 35

An Evening Prayer for a Private Person.
OEternal God, full of loving kindness, and long suffering, whose Mercy is
above all thy Works, and thy Glory above the Heavens, forgive me, I beseech
thee, my transgressions this day, my vain thoughts, idle words, and loose
Conversation; my exceeding neglect and forgetfulness of thee, my headstrong
inclinations and lusting after the World, preferring this Land of Cabul before
the Snow of Lebanon, and a broken Cistern before the Well of Life.

JUSTLY, O Lord, might thou have cut me off this day, and cast me into the
Lake of thy Displeasure, but thou have had Mercy, and not Sacrifice; thou have
shed upon me the Light of thy Countenance, and removed my sins far out of thy
sight. I know, O Lord, it is not in Man to Establish his own Ways, it is thy
Almighty Arm must do it; it is thou alone that have led me through this day,
and kept me both from doing and from suffering Evil.

AND now, O thou Preserver of men! What shall I do unto thee? What shall I
render unto my Lord, for all the mercies and loving kindnesses showed unto thy
Servant this day, and all the days of my life, even to this moment? I will
offer unto thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and call upon the Name of the
Lord: I will ever love thee, fear thee, praise thee, and trust in thee; my Song
shall be of thee in the Night Season, and in the Day time I will be speaking of
thy wondrous Works.

AND forasmuch as thou (out of thy tender Love and Compassion on thy Creatures)
have ordained this time for their repose and refreshment, that having past
through the Cares and Dangers of the Day, they might under the shadow of thy
Wings find rest and security; keep me, I most humbly beseech thee, from the
Hours and the Powers of darkness; watch over me this Night in thy Almighty
Providence, and scatter all the Rebellions and Devices of my Adversaries;
enlighten my Soul, sanctify my Body, govern my Affections, and guide my
Thoughts, that in the fastest closures of my Eyelids my Spirit may see thee,
and in the depth of sleep be conversant with thee* This, and what ever thou
know is needful for me, I humbly beg at thy hands, through the merits of
Jesus Christ my Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
Ejaculations to be used on several Occasions.
When you awake in the Night.
HOly, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath! Heaven and Earth are full of the
Majesty of thy Glory.

When the Clock strikes.
BLESSED be the hour in which my Lord Jesus was Born, and the hour in which he
Died! O Lord, remember me at the hour of Death, and in the Day of Judgment.

When you intend any Business or Journey.
O do well unto thy Servant! that I may live and keep thy Word. Prosper thou
the Work of my hands upon me, O prosper thou my handy Work.

When thou art Persecuted*
HASTE thee, O God, to deliver me, make haste to help me, O Lord!

Upon some sudden Fear.
O set me upon the Rock that is higher than I, for thou art my Hope, and a
strong Tower for me against my Enemy.

Upon any disorderly Thoughts.
MAKE me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Upon any occasions of Sadness.
THY rebuke has broken my Heart, I am full of Heaviness, but thou, O Lord,
shall lift me up again.

Upon any Diffidence.
THOU art my Hope, O Lord, even from my Youth, through thee have I been holden
up ever since I was Born; though thou should kill me, yet will I trust in
thee.

When thou perform'st any good Work.
NOT unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but unto thy Name give the praise.

When thou art provoked to Anger.
GIVE thy peace unto thy Servant, O God, let no man take away my Crown; in
patience, O Lord, let me possess my Soul.

For thine Enemies.
LORD, lay not this Sin to their Charge, they know not what they do.

Upon any Deliverance, or Mercy received.
THE Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not Want; he makes me to lie down in green
Pastures, he leads me besides the still Waters; he has prevented me with the
blessings of Goodness, he has granted me my Hearts desire, and not withheld
the Request of my Lips. Surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the days
of my Life, and I will dwell in the House of my God for ever.

Upon any Loss or Adversity.
SHALL we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Naked
came I out of my Mothers Womb, and Naked shall I return thither; the Lord Gave,
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

When you hear the Bell Toll for one Departed.
TEACH me, O Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom.

Upon thought of thy Sins.
TURN away thy Face from my Sins, O Lord, and blot out all mine Offenses.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul* and forget not all his Benefits, who forgiveth all
thy Sins, and heals all thine Infirmities.

When thou art weary of the Cares and Vanities of this World.
LIKE as the Heart brayeth for the Waterbrooks, so thirsts my Soul after
thee, O God.

O who will give me the Wings of a Dove, that I may fly away and be at rest.

Meditations for Sunday.
THis is the day which the Lord has made, let me rejoice and be glad therein,
it is a day of rest and sweetness unto my Soul, and a day of Ease from Labour^
unto my Body; as thou, O God, did rest this day from the Works of thy
Creation, so grant that I may cease this day from all Sin, and by an earnest
Repentance implore thy Pardon; thaw this frozen Heart of mine, that this day it
may melt at thy presence; and say unto my Soul those comfortable Words which
thou were pleased once to say to Zacheus, This day is Salvation come to thy
House,

O Lord, I am utterly unworthy in my self to stand at the Door of thy
Sanctuary, much less to appear in thy presence, and be made partaker of thy
Heavenly Gifts, for thou, O Lord art a God of pure Eyes, and can not behold
Iniquity; and I am thy sinful Creature, not only wilfully opposite unto thee,
but even Enmity it self against thee. Unto thee therefore belongs
Righteousness, and unto me shame and confusion of Face. Lord, when I thus see
my self in the Glass of thy Law, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy Judgments.

I HAVE sinned against Heaven, and before thee, by my sad refusal of thy
gracious offer of Eternity, in my sinful relinquishing of thy Sacred Word; and
am now no more Worthy to be called thy Child. I have been too long feeding on
the empty husks of vanity, amongst the filthy Swine of sensuality, and am now
willing, by thy Grace, to return home unto thee, and to humble my self low
before thee, that thou may have the Glory, and I the Comfort of thy Gracious
Pardon.

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday Morning.
O Lord I acknowledge this day to be thine, as consecrated and set a part for
thy Worship and Service, and to be obeserved not only as a Holy day, but a
glorious day unto thee, wherein I ought to pay my vows, present my Person and
my Prayers before thee, to hear thy word, and Meditate upon the same, to thy
Glory, and my own Everlasting Comfort. To this end remove far from me all
wandering thoughts, and Worldly Affections, and work in me a desire of studying
thy Law, and walking in the Truth, that thy word may not prove unto me the
Savor of Death unto Death, but of Life unto Life.

LET my Ears be attentive, that I may hear those things which thou shall
instruct me, that hearing I may understand them; understanding, I may remember
them; remembering, I may practice them, to adorn that profession which I have
invocated in thy name, and confirm me in the Faith of thy Son Jesus Christ,
wherein I was Baptized and made a Member, raise me, O Father, by the power of
my Saviors Resurrection from Sin and iniquity, and give me Spiritual rest,
Peace of Conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, and Fellowship in the Communion of
Saints, that when I shall leave this Earthly Tabernacle, I may keep an
Everlasting Sabbath with thee in the Kingdom of Heaven.

BEHOLD, O Lord, I knock at the Door of thy Mercy and tender Compassion, with
all the Faculties of my Soul and Body, for all these Graces and particular
favors, beseeching thee to continue unto me the right use of them, that thy
Spirit may witness unto my Spirit that I am thy Son, and shall be Heir of thy
Kingdom of Glory, and that I may be partaker of the inheritance of thy Saints
in light, where are Pleasures that last for Evermore. Grant this O Father for
Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday Noon.
O God, thou art great in Majesty and infinite in Mercy; wonderful in thy
goodness unto thy Church and Children: Thou have Commanded me to offer up my
Prayer and supplications for those that shall enter into the Ministry, and
stand before thee to wait at thine alter; the heaviest, O Lord, is very great,
and the painful and Conscionable Laborers but few; I beseech thee, be pleased
to send able Ministers into thy Church, and place such over particular
Congregations as like John the Baptist, may be burning lights, burning, as
being zealous in fervency; and lights also as being conspicuous and eminent for
Charity, Sanctity of life, and all holy Graces of thy Spirit.

LET thy Urim and thy Thummim be upon them, as upon thy Holy one; let them be
sound for Doctrine, and holy for Life and Conversation; Preaching, let them
practice, and by practice let them preach and teach the things which concern
thy Kingdom: Open wide unto them the Door of utterance, that they may deliver
thy Word freely and boldly: Take away all differences and animosities from
amongst them; make them examples to those that believe, in soundness of
Doctrine, and integrity of Conversation; bless them with all Graces befitting
so high a Calling, that I may give thanks unto thee for them, finding the
benefit of thy blessing upon me through their Labors, and may praise thy Name
for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday Evening.
O Lord, look down from Heaven, thine holy Habitation, and behold with the Eye
of thy Love, and tender Compassion, a wretched Creature, who now calls upon
thee in the Words of the poor Publican: O God be merciful unto me a Sinner.
Write not bitter things against me, neither suffer me to possess the Sins of my
Youth. O forgive, and forget all my Transgressions, and cast mine Iniquities as
far from thy presence, in distance, as the East is from the West.

LORD pardon, I humbly beseech thee, the faults and frailties which I have
escaped this day in the sanctifying of thy Sabbath, whether they be Sins of
Omission or Commission; wash them all away in the Blood of thy Son, sanctify
me by the Word, thy Word of Truth, that this day has sounded in my Ears. Grant
that like good Seed sown in good Ground, it may take root downward, and bring
forth Fruit upwards to the Glory and Praise of thy great Name, and the
Salvation of my Immortal Soul.

O LET thy Word be ever in my Mind, to meditate of it; in my Mouth, to speak of
it; and in my Life and Conversation, to practice it. By it Work in my Heart
Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other supernatural Graces, which accompany
Salvation; open mine Eyes that I may see thy Law; and incline my Heart, that I
may love the Truth; and loving the same, may yield Obedience to it; doing thy
Will on Earth, or at least endeavoring to do it, as the Angels in Heaven;
willingly, without murmuring; speedily, without delaying; constantly, without
ceasing; and universally, without omitting what thou command and commendest
in thy Word, so shall I not be distracted with Foolish fears, nor despair of
thy Mercy, but ever Hope and Trust in thee, and find Grace to help me in time
of need; to whom be ascribed all Honor, Power and Glory, World without end.

Amen.
Mondays Meditations.
O GOD, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, who Created the
Evening, and the Morning, continue, I beseech thee, unto me, as well the
Comfortable rest of the Evening to refresh my weariness, as the most necessary
Light of the Morning to manage my affairs and business; make my Conscience
serene and clear, and let the pure Light of thy Gospel guide my Feet in the way
of peace. This Light of thine, O Lord, shows what I was in my Birth, Slime
and Filthiness; what I am in my Life, Vanity and Folly; and what I shall be in
the Grave, Stench and Corruption.

LET these ponderous Considerations, Lord, humble me, that Christ may raise me;
wound me, that Christ may heal me; load me, that Christ may ease me; and make
me most vile in my own Eyes, that I may be most dear and precious in his sight.
O thou, which as upon this day createdst the Clouds to Rain upon the Earth,
shower down thy Graces plentifully into my hardened heart to mollify it,
whereby I may be fruitful in all good Works.

LORD, who this day did separate the Waters, separate, I beseech thee, and
distinguish betwixt the Water of Tears which I shed for my Sins, and those
which I shed for Worldly crosses and afflictions; cast away the one, and put
the other into thy Bottle. This day thou made the Heavens and the Air,
without which I cannot breath naturally; no not one moment: Infuse into my Soul
thy blessed Spirit of Grace, without which Spiritually I cannot breath forth my
Prayers, nor sigh, nor so much as move any Faculty of Soul and Body unto thee.
But, Lord, as often as I take in, or let out the Air which I breath, let me
receive in Grace from thee, and breath out Praise unto thee.

Amen.
A Prayer for Monday Morning.
O GOD, as thou have now raised up my Body from Sleep, the Image of Death, so I
beseech thee deliver my mind and affections from the Sleep of Sin, and from the
Darkness of this World; and as thou have brought me to the beginning of this
day, be thou present with me, and president in me. Let thy holy Spirit be my
Counselor and Instructor, my God and my Guide to lead me into all Truth; help
me by assistance of the same Spirit to watch over my Thoughts, Words and Works,
that I may neither think, speak, nor do any thing which is not agreeable to thy
holy Word.

LET me in all reverence and humility of Soul, submit my self unto thy holy
Will, so that ordering my Conversation aright, and walking according to thy
Golden Rule, peace may be upon me, as upon the Israel of God. Suffer me not to
oppress, or defraud my Brother in Bargaining, Buying, and Selling, by using
false Weights, and Balances, or any other unlawful means, but Guide me so by
thy Grace, that my Conscience may ever cheer me up through a delightful
apprehension of thy blessed Favor.

TO this end order thou my Paths* and establish my goings in the way of Peace,
Grace and Salvation; cause thou me to walk upright before thee; make me to
provide things honest before thee, and Men; behave my self as in thy sight, and
do unto others as I would they should do unto me. Let no Sin, inordinate Lust,
or unruly Passion, have dominion over me, but help me to lead Captivity
Captive, to kill and crucify my Lusts, and sinful Affections, and wage War
with my Corruptions, until through Christ which strengthens me, I shall prove
more than Conqueror. Grant this unto me for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for Monday Night.
O GOD, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I do in all humility prostrate my
self before thy Divine Majesty, to offer up unto thee this my Evening Sacrifice
of Prayer and Thanksgiving, who did offer up thy Son upon the Cross to be a
Propitiation, and meritorious Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. Lord hear
me, and help me, and be merciful unto me; my Sins are great, but thy Mercies
are greater; my Trespasses Finite, but thy Compassions Infinite, and never fail.

LORD hear my Prayers, and let my Praises be acceptable in thy sight, for unto
thee, O Lord, upon the Altar of my Heart do I offer up all possible Praise and
Thanksgiving, for all thy Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal, which thou
have in a great measure bestowed upon me; but above all, for Jesus Christ the
Fountain of them all, by whom I have Redemption through his Blood, and Access
through his Life. I also thank thee for thy Sacred Word, and for the
Confirmation and Strengthening of my Faith, by those Sacred Signs and Pledges of
thy Love which thou Exhibitest to me, and unto every Believing Soul in the
Sacraments.

I RENDER all thanks unto thee, for my Life, Liberty, Food, and Raiment,
Health, Wealth, Peace, and Plenty, which thou in much mercy have afforded unto
me, from time to time; and I beseech thee, to continue this thy providence over
me, and as thou have hitherto been a Sun to comfort me, so be thou now a shield
to protect me: Keep me in Soul and Body, goods and good name: Vouchsafe me this
Night Peace unto my Soul, and rest, and quietness to my Body, that so being
refreshed, I may Praise thy name for evermore.

Amen.
Tuesdays* Meditations.
O LORD, who on this day made dry Land, and firm ground to appear; dry up my
Tears with the beams of thy Mercy, and give me firm ground of Comfort in thy
Word: Thou who on this day Createdst all kind of Seeds, Sow in my heart the
incorruptible Seed of thy Sacred writ, that I may thereby be regenerated to a
lively, hope: And as on this day Createdst all kind of fruitful Trees, make me,
like a good Tree, bring forth good Fruit here, that I may hereafter eat of the
Tree of Life, in the midst of the Paradise of God.

LORD, let me enter into a serious Contemplation of the vanity of the World,
and the deceitfulness of Riches; the shame of Pleasures, and folly of sports;
the in constancy of honors, and danger of greatness, with the strickt account
which one day must be given for all: persuade me by thy Spirit, that I have
here no abiding City, but ought to seek for one hereafter: and that I am, but a
stranger and Pilgrim on this side Heaven.

LET me desire Temporal blessings only for Spiritual ends: Wealth, that I may
be Rich in good works; preferment, to advance the honor of the Gospel; Health,
and Strength, the better to enable me to do thee service; and length of days,
that I may Praise thee, in the Land of the Living: O Lord this day, thy Life
was sought to be destroyed, seek thou mine, I beseech thee, to save it. This
day thou wast anointed to thy death and burial, anoint me with thy Spirit to
eternal Life. Save me from the hands of all mine Enemies, that I may serve thee
without fear, in holiness, and Righteousness all the days of my Life.

Amen.
A Prayer for Tuesday Morning.
O LORD, what am I but Dust, and Ashes; and confess, I am utterly lost, having
walked after the vanity of my mind, and lived in all manner of Wickedness; but
O, if thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who were
able to abide it? Enter not therefore into Judgment with thy Servant, for in
thy sight shall no Flesh living be justified: Though my Sins have magnified
themselves in infinite length, breadth, depth, and height, yet let thy Mercy,
which passes all understanding, far exceed them.

AND howsoever, by reason of my Sins, I have justly deserved to be not only
deprived of thy blessings, but for ever deserted and forsaken, yet for his sake
in whom thou art well pleased; cast me not away from thy presence of Grace
here, or glory hereafter, but by the one, lead me to the other, by Holiness;
bring me to Happiness. Behold, O Lord, how I am thy Servant, and the Son of thy
Handmaid; O grant me Grace, that I may live with thee for ever.

THOU have redeemed me, O let me not fall into Captivity and Bondage unto Sin
and Satan, but so confirm and strengthen me, that both in life and death, I may
continue thine, and never draw back unto Perdition, or forsake thee, the
ever-living God, or renounce my Savior, who has the Words of Eternal Life;
and who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, but that both in Prosperity and
Adversity, I may live in thy Fear, die in thy Favor, rest in thy Peace, and
reign with thee in thy Glory.

Amen.
A Prayer for Tuesday Night.
O LORD, how often might thou cut me off in the midst of my Sins? but thine
Eye has spared me, thou have given me space of amendment, and Grace to return
unto thee, to seek thee whilst thou may be found, and call upon thee whilst
thou art near. O Lord, be not far from me, but draw near unto my Soul; make
haste to deliver me, and help me. Thou have promised to such as call upon thee,
to be a present help in Trouble, to be their Shield and Buckler, their Castle
and Fortress, and the Horn also of their Salvation.

AND now seeing thou have brought the Night upon me, wherein thou have ordained
Man to take his rest, keep me, O Lord, as the Apple of thine Eye, save and
defend me from Delusions; cause thine Angels to pitch their Tents round about
me, and watch over my Soul and Body, that I may not commit any Sin either in
Word or Deed, but persevere in Grace until the appearing of my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ unto Judgment.

DELIVER me, I beseech thee, from sudden Death, Fears and Affrightments,
Casualties by Fire, Water, or Tempestuous Weather, Disturbance by Thieves, or
any other Danger whatsoever; vouchsafe me peace of Conscience, and joy in the
Holy Ghost; guide me here by thy Council, and after that receive me to Glory;
let my lying down in the Bed, put me in mind of my resting in the Grave, and my
rising from thence, of my Resurrection, that both in Life and Death, I may
continue thine, through Jesus. Christ.

Amen.
Meditations for Wednesday.
WOnderful are thy Works, O Lord, to the Children of Men; thou have provided
all Creatures, the Fowls of the Air, Fish in the Sea, and Beasts of the Field,
to furnish his Table, cloth his Nakedness, and serve his Necessities. The
Earth thou Createdst to sustain him, the Waters to wash and cool him, the Air
to breath him, the Fire to warm him, the Flowers to refresh him, the Herbs to
cure him, the Fruits to nourish him, the Mines to enrich him, the precious
Stones to adorn him, and the glorious Luminaries of Heaven, the Sun, and the
Moon, to light him; the one in the Day, and the other in the Night, and both to
measure his time, to direct his Husbandry, to divert him in his Peregrinations,
to ripen his Fruits, and to increase his Stores.

I CANNOT plead Ignorance of thy Deity, for the Heavens declare thy Glory, and
the Firmament shows thy* Handiwork. I cannot pretend Ignorance of thy Law,
for thou have put thy Word into my Mouth, and written thy Law in my Heart; nor
I cannot affirm that I never heard of the Light of thy Gospel, for the Light
came into the World and shined in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended
it not; but Men love darkness rather than light, because their Deeds are evil.

FOR which thou might most justly have cast us into utter Darkness, where
there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, but there is mercy with
thee, that thou may be feared; there is Balm in Gilead to cure our deadly
Wounds; there is Unction in Christ, and Salvation in Jesus; out of his precious
side, he opened to all the Inhabitants of the Earth a Fountain for Sin, and all
Uncleanness, whereby we might be Purified even as he is pure.

A Prayer for Wednesday Morning.
O ETERNAL God, who art of Infinite Majesty, look down from Heaven, the
Habitation of thy Holiness, upon me thy unworthy Servant; thou art a God of
Power, and can relieve me; of Goodness, and wilt in thy good time mercifully
help me. O Lord, the Fountain of thy Mercy can never be dried up, nor the
Merits of my Savior diminished; O therefore Bath my Soul in them, that being
Sanctified and Justified, I may appear in thy sight more pure and white than
the Snow in Salmon.

I BLESS thy Name for keeping me this Night past, and bringing me to the
beginning of this Day; let thy Eyes always attend upon me, prosper, preserve,
cherish, guide, and govern me in all my Studies, Actions and Employments, so
that I may spend this day, and the remainder of my life, according to thy
blessed Will. Grant, O Lord, that whatever I do, it may be acceptable in thy
sight, to the Glory of thy most Holy Name, the peace of my Conscience, and the
Salvation of my own Soul.

TO this end, be thou, O Lord, my God and my Guide, my Protector and Defender:
Keep me unspotted of the World, teach me to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
and to live Soberly toward my self, Righteously toward my Neighbor, and
Piously toward thee, my God; repenting truly of my Sins, and serving thee in
holiness and righteousness all my days, that in life, thou may be my God, in
death my deliverer, and after death, my Eternal rewarder.

Amen.
A Prayer for Wednseday Night.
O MOST glorious God, I do here at this time with the good Samaritan return to
give thee thanks for all thy Mercies and Blessings bestowed on my soul and
body, in things Spiritual and temporal; for my Election before all time; my
Creation in the beginning of time; and my Redemption in the fullness of time; I
praise and glorify thee, for thy preservation of me this day, and that thou
have yet spared me, and have given me Liberty, and a gracious opportunity once
more to call upon thee.

LORD; I acknowledge and confess, that thou might have taken me away in the
midst of my Sins, and in the very act of Committing them; but thou have dealt
more merciful with me; Keep, me O Lord, this Night from fear and danger, and
from all noisome Dreams, and from all hindrances of sweet repose, which thou
have appointed for the refreshing of wearied Nature.

SEAL unto me a full, and a free Pardon of all my Sins, of what Nature or
quality soever they be, whether they be Sins of omission or Commssion, of
knowledge, ignorance, weakness, or wilfulness; O Lord, deal not with me
according to the magnitude and multitude of them, but for thine infinite
Mercies blot them out of thy Book of remembrance, and Cast them out of thy
sight into the bottomless Sea of thy Compassion, that they may never rise in
this Life to shame me, nor in the Life to come to Condemn me.

Amen.
Meditations for Thursday.
LOrd Teach me of what Spirit I am, or should be; even of that which descended
upon thy Son in the likeness of a Dove, without gall: By this Spirit mortify
in me the Lusts and affections of the Flesh, such as envy, wrath, and revenge;
by the still small voice, in which thou discoursest with Elias, let me ob^erve,
that thou art not in the fire of my rage, nor in the storm of my Passion, but
in the soft gale of Grace. Thou, did on this day replenish the Sea, and
Rivers with Fish, and the Air with Fowls, in Shapes admirably various, and in
number almost infinite; stir me up by this Consideration, to admire thy power;
and Wisdom in thus enriching this vast and seeming solitude.

BLESSED Lord, who this day made the Waters fruitful, let thy Spirit move
upon the waters of my Tears that they may abound in the fruits of Repentance,
and be blessed in the increase of Spiritual Consolation. This day thou
Command the Fowls to fly through the Air, lift up my Soul from ths Earth,
with the wings of Faith and hope, that She may mount up, toward Heaven^: Make
me light and cheerful, after my heavy Sorrows and afflictions, and though I
have been, as if I had layen among the Pots, yet I may be by the Grace of thy
Spirit, like that Dove, whose wings are Silver, and her feathers like Gold.

FOR my light and momentary Afflictions are no way worthy the Glory that shall
be revealed unto me hereafter: And for the present, what are Afflictions, or
Crosses, or Persecutions, but the common lot of thy Children, when I am thus
chastned, I am Judged of thee, that I may not be Condemned of the World. How
can I ever forget thee, who rememberest me at all times, and in all places;

Amen.
A Prayer for Thursday Morning.
O LORD God, who dwell in that light which no mortal Eye can approach; yet
beholdest in Mercy the Sons and Daughters of Men; thou make the outgoings of
the Morning full of thy Glory, and causest the Sun to shine upon the just and
the unjust, mercifully chasing away the darkness of the Night and shadow of
Death: I praise thy holy Name that thou have vouchsafed me to pass this Night
in rest and quietness, and have brought me safe to the beginning of this day.

I HUMBLY beseech thee, by the holy incarnation, and blessed Nativity of thy
Son Jesus Christ, the thrice happy day Star that appeared to the World, let thy
Mercy this day rest upon me, and the bright beams of thy heavenly light shine
forth in the dark corners of my heart, that I may not be transported either
through the Corruption of my Nature or the power of darkness to spend this day
after my own perverse will and pleasure, but carefully perform thy holy will,
willingly, speedily, and constantly.

INCREASE in me, O Lord, the gift of faith, and hope, that I may believe thee,
and rely on thy merciful* promises made unto me, in Christ Jesus bless my Body
and Soul, that no evil happen to them, and preserve my memory and senses that
they pass not the limits of reason and understanding: Enlighten my mind, O
Lord, to look upon good things, inflame my heart with the love of them, and
conduct me with thy Grace, that as thou have raised my Body from sleep so my
Soul may daily be raised from Sin, and Soul, and Body, and Spirit, may be
renewed in Righteousness to serve thee, the Living God for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for Thursday Night.
O Lord God, great in Mercy, and constant in truth; I acknowledge, and do here
in all humility offer unto thy Divine Majesty my duty of praise, and
thanksgiving for all thy manifold Graces and benefits bestowed upon me; and
though I am unable to recount them; and much unworthy to be a partaker of them,
yet in full assurance of thine unspeakable love, I presume to come unto thee,
and now again commit to thy almighty protection this night, my Soul, and Body,
with all its Faculties; beseeching thee to keep them day and night, blameless
and undefiled, against the day of thy coming.

LORD, pardon, and forgive, whatever Sins I have wretchedly effected, or
wickedly imagined against thee, or my Neighbor: O lay not the faults and
frailties of my Youth unto my charge, but forget, O Lord, and forgive, and
cancel the hand writing that is upon the wall, which will be ready to witness
against me; strike my Heart with an awe of thy fear, that I may labor to
escape thy threatenings, and give me the comfort once more of thy Salvation.

GRANT, O Lord that I may this night quietly rest under the shadow of thy
Wings, free from fears, dangers, and Spiritual darkness; and when the dark end
of this mortal life is approached, grant me, O Lord a vigilant Heart, freely
disposed to abandon all transitory things, and depart hence in the Peace of a
good Conscience, into thine everlasting rest, through Jesus Christ, my Lord,
and Savior.

Amen.
Meditations for Friday.
THIS day the first Man Adam, was made a living Soul, and Christ the second
Adam, was made a quickening Spirit; this day he Sinned in a garden, and this
day the Savior of the World sorrowed in a Garden: he took upon this day, the
fruit of the forbidden Tree, and thou, O Blessed redeemer were hung* upon the
accursed Tree; this day, Adam, was cast into a deep sleep, and his Wife Eve was
formed of his rib, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; likewise was the
Son of God cast into a deadly sleep, and his Side was pierced with a Spear,
from whence sprung out two blessed Sacraments, the water of regeneration, and
the blood of Expiation and Sanctification.

THIS day our first parent borught the curse upon himself, and all his
posterity; but thou, O God have provided an everlasting Blessing for thy self,
and all thy Members; thy Law, O God, is just, holy, and pure; but I am wicked,
profane, and impure: That Medicine is for the most part the best, which the
Patient least approves of, because it exasperates the pain for a time. Have I
the less affection for the most holy Faith, because it restrains my carnal
Liberty, and abridgeth me of Worldly Contentments? Have not I a Law in my mind
which opposes the Law of my members? And is it not much better to Sow unto the
Spirit, thereunto the flesh, which produces only Corruption?

IS it not as easy for thee, to raise me out of ashes, as at the first to
raise me out of the dust? To send back my Spirit into my Body, as at the first
to breath it in? I behold the Seed in the Earth, the plants in the Garden, dye
before they spring forth: I see Worms and insects, that spend the Winter
season in a kind of death, yet revive in the Spring; I know, I am my self dead
in sleep every* Night, but alive in the Morning: Why then should I call in
question any one Article of my Belief, but humbly say, Lord, I believe help
thou my unbelief.

A Prayer for Friday Morning.
O LORD God, maker and governor of all things both in Heaven, and Earth, I
come unto thee, with a broken and a contrite Heart, lamenting my Sins, and
seeking to find Comfort at thy merciful hands: Lord, thou know my grief, my
anxity, and care, Oh let me feel thy comforts to refresh my Soul: Be with me
this day in all my worldly affairs, and let thy holy Spirit evermore defend me
and preserve my integrity, that I may be acknowledged thine at the last day.

I YIELD thee all laud and praise, for thy preservation of me this night past,
and for safely bringing me to behold the glorious light of this day: Lord,
excite my heart, that I may express my thankfulness, by my serviceable
obedience, preserve and keep me from Sin, and all irregularities both of Soul
and Body: Mortify all my Corruptions and sensual Appetites, and purge me
thoroughly from filthiness both of flesh and Spirit, that I may perfect holiness
in thy fear.

STRENGTHEN me against all the vanities of the world, the lusts of the Flesh,
the lusts of the Eyes, and the Pride of life; and give me Grace to employ this
day, and the remainder of my Life, in all peace and purity, sanctity and
sobriety, to thy Glory, the good Example of others; and finally, the Salvation
of my own Soul. This, and whatsoever for want of memory I have omitted, I
humbly beg in the Name of thy* dear Son, and my alone Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
A Prayer for Friday Night.
O GOD, thou came into the World to save Sinners, behold me, I beseech thee,
the vile^ of them; but wash! oh! wash away all my sins in the Blood of thy Son,
sanctify my Nature, abolish my Corruptions; guide me here by thy Council, and
after that receive me into Glory: Keep me now, and ever, send me a quiet
repose, and grant that lying down to rest, I may rise again in thy peace, and
walk in thy fear, that so the succeeding day may learn me to grow Wise, and for
ever Glorify thy Holy Name.

INSPIRE me, O Lord, with the Spirit of sweet Consolation, and though sleep is
the Image of Death, and my Bed as the Grave, yet suffer me not to perish
suddenly, or unprepared, but watch over me for good, guide me now, and
evermore, let no appalements disturb me, keep me from Fire, Storms, Tempests,
Thieves, sudden Death and Danger; cause thine Angels to pitch their Tents round
about me, my House and Habitation, and preserve all that is near and dear unto
me. [ Here name your particular Friends]

REMEMBER thy Church, and every Member of it, have pity on the poor afflicted
Protestants in all parts beyond the Seas, who suffer for the Testimony of their
Faith and a good Conscience; send them help from thy Holy place, and evermore
mightily defend them; be unto them a Sun and a Shield, a Sun to Comfort, and a
Shield to defend them to all Dangers and Tribulations; put a period unto all
their afflictions, and in ^hy good time vouchsafe them a happy Deliverance.
Lord, receive them and me, and all that appertain unto me, this Night and for
ever, into thy Gracious protection, through the Mediation of Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
Meditations for Saturday.
THE great Creator this day rested from all his Work which he had made, and
blessed it; O Lord, grant that after this painful life is ended, I may enjoy a
comfortable rest with thee in Heaven, where I may keep an eternal Sabbath, and
hold a perpetual Feast; there will be rest without Labor, tranquillity without
Molestation, and joys without End: There, my Soul, will thou behold a Glorious
City, the Streets of Gold, the Gates of Pearl, and the Foundations garnished
with all sorts of precious Stones.

I SHALL behold thee, the Father, in thy Majesty, Christ thy Son in his Glory,
the Spirit in his Sanctity, the Archangels and Angels in their Exceilency, and
the Saints in their Felicity; then shall I no more hunger, labor, nor travel;
I shall no more fear, grieve, nor desire; I shall want no more an earthly
House, for the Heaven of Heavens shall be my Habitation, God will be my Temple,
and the Lamb that shines for ever shall enlighten me.

LORD, let the hope and expectation* of this eternal rest and felicity sweeten
all my labors, and ease my torments, let it mitigate my afflictions, and
comfort my spirits, that I faint not in my Journey, nor be depressed under my
burden, but hold on cheerfully and valiantly, till I arrive at the Land of
Promise, and there receive the Lot of mine Inheritance with the Saints in light
for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for Saturday Morning.
MOST Gracious God, sanctify I humbly beseech thee, this day unto me, and my
self, now and ever unto thy service; thy Mercies, O Lord, they are new every
Morning, and therefore my Thanks ought every day to be a new repeated: I praise
thy holy Name, for keeping me this Night past, unto this present hour and
moment, and have now brought me unto the last day of the Week; grant that I may
spend the same soberly, righteously, and holily.

BRING me to the knowledge of thy Blessed Will in all things, that I may
endeavor to perform the same to thy Glory, the peace of my Conscience, and the
preservation of my own Soul; purge and cleanse my Heart and Conscience from all
dead Works, that I may serve thee, the living God, for evermore. Be thou my
Guide in all my ways, my stay and support in all my necessities; put an end to
the motions of the Flesh, enlarge my Heart for all pious Duties, and habitual
Graces of thy Spirit, that I may bring forth the Fruits of them in my Life and
Conversation.

BLESS the Kingdom wherein I inhabit, and thy holy Catholic Church, whereof I
am an unworthy Member; bless thy Servants, and our dear Lord and Lady King
William and Queen Mary, as thou have Crowned them with a Temporal Crown here,
so in thy due time give them a Crown of Glory hereafter. Bless Katherine the
Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark* with the rest of
the Royal Family. Bless all persons, whether dignified or distinguished, from
the swayer of the Scepter, to the drawer of Water; have mercy upon all sick
persons, Women traveling with Child, and those who are troubled in Body, Mind,
or Estate; O Lord, speak peace unto their Consciences, and as thou have laid
laid them down with the one hand, so raise them up with the other, if not to
this life, to life eternal, for the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our
Lord

Amen.
A Prayer for Saturday Evening.
O GOD, the maker and preserver of all things, look down with thy eye of pity
and compassion upon me a miserable sinner; I here prostrate my self, Soul and
Body, before thy Divine Majesty, beseeching thee in much mercy to pardon my
sins, to Sanctify me, with thy grace, and to bring me to thy glory: That so my
Soul may be refreshed with such things as Eye has not seen, Ear has not
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of Man to conceive.

ENTER not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
Flesh living be justified: Examine not my ways, this Week past, by the strickt
rule of thy Law, neither reward me in the severity of thy Justice: But have
Mercy upon me a miserable offender, that have deserved the sharpest of thy
Judgments; but as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so is thy Mert cy over
all thy Works* of and great exten to poor Sinners.

SATISFY my Soul with thy Mercy, and that right soon, so shall I rejoice, and
be-glad in thee, and learn to praise thee Evermore: And now, O Lord, as this
Week is ended, so let my Sins be ended, and never be repeated again any more:
Be pleased to be my merciful protector and preserver from all perils; and
dangers this Night: Refresh my* Body with quiet rest, that my mind may be
cheerful, and be fit to serve thee, in. Sanctifying thy Sabbath, and keeping it
as a glorious day unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
Meditations on the Lords Supper.
HOW can I approach so divine a* banquet, and not by an humble confession wash
my hands in innocence; holy things must not be given to Dogs, nor Pearls cast
before Swine: What is so holy as the Body and blood of Christ, and what Pearl
so precious as this Sacrament? There is no Dog so filthy, or Sow so unclean as
I am by Nature; but with great detestation of my Rebellious Corruptions, I
confess that never Dog so often returned to his Vomit, nor Sow to her wallowing
in the mire, as I have to the sink of Sin and mire of sensual filthiness.

O WASH my hands in purity, cleanse my Mouth and purge my Heart, that I may
take with a pure Hand, eat with an undefileth mouth, and keep in a faithful
heart this bread of life, and food of Angels: give me grace, thoroughly and
sincerely to examine my self, and grant that after Examination, I may find my
desire fervent, my knowledge Competent, my Sorrow for Sin unfeigned, my purpose
of amendment sled fait, my love sincere, and my Faith lively.

AND finding my self thus apparelled in a wedding garment, let me be found of
thee in Peace, and both cheerfully approach unto, and joyfully and thankfully
depart from thy holy, and Heavenly Table; receiving by* and with the Bread
broken thy Crucified Body, and with the Wine poured out thy blood shed: And by
both remission of my Sins, readmission into thy presence and favor,
incorporation into thy my^tical Body, and finally the glorification of my Body
and Soul with thee in thy Kingdom of glory,

Amen.
A Prayer before the Communion.
O LORD Jesus, the Son of the living God, who freely offeredst thy most Sacred
Body to be broken, and thy blood to be shed for my Sins that I might be
ransomed from Hell, and delivered from wrath and eternal Condemnation; O Lord,
my sins, original and actual, of weakness and wickedness, have deserved thy
Wrath and heavy indignation; and had not thine eye spared me I had long since
been in everlasting burnings, and wholly banished from the presence of thy
glory.

LORD, wash away all my Sins in the streams of thy pre^ious blood, which Speaks
better things than that of Abel's thou have loved me, in laying down thy life
for me, and have left unto thy Church* this holy Sacrament as a pledge and
assurance, that through thy death, all that truly partake of this Sacred and
Heavenly inititution, apprehending the mysteries, and applying the m^rits of
Christ Crucified, they may receive Comfort and Peace in believing those
promises which thou have expre^t unto us in thy word, and be partakers of the
benefits of thy Sons passion, and have fruition of thy saving virtue here, and
life and Glory hereafter.

ACCEPT me, O Lord, in thy dear Son, as washed, justified and Sanctified, and
by thy Spirit cleanse and purify me daily more and more, Sanctify my
affections, and enlarge my heart for holy and Heavenly things; and grant that
through a steadfast, lively, and constant Faith, I may receive, and worthily eat
this Sanctified Bread, and drink of this Sacred Cup, in a holy remembrance that
thy Body, O Lord Jesus, was Crucified, and thy blood was shed for the remission
of my sins, and grant that it may so effectually operate in my Soul, that I may
ever hereafter live in a holy obedience, according to thy heavenly Will,
through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
An Ejaculation before Receiving the Bread*
BLESSED Lord, as thou have given thy Flesh to be the Bread of eternal
Salvation, so vouchsafe to work in me by a lively Faith, that I receiving the
same, may evermore continue in me, and thou in me,

Amen.
An Ejaculation before Receiving the Cup.
O LORD, vouchsafe that as thy Blood was shed to wash me a sinner from the
Corruption of Old Adam, so grant that it may, through a lively Faith, take
effect in me, washing^ me from the filth of sin, and renew in me the Fruits of
Righteousness, that I may become a fit Member to live in thee, and dye in thee.

Amen.
A Prayer after the Communion.
O GOD, I praise and bless thy holy Name, for thine unspeakable favor and
loving kindness, in feeding me at this time, with the spiritual Food of the
Body and Blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, whom thou vouchsafest to send for our
Redemption, and to offer him up to Death for me, in remembrance whereof he has
commanded me to eat his Body, and drink his Blood, to the end, that by Faith I
should be united to him, and made a lively Member of his Mystical Body, and
being washed from all my sins, in his Blood. I should lead a new life in all
obedience, holiness and righteousness. VOUCHSAFE, I humbly beseech thee for his
sake, to endue me with thy holy Spirit, that by casting away the works of
darkness, I may walk in the true light of thy holy Spirit, and ever remain in
the number of thy holy and elect Children; give me an earnest desire to partake
often of this holy Institution, and to lead my life according to thy holy Will
in all things, keeping my Body and Soul unspotted and undefiled, as fit
receptacles of so heavenly Food, that my Soul may be partaker of the Mysteries
thereof by faith in Christ Jesus.

AND now Glory be to God on high, on Earth peace and eternal Consolation in my
Conscience; I am sed now with thy Body, and my heart is refreshed with the Cup
of the New Testament in thy Blood: Now I am a Member of thy Mystical Body,
Flesh of thy Flesh, and Bone of thy Bone. Lord let nothing be ever able to
separate me from thee, but since all things work for the good of thy Chosen,
let all things more and more unite me to thee, that I may grow from Grace to
Grace, and Strength to Strength, till I come to the full measure of thy perfect
Age, and not be refused by thee, who have given thy self for me, and unto me.

Amen.
A Prayer before hearing the Word.
O LORD, Illuminate my dark understanding, to receive thy Word, and prudently
retain it; give me Grace that the Seed of thy Word being sown in my heart, it
may take deep root downward, and bring forth Fruit upward, to the Credit of thy
Gospel, the Comfort of my poor Soul; and above all, to the Glory of thy most
holy Name. Let thy spirit rule and guide the Lips of thy Minister, that he may
utter nothing but the Word of Truth, with that fervency, that neither fear nor
affection may stop the current of the same.

AND because the Harvest is great, and the Laborers but few, I beseech thee,
who art Lord of the Harvest, to send forth such into thy Vineyard, as may with
a zeal discharge their Ministerial Function; let thy Urim be upon them, as upon
thy holy ones, that sincerity of Doctrine, and integrity of Conversation, may
adorn their persons. Lord, guide the Heart and Tongue of him whom I shall hear
this day, grant he may speak home to my Conscience, and leave no Corruption
unbowelled, but that his Words may chase away all sinful affections from me,
whereby I may depart from all Iniquity.

BLESS all thy people, and grant that they may be not only hearers of thy Word,
but doers of the same, not deceiving their own Souls; and grant that thy
Messengers dividing the Word aright, and thy people keeping it carefully, and
practicing it conscionably, they may through Jesus Christ, obtain the remission
of their sins past, and receive thy Grace for the time to come. Give them light
instead of darkness; peace for trouble, and eternal happiness instead of
Felicity, that tasting the sweetness of Caelestial Comfort, they may despise
Terrestrial, and after this life ended, they may enter into everlasting Glory,
through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer after hearing the Word.
MOST gracious God, of thy bountiful Goodness, thou have, through thy Son Jesus
Christ, made known, for my instruction and unspeakable comfort, the glorious
Gospel, thy Word of Truth, which none can learn but by hearing, and none can
hear but by preaching; and none can preach except they be sent; to this end,
give me thy grace, I humbly beseech thee, that as I have heard thy word at this
time by thy Minister and messenger, so grant, that I and all that have heard,
may Know, understand the same, retain and practice it, according to thy
Heavenly will, that I may thereby grow in knowledge, increase in Grace, and be
a lively instrument of thy Glory unto my lives end,

Amen.
A Prayer for Necessary Blessings of this Life.
O LORD, thou have promised never to fail those that depend upon thee; thou
openest thine hands and fillest all things living with plenteousness, never
suffering any of thine to perish, that carefully seek relief from thy most
gracious bounty: I humbly beseech thee dermit me not to want necessaries for
this present Life; enable me to live without distracting cares; to this end,
bless my labors, that I may have a sufficiency for me, and mine, and not be
burdensome unto any but rather be able to administer unto others, whatsoever
refreshing Comforts they shall stand in need of.

GIVE me neither Poverty, nor Riches, but feed me with Food convenient for me;
lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord; or lest I be poor and
Steal, and take the name of my God in vain afford me such a portion of Health,
and Wealth as thou in thy Divine Wisdom shall think most convenient for me;
succor all such as be in want, relieve the oppressed, comfort the Afflicted,
raise the lowly, and aid the needy.

AND O Lord, I humbly beseech thee, never let me want thy favorable
assistance, but bless my Basket and increase my Store, with thy never failing
blessings, that I may be able to live in thy Faith, Fear, and Love, and out of
the Depth of misery, and danger of all Men, through Jesusus Christ my only
Lord, and Savior,

Amen.
A Thanks giving for Gods Benefits.
O GOD Almighty, the giver of all good things, thou art my stay, my Comfort and
only guide, direct me, I pray thee, to employ that talent which thou have
allotted, me, for the advancement of thy Glory: Lord thou have been abundantly
gracious, and bountiful unto me, and have blessed my Store, insomuch that I have
not only what satisfies my own occasions, but have also sufficient to Relieve
others in the time of their necessity.

GIVE me therefore a free Heart, to cast my Bread upon the waters; and to
Relieve my poor distressed Brethren, according to the utmost of my ability; to
feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, and minister unto thy distressed Saints
that I may not live unto my self, but for the help of all those that want my
assistance, that I may lay up in Store a good foundation against the time to
come, and be found of thee in peace, enjoying Life, and Salvation through Jesus
Christ,

Amen.
A Prayer for Wisdom.
O MOST great and glorious Lord God, I confess that whilst I bear about me this
Body of sin imprisoning the Soul, my Nature corrupted and depraved with
Iniquity, original and actual, seeks by all means possible to oppose the
spirit, and do those things which are dissonant and contrary to the motions,
inspirations, gracious influences, and working thereof; my Flesh lusts
against the Spirit, so that the things I would do I cannot, and the things
which I suppose to be done in much knowledge and wisdom, will be found not only
ignorance, and erroneous, but sinful wickedness in thy sight.

WHEREFORE I humbly beseech thee, O holy Father, to send out thy Light and
Truth, thy spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, to Teach and Instruct me, to be my
God and Guide, to lead me into all Truth. Lord, send down that Wisdom that
waits about thy Throne, and plant the same in my Heart, that all my sayings
and doings, being always ordered by this Wisdom from on high, I may do that
which is pleasing in thy sight, and profitable for my own Salvation, and shun
the contrary in all things, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for Defense against our Enemies.
O LORD my God, be not far from me in trouble, and in all dangers Ghostly and
Bodily, draw near and make haste to help me, I am, I confess, a most sinful
Creature, and have justly deserved thy Wrath and Indignation against me, yet, O
Lord, for thy mercy sake, turn thee unto me, and have compassion on me; let
mine Enemies prevail not in their mischievous devises, lest they be too proud;
in thy Mercy convert them, or in thy Justice consound them; make them as
stubble before the Wind, and thine Angel scattering them.

LORD, I am in thy hand, and they are within the compass of thy power; stay and
allay their fury, let them not take effect in their wicked Imaginations and
Attempts against me, but put them to confusion; rid me, and deliver me in thy
Righteousness; and be thou a Sun and a Shield unto me, to comfort and protect
me.

TO this end cause thine Angels to pitch their Tents round about me, that being
defended under the shadow of thy Wings, and armed with the power of thy Might,
I may not fear what Man can do unto me. Lord, regard me with the eye of thy
Grace, and guard me with the hand of thy power, that being preserved both in
Soul and Body, I may live in Piety, Peace and Godliness, unto my lives end.

Amen.
A Morning Prayer for a Family.
O ETERNAL, and All-seeing God, wonderful in thy Majesty, and Infinite in thy
Mercy, who have the Heavens for thy Throne, and the Earth for thy Footstool;
the Heavens are full of the Majesty of thy Glory, and cannot contain the same;
look down therefore from thence, upon us thy Servants, who now prostrate our
selves before the Footstool of thy Throne of Grace, humbly beseeching thee, for
thy dear Sons sake, to be merciful unto us miserable sinners; one deep calls
upon another, the depth of Misery unto the depth of Mercy, have Mercy therefore
upon us, O Lord, and in the multitude of thy Mercies do away all our Offenses.

WE Confess we are not worthy to think of thee, much less speak unto thee, we
being so vile and miserable, thou so glorious and admirable; yet being assured
that in forgiving of Sins and helping afflicted Souls, thy fountain of Mercy is
never dried up; we thine unprofitable Servants are emboldned to present our
selves this Morning before thee, to offer up unto thee a lively Sacrifice of
Prayer and thanksgiving, who did offer up thy Son upon the Cross to be a
propitiation for our Sins: O let this lifting up of our hearts and hands be a
morning Sacrifice pure, and acceptable in thy sight: Let not the greatness of
our Sins, withold thy emplored Mercy, but wash us from all uncleanness, and
remove thy judgments due unto us for them, as far from thy presence, as the
East is from the West.

O, BURY them in the Grave with Christ, raise us up by the power of thy Spirit
unto newness of Life, that we may walk in all holy obedience before thee this
day, and that endeavoring to keep our Faith and a good Conscience void of
offense, we may now, and in the hour of death be, and remain always thine,
Defend us from all evil, and sense us against the assaluts of Satan, watch over
us by the Eye of thy good providence, and cause thy Angels, to pitch their
tents about us for our safety and continual preservation.

INTO thy hands, we now commit our Souls and Bodies, guide our thoughts, words,
and actions, and if we forget thee, our God at any time, O! do thou in mercy
remember us, and forgive us our trespasses; make us to see our Sins in the
glass of thy Law, to mourn for them in the Closet of our hearts, and Confess
them in the bitterness of our Souls, teach us to cast off the rags of iniquity,
and by Faith, put on the Robes of Righteousness: Help us to manage the Sword of
the Spirit, and the Helmet of Salvation, that we may be able to fight against
the Wiles of the Devil, the vanitics of the World, the Lusts of the flesh, and
the pride of Life.

BE favorable to Sion, build up the walls of Jerusalem, more particularly,
preserve and enlarge these Churches of great Britain, and Ireland; feed them as
thy flock, and Family: Dress them, as thy Vineyard, and adorn them, as thy
Spouse: Defend our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William, and Queen Mary from
all Enemies, at home, and abroad, preserve their Bodies in Health, the Hearts
and Souls in soundness and truth, their lives in honor, and their honor from
underminers. Bless Katherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess
Ann of Denmark, with the rest of the Royal Family. Bless those which rule in
Church and State, all Schools of good Education and sound Learning, all thy
Ministers and Magistrates, with all our Relations in the Flesh, and Friends in
the Spirit, to whom thou have any ways made us bounden. O Lord, enable us to
requite them, or lay it on thine own account to restore it unto them, and their
Posterities.

And here we yield thee all laud and praise, for Creating us when we were
nothing, for Predestinating us unto the Adoption, and choosing us in Christ
before the Foundation of the World. We thank thee for our Preservation this
Night past, and for bringing of us this day to behold thy glorious light. Lord,
awake our Souls from Sin, and Carnal Security, that we may be prepared like
wise Virgins, with Oil in our Lamps, to meet the sweet Bridegroom of our Souls,
whether at the hour of Death, or the Day of Judgment. These and all other
Graces, which for blindness, we cannot, and for our unworthiness we dare not
ask, we beseech thee to give us, for the worthiness of thy dear Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, in whose most holy Name and Words, we conclude these our
imperfect Prayers, in that most perfect Form of Prayer, which he himself has
further taught us in his holy Gospel, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Collect for the Day.
LORD bless us, and make thy Face to shine upon us; keep us from Sin and Satan,
sickness and sorrow, shame and servitude, loss of Goods and good Names, or of
any thing more near and dear unto us, if it be thy good pleasure; preserve us
evermore in thy Faith and holy Fear, guide us constantly by thy Council, and
after that receive us to Glory.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer for a Family.
O GOD, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, the high and lofty one that
Inhabitest Eternity, who have made the Earth by thy power, Established the
World by thy Wisdom, and stretched out the Heavens by thy discretion; the
Father of Eternity, and Fountain of Mercy, the giver of all good things, the
forgiver of all sins, and the comforter of all such as fly unto thee. Lord, we
are here present before thee, be thou present with us, and President amongst
us; we appeal from the Seat of thy Justice, to the Throne of thy Mercy,
beseeching thee to give us a sense of our own Miseries, and an assurance of thy
Mercies; let us not be possessed with over much fear, but that with a holy
confidence of thy goodness, we may with joy appear in thy presence, in an
humble acknowledgment of our sins.

TO this end, we confess that we have sinned against Heaven, and before thee,
and are no more worthy to be called thy Children; we have transgressed thy holy
Laws and Commandments, not only by our Thoughts and Words, but by our Deeds and
Actions; our Iniquities are more in number than the hairs of our Head, and make
us seem vile in our own Eyes, but much more in thy sight. Lord, unto thee we
confess our sins, O grant us Pardon and Absolution for them; open unto us
Penitents, that ever streaming Fountain of thy Sons Blood, that our sins being
Bathed therein, we may appear without blemish in thy sight; by his Death
mortify our sinful Corruptions, hide them in his Wounds, and bury them in his
Grave, that they may neither rise in this life to shame us, nor in the World to
come to condemn us.

GIVE us thy holy Spirit, let him purge our Consciences, heal our Corruptions,
illuminate our Understandings, confirm our Memories, and consecrate our Souls
and Bodies, that they may be fit Temples for thy holy Ghost to dwell in. Be
merciful to thy Church, and enlarge her borders; shower down the choicest of
thy blessings upon the heads and hearts of thy Servants, our Sovereign Lord and
Lady, King William and Queen Mary, bless them with length of days here, and
with a Crown of Glory hereafter; bless Katherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal
Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark, with all the rest of the Royal Family.
Bless the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, Magistracy and Commonalty, our Relations
in the Flesh, and Friends in the Spirit; protect all that stand up for thy
Truth, but as for thy Foes, let them be ashamed and confounded.

AND now seeing thou have brought the Night upon us, wherein thou have ordained
man to rest in, we humbly beseech thee, who art the Keeper of Israel, who never
slumberest nor sleep, to watch over us by thy Providence; cause thy holy
Angels to pitch their Tents round about us, that being freed from the terrors
of the Night, and refreshed with moderate rest and sleep, we may the better be
enabled to praise thy Name, and to walk before thee in all good Works, and
holiness of Conversation, all the days of our lives. Let our Bed, O Lord, put
us in mind of our Grave, and our rising from thence of our Resurrection, that
whether we wake or sleep, we may be always thine.

AND knowing that thy Name, O Lord, is a strong To ver of Defense, we here
commend our selves this Night, to thy most holy protection; if it be thy Divine
Will to call any of us hence in our sleep, O Lord, for thy Sons sake, have
mercy upon us, and receive our Souls into thy most blessed Kingdom; but if it
be thy heavenly pleasure to add more days unto our lives, add more amendment
unto our days, that living we may live in thy Fear, and dying we may dye in thy
Favor, and in the end, Reign with thee in Glory.

Amen.
A Collect for the Night.
INTO thy hands, O Father, we commend our Spirits, for thou have redeemed us, O
thou God of Truth; into thy most merciful Tuition, and gracious Preservation,
do we commend our selves, our Souls and Bodies, our Relations, our Goods and
good Names, all ours, and all that call upon thy Name. Lord, be thou present
with them and us, and about our Beds, unto our lives end; let not our fantasies
be troubled with vain Imaginations, nor the Dreams and Visions of our heads,
like Nebuchadnezzar's, make us afraid, but give us quiet and comfortable rest,
that our Souls and Bodies being refreshed, we may when we awake, laud and
praise thee, and joyfully perform the business of the next day in our
particular Callings.

LET our whole life be a serving and glorifying of thee, that we may live in
thy Fear, dye in thy Favor, and rest from all our Labors, and be blessed with
thy glorious Vision, enjoying the presence of our blessed Savior, the comfort
of thy holy Spirit, and the Communion of thy most holy Saints and Angels, that
we, together with them, may ascribe unto thee the Glory of our Redemption from
Sin, Satan, Hell, and Death, World without end.

Amen.
Prayers for several Persons.
The Husbands Prayer.
MOST gracious God, have mercy upon me, and upon all those which appertain unto
me; in the beginning thou did Institute Marriage, for the propagation of
Mankind, a remedy to avoid unlawful Lust, and for the mutual Comfort and
Consolation of thy Children; give me, O heavenly Father, I humbly beseech thee,
the assistance of thy Grace, that I may according to thy Commandments, love and
cherish her whom thou have allotted for my help and comfort in this life.

MORTIFY in me all fleshly Lusts, and let not the heat of unlawful
Concupiscence, take possession of me, but grant that we may live in Peace and
Unity, and equally praise thy holy Name: [ If any Children] Bless, O Lord,
those Children thou have bestowed upon us, give us understanding hearts and
minds, to bring them up in thy Faith and Fear, and give them obedient hearts to
thee, and to all thy Commandments; grant that they may not prove a Curse but a
Blessing to us, and thereby attain that reward which thou have promised to
those which honor and obey their Parents.

TEACH me, O Lord, to Govern and Instruct my Family, whereby they may walk in
thy Fear; and grant that I may, according to my ability, provide what is
necessary as well for their Bodies as their Souls: And do thou, O Lord, endue
them with thy Grace, that they may perform their Duties, in Fear and Obedience,
not with Eye-service, but in singleness of Heart as in thy presence. Give me, O
Lord, I beseech thee a competency to maintain that which thou have committed to
my Charge, and grant that we may in all humility rely upon thy blessed Will,
who know what is fitter for us then we do for our selves To whom be all
Honor and Glory

Amen.
The Wives Prayer.
O LORD, I give thee humble thanks for calling me to the Honorable State of
Matrimony; give me, O Lord, thy heavenly Grace, that I may fear thee, and love,
reverence, and obey him whom thou have appointed to be my head in all good
things, to live peaceably and quietly with him; suffer me not to be puffed up
with the Vanities of the World, but grant that I may frame my mind and habit
suitable to the Estate of my Husband, and adorn my self with that which may
become a modest Woman to wear. Assist me, O Lord, that I may with his Consent,
prudently and with discretion, Govern his Family, and carefully mind that
nothing be wasted, norpermit any evil to be committed in his House.

FURNISH me, O Lord, with those Gifts and Graces which the Royal Preacher
described in a good Woman, and endue me with such a Care in the Education of my
Children, as belongs unto my part to perform, that I may live and rejoice to
see the prosperity of them in this life, and after this life is ended, grant
that we all may be received to thy eternal Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
The Child's Prayer.
MOST gracious God, to whom the Child's obedience to the Parents is always
acceptable, but their disobedience most displeasing, I humbly beseech thee to
remove far from me the horrid sin of Disobedience and Rebellion against my
Parents; O give me Grace to observe them with all diligence in Duty, obey them
in all lawful Commands, and aid and assist them in all their Necessities; give
me Grace to receive all their reproofs patiently, and not to perplex them by
Stubbornness and bad Courses.

SUFFER me not to scoff or deride at their Age or Infirmity, but rather supply
their Wants, and cover their Weaknesses. Forgive, O Lord, the many offenses I
have committed against them, increase their days, and preserve them sound in
Body and Mind; let them see their Childrens Children, to their Comfort and thy
Glory; let them Govern me, and the rest of their Family, with Prudence and good
Example, that when this life is ended, they may depart hence in peace, and come
to thy Kingdom unspotted, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Widows Prayer.
O ALMIGHTY God, who have promised to be a Father to the Fatherless, and a
Husband to the Widow, let thy tender Eye of Compassion look down upon me, and
my Children; preserve me and them from all Oppression and Wrong, and relieve
us, we beseech thee, in all our Necessities.

BLESS, O Lord, that small portion thou have lent me, for a competent
maintenance of me and mine, O let it be like the Widows Barrel of Meal, never
to waste, and like the Cruse of Oil, never to fail. Dispose our hearts to all
Obedience, and give us Grace to walk worthy of thee, and thy Mercies which we
daily and hourly receive. And lastly, in all our Afflictions, let me put my
whole trust and confidence in thee, and praise thy Name for evermore.

Amen.
The Orphans Prayer.
O ALMIGHTY and most merciful Father, thou have promised that when my Father
and my Mother forsakes me, thou O God, wilt take me up. O Lord, I am now, by
thy appointment, deprived of my Parents, who under thee, were the only stay I
had in this World. Be thou, O Lord my God, my Father and my Deliverer, teach me
to seek thee early, and endue me with thy Grace, that I may be obedient to
those whom thou art pleased to place over me.

MAKE me to remember thee my Creator in the days of my Youth, that I may lead
my life according to the rule of true Godliness; Govern and Guide, I beseech
thee, all my Actions, preserve my Body in health, and my Soul ^^om all evil
thoughts which may molest it; add unto me length of Days, Grace and Virtue, and
guide my Feet in the way of peace.

Amen.
A Prayer for a Young Man or Maid.
MOST gracious God, vouchsafe to me thy Heavenly Grace now and at all times;
more especially in this most dangerous part of my Life, when the heat of Youth,
and many temptations do surround me; O preserve me, I beseech thee, as the
apple of thine Eye, and though the flesh strives against the Spirit, yet do
thou exercise thy power and strengthen my imbecility: Stifle Sin in me at the
beginning that it arise not up to a habit, and prevent in me all evil and
unworthy thoughts against thy Divine Majesty.

O LORD I recommend unto thee my Soul as a Child that can of it self do
nothing; defend me from all enemies Spiritual and Temporal, keep my Soul, and
Body, pure, chaste, and undefiled, that I offend not either in thought word, or
deed: Give me grace, O Lord, to obey my Parents, and those to whose tuition I
am committed; and grant that if thou shall be pleased to call me to the
honorable estate of Matrimony, I may be joined with one, with whom I may serve
thee, in peace and holiness, all the days of my Life.

Amen.
A Prayer for a Servant.
O HOLY, and blessed Lord God, who tookest upon thee, the form of a Servant,
and wast obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, that thou might
work the Salvation of all people, as well bond as free; thou have been pleased
to call me to the State and Condition of a Servant, below many others in the
world, O make me humbly submit to it, and always praise and magnify thy holy
Name that thou have given me Health and strength of Body to perfrom my Duty.

LORD cast forth all murmurings and repinings in me, and all Envy at the
prosperity of others; Endue me with meekness and humility, and deliver me from
the slavery of Sin, that I may be made a Servant of Righteousness; teach me to
understand my duty, and to reverence those whom I serve, accounting them worthy
of that honor which appertains to them: Preserve me from Pride, unseemly
passions, or disrespectfull behavior toward my Superiors; quicken my
diligence in business, and grant that whatever I shall take in hand, I may not
do it with Eye Service, but in singleness of heart; and obtain thy Grace and
favor for Evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer for the fruits of the Earth.
MOST gracious God, thy Works are to be wondered at through the World; thou
make the grass to grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the service of Man: Thou
bring forth food out of the Earth, and blessest the increase of it: look
down O Lord, I beseech thee, upon all the dwellers upon earth wherein we
inhabit: That our Land may become fruitful and yield forth plenty in its proper
Season.

And O thou, who openest thy hand, and fillest all things Living with good
things; fill our hearts with wisdom, and all Christian virtues, that we may
bring forth abundantly the fruit of good works, to the honor and glory of thy
holy Name And: as thou Crownest the Year with thy goodness, and thy Clouds drop
fatness: So grant that we may evermore praise thee for all thy Mercies, from
whom comes every good and perfect gift, to whom be ascribed all honor, power
and glory, now, and forever,

Amen.
A Prayer for Seasonable Weather.
O LORD God, who for our sins art justly displeased at us, and do now
chastise us by keeping back thy rain from watering the Earth; whereby we are in
danger of losing the diligent labor of our hands: Pardon, O Lord we humbly
beseech our high provocations, and accept of our hearty and true Repentance,
and favorably and Mercifully forgive all our transgressions committed against
thee.

SHOWER down again thy blessings of Rain upon the Earth, and water it, O Lord,
that it may be softened and replenished: But let not immoderately the Floods
overflow us, nor the Seed be spoiled under the Clod: But let thy loving
kindness renw the face of the Earth' and make the green Pastures rejoice:
Hearken unto the Cry of the Poor and Needy, and though we eat our Bread in the
sweat of our Face yet punish us not with the Scarcity of it, which is the Staff
and Support of our Lives: Lord prosper all our labors, and let us with
moderation enjoy the fruit of it, this we beg for thy Sons sake our blessed
Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after a good Havest.
WE Bless and praise thy holy Name, O Lord, for sending us Rain from Heaven,
and fruitful Seasons, whereby thou have filled our hearts with Food and
gladness: Thou have made the Grass to grow upon the Mountains, and given Food
to the Beasts of the field, and have filled us with the finest of the Wheat
flower, thou have given Seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater, and have
loaded the Earth with thy bounty, that our Barns might be filled.

BLESSED for ever art thou O Lord, and magnified be thy Name for these and all
others this benefits which thou from time to time have bestowed upon us; O that
our hearts may overflow with love, and our Tongues with expressions of
thankfulness to thee; grant that we may never forget nor abuse thy loving
kindness toward us, but by a sober and charitable use of these thy Mercies, we
may be made fit for a continual supply of them, and at the last be made heirs
of thy glorious Kingdom.

Amen.
A Prayer for a Woman with Child.
O GOD, the Creator and preserver of all things, who in the beginning did
place mankind in unspeakable happiness, and had there continued, had not our
first Parents broke thy Divine precepts given them in Paradise: So that the
Earth for their sakes was accursed; and unto us the Daughters of Eve for our
transgressions thou have allotted most grievous pains and torments of Body in
bringing forth Children.

LORD extend unto me, and to all Women thy Mercy, mitigate the torments
thereof, that we may be able patiently to endure the pains of our travel at
the hour appointed: And make that easy and light to us, which our defects have
made heavy and burdensome; and that wherewith I am now laden, may graciously be
delivered from my frail Body: and send us all, good Lord, a safe deliverance,
that we may be made joyful and happy Mothers.

VOUCHSAFE unto me and to all that have conceived with child strength to bring
forth that which thine omnipotency has so wonderfully wrought in us, in our
greatest perils, O Lord help us, and mightily deliver us; let thy power might,
and Love, be no less manifest en the delivery, then in the forming of thiy
Creature, that being through thy goodness, made a joyful Mother I may obtain
my perfect strength again, and live to praise thee for evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer for a Woman near the time of her Travel.
O GOD most holy, the speedy helper of all those who rely upon thee, by thy
almighty power I was formed, and fashioned in the Womb, by thy tender care I
was brought from thence, and by thy Merciful providence, I have been preserved
even to this momenthin laud and magnify thy holy Name, and implore thy never
failing aid in this approaching time of my necessity: O be not far off rom me
when trouble is nigh at hand, but hear my voice and save me when I call upon
thee! mitigate my pains or endue me with patience; and support my Spirits in
that great conflict.

LORD perfect what thou have begun, and what thou have wrought in secret bring
forth I beseech thee into thy most mavelous light; that we may all behold the
wonders of thy Wisdom and extol thy power: O Lord in thee alone do I humbly
place my Confidence, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth; I
wholly resign my self unto thee, beseeching thee to have Mercy upon me, and
when ever thou shall be pleased to call me from this Life, Lord fit me for a
better, where all sorrows and tears shall be done away, and everlasting joys
possess our hearts for evermore.

Amen.
The Midwives Prayer before Deliverance
MOST gracious God, who by thy never failing providence have kept me even from
my Mothers Womb to this moment, and have now deputed me the unworthiest of all
thy Servants to this great office, for a help and comfort, in that great pain
and peril of Child birth: Be with me, O Lord, I beseech thee, and assist me in
this great work, which I am now ready to undertake; prosper thou, O Lord, the
work of my hands, O prosper I beseech thee, my handy work.

O PUT thy fear into my heart, that I may be as sincere to the Poor as to the
Rich, to save life and not to destroy, let me not be too timorous, nor too
violent, but endue me with those virtues and graces, which thou know most
convenient for me, and give a Blessing to this undertaking, preserve me I
humbly beseech thee, in the dangerous times, from contagion, infection, or any
bodily diseases, which may be received from sick Persons.

AND as thou have by thy Almighty power made her Conceive, and have now even
brought it to the Birth, so give her strength also to bring forth: Support her
Spirits in her labor, bless the endeavors of those who are present with her,
preserve the life of that which strugles in her Womb to be delivered: And let
us behold the operation of thy hands, to all our Joy and Comfort: Lord hear our
Prayers, and let our cry come unto thee; save her, and help her, we humbly
beseech thee, O Lord. Our Father, etc.

A Thanksgiving after Deliverance.
FORASMUCH as it has pleased thee, O Almighty God, of thy gra cious Goodness,
to ease me of my pains and deliver me of my burden, and from the great danger
and peril of Childbirth, I here humbly prostrate my Soul and Body before thee,
to be unto thee a reasonable, lively, and living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable
in thy sight, giving thy Divine Majesty infinite and unfeigned thanks for this
thy gracious preservation of me, and delivering me out of this great danger of
Death, under which I might have perished, had not thy mercy and goodness
embraced me on every side.

TO thee alone, most heavenly Father, be given and ascribed all Praise and
Thanksgiving, now and for ever; as thou have been graciously pleased to give me
a Child, so Lord, give me thy Grace which is sufficient for me, to devote and
consecrate it wholly to thee, and thy service; to this end work mightily in it,
by thy holy spirit, sanctify it from the Womb, not whilst it hangs upon the
Breasts, but so long as it shall breathe in the Land of the Living, until thou
translate it hence to Reign with thee in Glory.

Amen.
A Prayer for one near any Temptation.
O MERCIFUL God, thou exercisest thy Children with sundry Trials and
Temptations, leaving them to themselves, as thou did Hezekiah, to the end he
might see his frailty; some like St. Peter, thou exposest to the boisterous
Winds of Satan's Winnowings; and others, like St. Paul, to the blows of the
Adversaries vehement Buffetings; O God, thine only Son thou did not exempt
from Satan's sharpest and stoutest Trials, when thou conductedst him into the
Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil.

IF thou, O Lord, should permit me in like manner to be tried and tempted,
suffer me not at any time to be overcome, but hold me up by thy Almighty power,
animate by the presence of thy blessed Spirit, and let thy Grace be ever
sufficient for me, whereby I may foil my Enemy, and in the end get the Victory;
detect his Policies, discover his Subtilties, defeat his doings and dealings
which are against me; to this end endue me with such Wisdom, as may make me
foresee his Stratagems, such vigilance as I may avoid his Snares, which he
prepares for my Souls destruction.

LET no temptation take me, but what is common to Man, try me not above my
strength, but with the temptation make me a way to escape; let me never yield
to the motions of Satan, suggesting unto me Death or Desperation, but grant me
patience to expect the hour of my Departure, my Souls Separation, the
dissolution of my Body, and deliverance from the misery of this wretched World;
let my trouble be without distress, my perplexity without despair, my
persecution without forsaking, and my casting down without destruction; if
Tears fall from my Eyes, in thy good time wipe them away, and preserve them in
thy Bottle, that they may be precious in thy sight.

O LORD, if thou leavest me for a while, draw nigh again unto me in great
Compassion; cover my head in my spiritual Conflicts; let thy Love be my Banner,
thy Faithfulness and Truth my Shield and Buckler; let no trial surprise me, but
give me a right Judgment, that I may count it all Joy when I fall into diverse
Temptations; O let not my heart be hardened by them, as the Israelites were who
provoked thee in the Wilderness, but sanctify all thy visitations unto me,
that I may be bettered and reformed by them, that my Faith being tried,
patience may have her perfect work in me entire, lacking nothing.

I KNOW, O Lord, in all thy Temptations thou ever have one end, and Satan
another; thou triest me to the end, that being faithful, thou might give me
a Crown of Life, but Satan seeks to seduce me to Wickedness; but O holy Spirit,
thou preserver of all Men, keep me by thy Grace, and strengthen me by thy
Power, be present with me, and president in me, and as thy sufferings abound in
me, so let thy consolation much more abound; and in the midst of my greatest
Agonies of Mind, let thy Comforts refresh my disquieted Soul.

LORD, let thy mighty Hand, and stretched-out-Arm, be now and always my
Defense, thy mercy and loving kindness in Christ Jesus thy dear Son, my
Salvation, thy true and holy Word my Instruction, thy Grace and holy Spirit my
Comfort and Consolation.

THE peace of God which passes all Understanding, keep my Heart and Mind in
the love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the blessing of God
Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be with me, and remain with me and
mine, and with the whole Church of God, from this time forth, and for evermore.

GOD be merciful unto me, and bless me, the Lord lift up the light of his
Countenance upon me, and be merciful unto me, and grant me his everlasting
peace.

Amen.
A Prayer for one afflicted in Mind.
O FATHER of Mercy, and God of all Consolation, vouchsafe I beseech thee,
relief and succor, unto me a wretched Sinner, who am much tormented in Mind,
and afflicted in Conscience; Lord, I am afraid of thy Judgments, and the severe
Threatenings written in thy Law against those sins I have committed, but, O
Lord, break not the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; wound not my
humble and contrite Heart, but revive my Spirit that goes mourning all the day
long; though Satan thinks thou have smitten and forsaken me, yet frustrate his
hopes and expectations; leave me not destitute of thy Grace, as a prey unto the
Enemy of my Soul, but mightily preserve, and evermore defend me.

AND though my Conscience accuses me, my Memory witnesses against me, and my
Reason condemns me; though I am overwhelmed in discomfort, and have lost the
voice of joy and gladness, and have neither worth to appease thy wrath, nor
patience to endure thy trial, yet send me, O Lord, the comfort of thy holy
Spirit into my heart, that I may not be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness,
but may rejoice in thee with joy unspeakable and full of Glory: Open, and set
open, the Gate of thy Mercy, to the greatness of my Misery, for my mind is
sorrowful, my heart heavy, my spirit is oppressed, my words are stopped with
sighs, and my complaints watered with tears.

IN executing thy Judgments, Lord, remember Mercy, try me not least I be
condemned; weigh not my offenses, but pardon my offenses; sanctify all those
means unto me which may afford me relief, as Prayer, Conference, Meditation,
reading and hearing of thy Word, and receiving the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of thy Son, and my alone Savior and Redeemer; mitigate my extremities,
abate my fears, and moderate my afflictions; let not Night Visions, like
Nebuchadnezzar's, make me afraid, but when I awake, stay me with Flaggons, and
comfort me with Apples, thy precious promises, which are pleasant to the Soul.

RECTIFY my Understanding, as in the days of Old, and Drink no longer unto me
in the Cup of Affliction, but in the Chalice of refreshing, that I may pay my
Vows unto thee, and call upon thy Name in the sight of all thy Congregation;
but if it be thy good pleasure to try me, and not take away this Cup from me,
confirm my Faith, and continue unto me that Hope which is to be revealed; to
this end, cause me with the Eye of Faith to look up to thee, who chastisest me,
and wait for the appointed time of my delivery out of all my Troubles.

LORD, suffer me not to be swallowed up with despair, but vouchsafe me a full
assurance of thy Mercy, that thou will never leave me, nor forsake me, but wilt
be in life my God, in death my Deliverer, and after death my Eternal Rewarder.
Lord hearken, and incline thine Ear unto these my Requests for thy Sons sake,
my only Lord and Savior. Our Father, etc.

THE Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the most
comfortable Fellowship of God the holy Ghost, be with me, bless, preserve and
keep me, both in Soul and Body, in Goods and good Name, in Life, Health, Peace
and Godliness, together with thy whole Church, and all that appertain unto me,
now, and for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer to be used in behalf of one troubled in Mind.
ALMIGHTY God, the only Guide and Comfort of our Souls, and to whom alone we
fly for succor in all afflictions; O Lord we presume now to appear before thee
in behalf of this thy afflicted Servant, Support him I beseech thee, in his
greatest conflicts, silence and appease his troubled Spirit, that he may
quietly hearken to thy blessed Words of, Come unto me all ye that labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

THOU have solemnly proclaimed, O Lord, in thy holy Scripture, that thou do
not delight in the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his
Wickedness and live. O make him with joy feel his Soul turning to thee, since
no satisfactory Comfort can be acquired but only in thy love and favor which
to all thy Servants is better than life it self; We beseech thee, speak peace
to his Conscience and say unto him and all that are here present, that thou art
our Salvation.

ENDUE him with thy Grace, give him peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy
Ghost; O give him the Comfort of thy help again, and Establish him with thy
free Spirit: quicken him, O Lord, for thy Names sake, and for thy Righteousness
sake bring his Soul out of this trouble: Put gladness into his heart, and
restore him again if it be thy Blessed will, that he and we may Evermore
rejoice in thee, who art the Father of all Mercies and the God of all
Consolation, to whom be Glory and Praise now, and for Evermore.

Amen.
Meditations for the Sick.
O GOD, thou do what thou please in Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea, and in
all deep places; thou art full of Compassion and tender Mercy, long suffering
and aboundest in goodness and truth, thou alone forgivest Sins and savest all
those, that trust in thee, in time of affliction.

I KNOW that all Flesh is Grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the
flower of the field; the grass withers, the flower fades, but the Word of
thee, our God, shall stand for Ever: In thy word therefore, and gracious
promises is my hope, which is my greatest Comfort in my affliction.

IN the multitude of thy thoughts within me, thy Comforts shall delight my
Soul; I will rejoice even in the midst of my tribulation, and glory in thy Holy
Name, who make all things work together for good to them that love thee:
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff does Comfort me.

WE are but of Yesterday, and know nothing; because our days upon Earth are as
a shadow: When thou with rebukes do correct Man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to Consume away like a Moth: Surely every Man is vanity; my time is in
thy hand: Make thy face to shine upon thy Servant: Save me for thy Mercies sake.

HIDE not thy face from me; put not thy Servant away in thine anger: Thou had
been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God my of salvation: Thou
shall show me the Path of Life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at
thy right hand there are pleasures for Evermore.

WE have had Fathers of the Flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence, shall we not much rather be in Subjection to the Father of Spirits,
and live: he draws the mighty with his power; he rises up, and no Man is
sure of Life.

WE have received good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive Evil?
Affliction comes not forth of the dust; neither does Travail come forth of the
Ground: Let us search and try our ways* and turn again to the Lord, for though
our outward Man decay, our inward Man is renewed.

WE are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be Condemned with the World:
For we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, but in God that raised the dead, who has delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver: And in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver us.

BUT we know that all things work together for good to them that love God: Let
them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
Souls to him in well doing, as unto ae Faithful Creator. We that are in this
Tabernacle, do groan, being burdened.

I KNOW, O Lord, that thy judgments are just, and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled O let this lightaffliction, which
will quickly pass away, cause unto me afterward a more excellent and eternal
weight of Glory.

REMEMBER, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the Clay, and will thou
bring me into the Dust again? Deliver me, O Lord, from Eternal Death, in that
day wherein Heaven and Earth shall be dissolved, when thou come to judge the
Earth, I know thou will bring me to Death, and to the House appointed for all
Living.

A Prayer to be used by a sick Person.
O GOD, my Creator and Preserver, thou have made me after thine own Image, in
Knowledge, Holiness, and Righteousness, but I have sinned, most holy Father,
against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called, or
reckoned amongst thy Children; for this Image of thine I have defaced, I have
filled my Understanding with Ignorance, my Will with Stubbornness, my
Affections with Perverseness, my Heart with Deceitfulness, and my whole Life
with Disobedience; ever since I drew my Breath, I have drank Iniquity like
Water, so that I can expect nothing but Death, and to be Arraigned at the Bar
of thy Justice, there to receive an irrevocable Doom.

BUT O most merciful God, for thy dear Sons sake, blot out all my Offenses, and
receive me Graciously; enlarge my patience to endure thy Trial, and lay no more
upon me than I am able to bear; give a happy issue unto all Temptations, and
make a way for me to escape, and in the end, grant me a full Deliverance. As
thou have made me of Dust, so thou can take from me my breath, and cast me
forth again to that Earth from whence I was taken; but I humbly beseech thee,
for to spare me a little, that I may recover my health and strength, before I
go hence, and be no more seen.

I CONFESS, O Lord, there is no soundness in my Flesh, because of thy
Displeasure, nor any rest in my Bones; by reason of my sin; my heart pants,
my strength fails, and my beauty consumes away like a Moth fretting a
Garment. O Lord, if it be thy holy Will, ease my Agonies, mitigate my
Extremities, be mindful of my Sorrows, and be merciful unto my Sins; redeem my
Life from Destruction, strengthen my Weakness, heal my Malady, and cause me
again to walk before thee, in the Land of the Living, but if thou have
determined to call me hence, thy Will be done; grant me patience under thy
Correction, and a lively Faith in the All-sufficient and Efficacious Merit of
Christ my Savior; seal unto me a free, and a full pardon of all my sins, in
the Blood of thy dear Son, and say unto my Soul, that thou will be my Salvation.

IN assiance of thy merciful Absolution, cause me to confess mine Iniquities,
and fill my heart with such a Godly sorrow, as may work my Repentance unto
Salvation, never to be repented of; sprinkle me with the Blood of Jesus, and
purify me from my daily Pollutions, that being washed, justified, and
sanctified, I may be presented unto thee, without spot or wrinkle; let nothing
separate me from the love of thee, grant me thy preserving Grace, that dying,
thine Angels may convey my Soul into Abraham's Bosom, there to reign with thee,
World without end.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said by the Friends of the Sick.
O LORD, our God, and great Creator, thou made us innocent, but by sin we
have brought Death and Destruction upon our selves, for we have profaned thy
Sabbaths, contemned thine Ordinances, cast thy Word behind our backs, lived in
all sin and sensuality, spiritual slumber and security, so that thou might
justly cut us off from the Land of the Living, and give us our Portion with
Hypocrites, where there is weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

BUT, O Lord, for thy Mercy sake, and for the Merits of thy Son spare us a
little, and give us space of amendment, before we go hence, and be no more
seen; correct us in thy Mercy, and not in thy Justice, lest we should be
consumed and brought to nothing; whilst we live, teach us to die daily, to
mortify the deeds of the Flesh, and to contemn the World, with the Vanities
thereof; wean us from inordinate Self-love, that we may not endear our selves
too much to these Transitory lives of ours, but may be ready and willing to
depart, when it shall stand with thy good pleasure to call for us; take away
from us the bitterness of Death, and sweeten by the Cross of Christ these
Waters of Marah, that we may sigh and lament in our selves, desiring to be
delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God.

LET our lives, and the life of this thy sick Servant, be now and ever precious
in thy sight, look mercifully upon him that is grieved with sickness: Lord, if
thou will, thou can make him whole, send him therefore help and health from
thy holy place, and evermore mightily defend him; let the Enemy have no
advantage against him, nor the Wicked approach to hurt him, but be thou present
with him, strengthen his Faith, increase his patience under thy Correctinghand,
raise him up from his sorrowful Bed, and if thou art pleased longer to exercise
him, lend him strength to endure thy Trial.

BUT if thou have determined to take him hence, Lord, certify unto him how
long he has to live, make him to know his end, and the measure of his days,
that by Prayer and Repentance, he may provide wisely for his last end, and be
found of thee in peace, and enjoy everlasting happiness; dispose his
Meditations aright for Mortality, and at that last hour, make him to deny
himself in renouncing his Justification by any inherent worth or righteousness,
and in all sorrows and sufferings let thy comforts rejoice his Soul.

TO this end, mortify in him the Corruption of Nature, quicken him with the
Soul of new life, and establish him with thy free Spirit; purge his heart from
all worldly thoughts, and his mind from carnal desires, motions and affections;
wash his Soul and Body with the Blood of Christ, and sanctify him throughout
in Spirit, Soul and Body, with the Grace of thy holy Spirit, that departing in
the true Faith, not casting away his confidence, nor hope of rejoicing, in full
assurance of a blessed Resurrection, he may have boldness in the day of the
Lord Jesus, and so pass from Death to Life, and be ever with thee to behold thy
Glory; grant this for the sake of thy dear Son, our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
Another Prayer to be used by those that are about the Sick.
O LORD our God, thou art the Judge of all the Earth; we Dust and Ashes, vile
and miserable Sinners, do here in all humility cast down our selves before thee
for our Sins, which are the occasion of all the evil of punishment thou*
inflictest on the Sons and Daughters of Men. Lord hear us, and forgive
whatsoever is past, and grant that we may for ever hereafter serve and please
thee through newness of life, walking before thee in holiness and righteousness
all our days; and because the days are evil, give us Grace to redeem the time,
that numbering our days aright, we may apply our hearts unto true Wisdom; make
us constantly to eschew evil and do good, to seek peace and ensue it.

LOOK with thine Eye of Mercy and Compassion upon this thy Servant, who is
grieved with Sickness; sanctify this thy Visitation unto him, that those
Graces which thou have begun to work in him, may be strengthened, increased,
and by degrees perfected; restore unto him the voice of joy and health, that
the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice. And seeing we have need of
patience, send this thy Servant such a degree of patience and consiancy, that
he may continue thy Faithful Soldier and Servant unto his lives end; work in
him a sense and seeling of sin, and true sorrow for the same, which may cause
repentance unto Salvation never to be repented of.

O LORD, if it be not thy good pleasure to raise him up from his Bed of
languishing, prepare his heart for Death, and his Soul for Heaven, and wash
away his Sins in the Blood of Jesus; wean his affections from the love of this
World, and set them on those things which are above, that being absent from the
Body, he may be present with thee, O Lord. Repair in this thy Servant thine own
Image, and renew it in knowledge, holiness, and righteousness, that thou may
acknowledge him for thine; raise him up from the Grave unto the Resurrection of
Life, and for ever satisfy him with thy likeness, and transform him into the
same from Glory to Glory.

Amen.
A Prayer to recommend the Soul to God when it is departing the Body.
O MOST Gracious God, we commend into thy holy hands the Soul of this thy
Servant, beseeching thee to defend it from all evil, and from thy wrath, which
he has deserved; let thy holy Angels receive this Soul from this ruinous
habitation of Clay, and carry it unto the bosom of thy dear Son; O say unto
this Soul, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise, and fear not, for it is
my Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom.

GIVE unto his decaying Body, a blessed and a glorious Resurrection, to his
weary and afflicted, his penitent and redeemed Soul, a portion in the blessed
sentence of the right hand amongst the happy Children of thy Father, who shall
receive the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the World; let his
Soul dwell in heavenly Mansions, be supported with thy hope, comforted with a
holy conscience, rejoice in a confirmed pardon, be recreated with the
visitation of Angels, and be arrayed in white to follow after the Lamb whither
soever he goes.

A Prayer for a Soul departing.
O LORD, remember the good things which by thy Grace, and by the Inspiration of
thy holy Spirit, thy Servant has performed, and remember not his evil Deeds,
nor the frailties of his Youth, which by the weakness of the Flesh, and the
temptations of Satan, and the vain contingencies of this World, have afflicted
and humbled his poor, but penitent Soul. O God, remember thy only Son did die
for these, and thy blessed Spirit occasioned the other; and for whom thou have
given thy Son* and to whom thou have vouchsafed to give thy Spirit, give thy
eternal Pardon, and thy everlasting Glories, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
An Act of Resignation when a Friend is deceased.
O ETERNAL God, who bring good out of evil, comfort out of sorrow, and after
a gentle visitation do refresh thy Children, have mercy upon us, and return
to us with thy loving kindness, exchanging our present sorrow into the
advantages of holiness and blessing. Thy Judgments, O Lord, are unsearchable,
and thy ways past finding out, but we will bless thy holy Name at all times,
for thou, O Lord, have given, and have taken away, blessed be the Name of the
Lord.

BE thou now, and for ever, what thou have so graciously promised; a Father of
the Fatherless, a Husband to the Widow, and a God of Comfort to them that mourn
in secret. Grant that we thy Servants may not weep as them without hope,
neither murmur at thy dispensation, nor complain of any thing but our selves,
nor desire any thing but that thy Will may be done, nor do any thing but what
is agreeable to thy holy Word and Commandment.

GRANT O Lord, that when thou smitest any of us it may increase thy fear in us,
and when thou do good to any of us in smiting or forbearing, in chastising or
Comforting it may increase thy love in us: And let thy holy Spirit so prevail
over all our wills and understandings, our Affections, and the outward Man, our
interests and our hopes, that we may live in this World pleasing to thee, and
may depart out of this World with the peace of a good Conscience, and may
attain to a joyful Resurrection in the last day, and to a participation of thy
Glory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Meditation after Recovery from Sickness.
O COME hither and behold the Works of the Lord, how wonderful he is in his
doings toward the Children of Men: O come hither and hearken all ye that fear
God; and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul: I called unto him with
my mouth, and gave him praises with my Tongue: O Lord my God, I cried unto
thee, and thou have healed me.

THOU Lord have brought my Soul out of Hell: Thou have kept my Life from them,
that go down to the pit: O what great troubles and Adversities have thou showed
me, and yet did thou turn and refresh me! yea and broughtest me from the deep
of the Earth again: Praised be god which (...) not cast out my Prayer, nor
^^^ned his Mercy from me.

LORD what is Man that thou have respect unto him! Or the Son of Man that thou
so*regardest him: The Lord is Righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
Works: The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him; yea all such as call
upon him faithfully: He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also
will hear their Cry and will help them.

SING Praises unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks unto him for a
remembrance of his Holiness: for his Wrath endures but the twinkling of Eye,
and in his pleasure is Life: Heaviness may endure for a Night, but joy comes
in the Morning: Praised be the Lord daily, even the God which helps us and
pouereth his benefits upon us.

HE is our God, even the God of whom comes Salvation: God is the Lord by whom
we escape Death: I will be glad and rejoice in thy Mercy: For thou have
Considered my trouble, and have known my Soul in adver^ity, thou have turned my
heaviness into joy; thou have put off my Sackeloth, and girded me with gladness.

PRAISE the Lord, O my Soul: And all that is within me Praise his holy Name:
Praise the Lord, O my Soul; and forget not all his benefits, Which forgiveth
all thy Sin, and heals all thine infirmities: Which saves thy life from
destruction and Crowns thee with Mercy and loving kindness: I shall not dye
but live, and declare the works of the Lord: The Lord has chastned me, and
corrected me, but he has not given me over unto Death.

A Thanksgiving after Recovery from Sickness
OMNIPOTENT Lord God the Author of Life, who bring down to the Grave and
raisest up again, I most humbly confess to the Glory of thine infinite Majesty,
that if thou had not out of thy tender Compassion blessed and sustained me in
my sickness, I should have gone down to the Gates of Death; but it was thy
goodness, and loving kindness to spare and deliver me from all dangers: Let me
for ever Praise and glorify thy holy Name for this and all other thy Mercies
toward me.

THOU art gracious when thou smitest me, but I cannot express thy infinite
sweetness, when thou Relievest my necessity, when thou sustainest my Sorrows,
when thou do^t deliver me from thy Wrath, when thou hear my prayers, and
when thou pourest thy Benefits upon me: O give unto me thy unworthy Servant a
thankful Heart, and obedient and loving Spirit, a carefulness of my Duty,
Charity, and Humility, Zeal of thy Glory, and a submission to thy Divine will
and Pleasure: that serving thee in all things, I may be conducted at last to
thy Heavenly Kingdom.

TEACH me always to remember my latter end, and that this Life is but a
shadow, that declineth, and withers like Grass; But thou O Lord shall endure
for ever, for thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no end: Bring me by
an unchangeable love and obedience to thee in all the changes and chances of
this mortal Life; for his sake who loved me, and gave himself for me, even thy
Son, and my alone Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer before a Journey.
O MOST gracious and Merciful Lord God who art a God a far off, as well as nigh
at hand, be pleased to send thy holy Angel before me thy Servant, to defend me
in this my journey from the heat of the day, and the Cold of the night, from
the Arrow that flies at Noon, and the evil Spirits that walk in darkness, from
errors and falls, from precipices and fracture of bones, from Robbers, evil
intentions, and bad accidents, from violent Weather, and violent Fears, from
all impressions of evil Men, and evil Spirits; let this Journey be safe and
useful to me thy Servant, Comfortable to my Relations, and holiness to thy
great Name.

THE Lord bless me and keep me, the Lord make his Face to shine upon me, and be
gracious unto me; keep me from all evil, and lead me into all good by the
Conduct of thy good Spirit; let thy providence and love, be my defense and
security, thy Grace be my portion, and thy Service my Employment; do thou O
Lord, go in and out before me, and keep me in all my ways, and lead me in thy
Paths: bring me back again in peace and safety, and prosper all my innocent and
holy purposes; and when the few and evil days of my Pilgrimage are ended, do
thou of thy infinite Mercy bring me to the Regions of holiness and eternal
peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after a Journey.
O GOD, the great Creator and preserver of all Men, I give thee humble and
hearty thanks for thy great Mercies showed unto me, all the days of my Life;
how often O Lord, have thou turned away thy Face from my sins, and made as if
thou perceivest them not? How often might thou have withheld thy hand of
preservation from me, and yet thy patience has extended so far toward me,
that thou have suffered no prejudice to befall me? And as I owe thee infinite
thanks for thy former preservations, so now I am further obliged to thee, that
thou have at this time not only guided me to the place, whither I designed to
go, but have also brought me back in safety, and in my absence have preserved
all things unto me.

GIVE me thy Grace, O Lord, to be always mindful of these, and all other thy
Mercies toward me, and make me truly thankful unto thee for them; and grant
that as by this thy Mercy I have well finished my affairs abroad, and am
returned safe to this my Temporal habitation; so grant that my Spirit after
this Pilgrimage here on Earth, may return to thy Heavenly mansion, and there
dwell with thee for ever, and that for the sake and merits of Jesus Christ, my
Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer before a Voyage.
OETERNAL God, even the God of our Salvation, the hope of all the ends of the
Earth, and of them that remain in the wide Ocean; under the shadow of whose
Wings we are always secure, and without whose protection we cannot expect
safety; I have been, O Lord, preserved by thee until this moment from many
dangers, for which I have not expressed my thankfulness in acknowledging those
daily blessings I have received from thee; but O Lord, forget and forgive those
manifold sins which I have Committed against thee, and blot them out of thy
Book of remembrance.

PURGE me O Lord, I beseech thee from all vile affections, and grant I may
bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit; go along with me with thy blessed Spirit
in this my Voyage, preserve me from Pirates, Robbers and Enemies, defend me
from Rocks, Sands and Shelves, and keep me from Thunder and Lightning, Storms
and Tempestuous Weather, or any other danger that may dismay me. To thee, O
Lord, I commend my Body and Spirit, to dispose of me according to thy holy Will
and Pleasure; if thou art pleased to call for my life upon the surface of the
Waters, I know thy Almighty Word can command the Sea to give up her Dead at the
last and great audit.

BUT if thou have determined to bring me safe to my desired Haven, give me thy
Grace which is sufficient for me to walk according to thy holy Will in all
things; make me to lay hold of eternal Life, which as the Anchor of Hope, is
both sure and steadfast; keep me from all temptations Ghostly and Bodily, and
from sudden Death, and in thy good time bring me to the Land of the Living,
there to reign with thee for evermore.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after a Voyage.
O IMMORTAL God, I have seen thy Works O Lord, and thy Wonders in the Deep;
thou spakest the Word and the stormy Wind arose, which lifted up the Waves
thereof, but when we cried unto thee, thou made the Storm to cease, so that
the Waves thereof were still; then did we rejoice because we were at rest, and
thou broughtest us safe to that Haven where we would be: O that men would
therefore praise thee, O Lord, for thy Goodness, and declare the Wonders thou
do continually for them.

I BLESS thy holy Name, for conducting me through those many dangers which
encompassed me, and praise thy Mercy that the Deep has not swalloyed me up,
and that I am not gone down into the place of Silence. I also praise thy holy
Name, and admire thy loving Kindness toward me, that thou have not delivered
up my Body and Goods as a prey into the hands of unreasonable Men, but have
brought me to my desired Haven, and at last has returned me back in safety to
my Habitation.

O LET me never forget to pay those vows I made to thee, when I was in trouble;
but give me an awful sense and apprehension of thy great power, and possess my
Soul with a true reverence of thy Divine Majes^y; that I may evermore serve
thee in holiness and Righteousness all the days of my Life; Endue me with thy
holy Spirit that I may become acceptable in thy sight, and may be fitted at
lenght for future Glories this I beg for thy Son Jesus Christ sake, my only
Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer in a Storm.
O LORD, our God, thou have commanded us in the day of Calamity to call upon
thy Name, and thou have promised to hear us; Lord, I fly unto thee, who art a
sure refuge, thy Floodgates are opened, and the Floods lift up their lofty
waves. But thou O Lord, most high art mightier than the noise of many Waters;
yea, than the mighty Waves of the Sea: Thou can in a moment if it stand with
thy Divine will and pleasure, rebuke the Winds and the Sea and this Storm into
a Calm

I KNOW I justly deserve, to be cast away and utterly to be rejected by thee;
but Lord save us or else we perish, accept of my unfeigned Sorrow for all my
sins and trangressions, and endue me with a steadfast resolution to forsake
them; be merciful unto us, O God, be merciful unto us, and save us from
perishing in these deep Waters; O refresh us with thy Mercy and that soon, lest
we go down into the place of silence; O comfort us in this great distress, that
though the Sea rage and swell, our hearts may be quiet and still in this time
of our disconsolation.

AND as I earnestly desire to be protected from this great Peril and danger
which now terrifies us, so I earnestly beseech thee, that thou will for ever
fill my heart with such an awful dread of thy Majesty, that I may fear thy Name
and praise thy power in the great Congregation; awake my dull and drousie Soul,
from the sloth of Sin, and renew a right Spirit within me; fill me with the
gifts and Graces of thy holy Spirit, that I may live the life of the Righteous,
and never forget thy loving kindness; save us now from death I beseech thee,
from the merciless Waves who are now ready to swallow us up, and bring us home
in safety for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after a Storm.
I PRAISE and glorify thy holy Name, O Lord, for all thy mercies and blessings
vouchsafed unto me, especially for this thy last great Deliverance, wherein I
was encompassed in that wide Ocean, whom thou have set bounds and limits to; if
thou, O Lord had not been on my side, the Sea had swallowed me up quick, and
I had gone down into the deep of silence; but thou have been my God and my
deliverer, and have put a new Song into my Mouth, even a Song of Praise, and
Thanksgiving unto my God.

I ACKNOWLEDGE O Lord, that thou art the God of all the Earth, and of them that
remain in the broad Sea; Blessed for ever, and magnified be thy Name, that thou
have not cast me out of thy sight, nor turned thy Mercy from me; I have escaped
thy raging Sea, and the noise of the proud Waves have done me no harm; if thy
Almighty providence had not protected me, the Streams had gone over my Soul:
But the stormy wind and Tempest I have narrowly escaped, the storm is ceased,
and I am safely delivered.

AND now what shall I render to thee O Lord, for this and all other thy great
benefits? I will offer up unto thee, the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will
pay those vows I so solemnly made unto thee when I was in trouble; I will
evermore remember, that my help is in the Lord who made Heaven and Earth, and
that thou art that God that can and will deliver me; let this thy mercy and
lovingkindness never depart my memory, but let me praise thy goodness and sing
of thy power, unto my lives end.

Amen.
A Prayer in time of Thunder and lightning.
O MOST mighty, and terrible Lord God, before whom the Earth shakes and the
Heavens drop at thy presence; thou overturnest the mountains by the roots and
removest them in thy anger; thou do great things and thy ways are past
finding out; yea thou do wonders without number: Thy voice O Lord, is very
powerful, full of Majesty, that it rends the Air, and casts forth flames of
Fire. Thou can, O Lord, at this time, tear us in pieces, and none can be able
to deliver us, for there is none but thee alone that delivers after this sort.

O WHO would not dread thy Allglorious Name, O Lord? Who would not stand in awe
of thy Majesty? Who would not fear thy Judgments, when thou shoots forth thy
Arrows of Thunder and Lightning? It is of thy mere Mercy, O Lord, that we are
not at this time consumed, but that thy tender compassions fail not toward us
poor, but miserable Sinners; the blast of the breath of thy No^trils, can drive
us like Chaff before the face of the Wind, and chase us into the bottomless
Pit, from whence there is no Redemption.

BUT thine Eye, O Lord, has spared us, and we are yet alive, O make us living
Monuments of thy Mercy, that we may work out our Repentance unto Salvation, and
let it be such a Repentance never to be repented of; possess my heart with such
a fear and a love of thee, that I may tremble at thy Word, and melt at the
sight of thy Judgments; deliver me, I humbly beseech thee, in that great day of
thy appearance, and let me not be in the number of Depart ye Cursed, but among
those whom thou call, Come you blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you. This I humbly beg for thy Sons sake, our only Lord and
Savior.

Amen.
The Mariners Prayer.
O GOD, the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, thou do whatsoever thou
please^t in the Sea, and in all deep places; I, the most unworthiest of all thy
Servants, am at this time called upon to behold thy Wonders in the Deep, and to
perform my Duty in great Waters. Guide me, I beseech thee, in all times and in
all places; be thou our skilful Pilot to steer us, and protect us from all
Dangers, and rebuke the Winds and the Seas when they molest us; preserve our
Vessel from being rent by the loud cracks of Thunder, or from being burnt by
Lightning, or any other accident; keep us and save us from tempestuous Weather,
from bitter Frosts, Hail, Ice, Snow, or Whirlwinds, and from Captivity and
Slavery.

TEACH me, O God, to remember thee my Creator in the days of my Youth, to
continually think upon thee, and to praise thy Name for all thy Mercies; bless
all our Friends, I beseech thee, that are on Land, and let their Prayers for us
be acceptable in thy sight, and grant that our next meeting together may be for
the better, and not for the worse, even to the praising and magnifying of thy
holy Name, and the Salvation of our own Souls, in the great day of the Lord
Jesus, to whom with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed all Honor, Power
and Glory, Adoration and Subjection, now and for evermore.

Amen.
The Soldiers Prayer.
O MOST Omnipotent Lord God, Heaven is thy Throne, and Earth is thy Footstool,
and the whole Host of Heaven continually pays obedience to thee. O Lord, I
present my self before thee, acknowledging my own vileness, but thy infinite
goodness, my own weakness, but thy infinite Power and Majesty. O thou that
teaches our hands to War, and our fingers to Fight, endue me with a courage and
resolution to run through those difficulties I may meet withal, and when any
engagement presents it self for the public good of my King and Country, then,
O my God, animate me with that vigor and Christian fortitude, that I may
overcome all those which oppose thee, and thy people.

PRESERVE me, I beseech thee, and bless me in all my Enterprises; save me from
Death, and cover my head in our day of Battle; prosper our Arms with good
success, make our Religion and Country, like the House of David, grow stronger
and stronger, but let the Enemy, like the House of Saul, grow weaker and
weaker; let no covetous desires, greediness of spoil, ambition, vainglory,
hatred, malice, uncharitableness, or any thing that exalts it self against thee
and thy Kingdom; ever take hold of me, keep me from all Atheism, Infidelity,
Blasphemy and Profaneness; from all Rioting, Chambering and Wantonness; grant
that I may do no violence to any man, nor accuse no man falsely, but be content
with my Wages, that when ever Death approaches, I may joyfully, giving up the
Ghost, pronounce this saying, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give unto all those
which love and fear him, and put their trust in his mercy.

Amen.
The Magistrates Prayer.
O GOD, thou Supreme Judge of the World, thou didit ordain Man through thy
Wisdom, and gave him dominion over thy Creatures, and authority to govern the
World, according to equity and righteousness, and to execute Judgment with all
uprightness; thou have appointed me a Minister, O Lord, and a Judge of thy Sons
and Daughters, but none can discharge so great a trust, without thy divine
power and assi^tance.

TO thee therefore, O Lord, do I humbly address my self; thou art the Fountain
from whence every good and perfect gift comes, and none can rule without thy
Wisdom guides them. Endue me, O Lord, with that wisdom which is from above,
which is first pure, and then peaceable; inspire me with an understanding
Spirit, that I may discern between Good and Evil, between Light and Darkness,
that I may be always ready to pronounce a just sentence in all Causes; let the
Scales of Justice be ever even, and let my Eyes be blind, and my Ears deaf, to
all gifts or popular applause amongst men; suffer me not to bear thy Sword in
vain, but fill me with that Zeal and Courage, that I may be ready to punish
Wickedness and Vice, but encourage true Religion and Virtue, so that at the
last, when thou shall be pleased to call me hence, I may give up my accounts
with joy, and not with grief, and receive those blessed Words which thou have
pronounced, of Well done thou good and faithful Servant, enter into the joy of
thy Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer of a Debtor in Prison.
O GOD, the helper of the poor and needy, and all those who are in adversity;
look down, I beseech thee, with an Eye of Pity and Compassion, upon thy
afflicted Servant, the place I am in is miserable disconsolate and comfortless,
but withdraw not the light of thy countenance from me. O Lord, I confess I have
abused all those mercies I have enjoyed, I have not employed that precious time
thou have given me to improve, but on the contrary, I have been negligent and
guilty of all profuseness; I have been worse than an Infidel, in not making
that provision for my Family which I was obliged in Justice to perform, neither
have I paid those due Debts which I became bound to do, therefore a^ I plunged
into this depth of misery.

Diverse ways I am apprehensive, I have highly offended thy Divine Majesty, both
in thought, word, and deed, for which I earnestly implore thy gracious pardon
and forgiveness; I acknowledge thy Divine Goodness and Mercy, that thou have
not snatched me hence, and sent me into everlasting burnings amongst the
damned, but thou have preserved me unto this moment, that I might live and
praise thy great Name. My Body, O Lord, is now confined, but I beseech thee
enlarge my Spirit, whereby I may offer up the Sacrifice of Prayer and
Thanksgiving with all cheerfulness, for all thy innumerable benefits, which I
have from time to time received from thee; dispose the hearts of my Creditors
to a free compliance, and enable me I beseech thee to make them restitution,
that when Ever I shall be released, I may walk more Circumspectly, and redeem
that time I have so vainly lost: Bless all those whose Charity have extended to
my relief, or have sought to procure my Liberty, and bring us all at last to
thy Heavenly Kingdom.

Amen.
A Prayer of a Malefactor in Prison.
O MOST merciful God, thou art Holy in all thy ways, and righteous in all thy
Works; vouchsafe thy Grace, O Lord, to a vile wretch and incorrigible sinner; I
implore O Lord, that Mercy which formerly I have abused, I sigh and groan now
under the Weight of my sins, and they are become a burden too heavy for me to
bear; my presumptuous and wicked proceedings stick like so many arrows within
me, and when with an awakened Conscience I remember them, I am ready to sink
down into the Pit of perdition, and utterly despair of any Mercy or Compassion.

HOW brutish have I been, in hating instruction, and all manner of reproof. I
have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, neither did I incline my Ear to them
that admonished me, but like the D^af adder I stopped my Ears and adhered not
to wise Council; thy most holy Laws I have broken, thy Sabbath I have profaned
by excess of drunkenness and all manner of riot and debauchery, which have been
as forerunners of this crime, for which I stand now committed, and the hand of
justice has overtaken me.

But O Lord, I beseech thee, have Mercy upon me even for his sake who redeemed
me and all Mankind; accept of his atonement for my sins, and save my Soul for
thy Mercies sake; wash away all my sins in his most precious Blood, and blot
out all my offenses out of thy remembrance; O show me some taste of thy tender
Mercy, whereby the fear of death may be abated, give me some assurance of a
hope in thee that when my day of dissolution comes, my unworthy Soul may be
received into thy Heavenly Kingdom.

Amen.
A Submission to the sentence of Death.
O ETERNAL God, in all humility of Soul and Body, I cast my self at the Feet of
thy Divine Majesty; thou art the Sovereign Judge of the all the World, and have
fully pronounced against me and all sinners, that dust thou art, and to dust
thou shall return, in obedience to thy Divine Justice, I wholly resign all the
faculties of my Soul and Body to thy sentence pronounced against me,
acknowledging it most just and due to me for those infinite Sins I have
committed against thee.

O Let it never slip from my Memory, that bloody and shameful Death of thy Son
Jesus Christ, who after he had suffered in his Soul unspeakable sorrows, and in
his Agony and bloody Sweat offered up himself a Sacrifice for mine, and the
sins of the whole World: Never let me never repine at what the hand of Justice
has decreed to my Body, but let me by a sincere repentance, seek thy face to
preserve my Soul; the Death I am to suffer is painful and even a shameful
death; but thou, O my God can make my passage Easy.

THOU O my God did remember the Thief upon the Cross, O remember me I beseech
thee in my last Hour, and say unto my Soul, this day shall thou be with me in
Paradise; keep my heart and mouth from pronouncing words which may be offensive
to Christian Ears, but let me never be ashamed to confess thy holy Name, and to
continue thy Soldier and Servant, manfully fighting under thy Banner, unto my
lives end. Strengthen me, O Lord, in this great conflict, and show me the light
of thy Countenance for evermore.

Amen.
A Preparation for Death.
MOST gracious God, the Fountain of all goodness, I bless and magnify thy holy
Name, for all thy mercies extended to me and all Mankind; I bless thee for my
being and well-being, from the hour of my Conception, to the day of my
Nativity, from my Minority to my riper Years, and age of full strength, and
even to this present moment; I praise thy holy Name for all the means of Grace;
and for the hope of Glory, for my Creation, Redemption* Preservation, and all
the blessings of this life.

I MAGNIFY thee for all thy mercies, in forgiving my infinite Transgressions;
for all thy patience and longsuffering toward me, I have, like the Prodigal
Son, absented my self from thee, and at my return thou have received me
graciously. Lord, I humbly beseech thee, raise me up from the death of Sin unto
the life of Righteousness, that being made a partaker of the death of Christ,
and a follower of his holy life, I may be made a partaker of his Spirit, and of
his Promises.

O LET me never charge thee, O my God, foolishly, nor offend thee by my
impatience, and uneasy Spirit, nor weaken the hands and hearts of those that
charitably minister to my Necessities, but let me pass through this vale of
tears, and the valley of the shadow of death, with peace and safety, with a
meek spirit, and a sense of thy divine mercies; grant this, eternal God, for
the merits of thy only Son, my ever blessed Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for Pardon of Sin.
O MOST merciful God, who would not the death of a Sinner, but rather that
he should turn from his wickedness and live, have mercy upon me, and heal my
Soul, for I have sinned against thee, I have committed Iniquity with
greediness, and have added unto sin daily and hourly, I have made resolutions
and purposes of amendment, but in a moment I have started aside like a broken
Bow, and have returned to my former custom, like the Dog to his vomit, and the
Swine to her wallowing in the mire.

BUT thou art a God, gracious and merciful, pardoning Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin, and there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared;
therefore to thee, O God, I come like an ungracious Child, but to a gracious
Father; I come in all humility of Soul and Body, and appeal from thy Throne of
Justice, unto thy Mercy-seat. Mercy good Lord, I beg at thy fatherly hands, for
I acknowledge with grief of heart, and sorrow of spirit, that I have infinitely
sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son.

GIVE unto me, O Lord, a new heart, and a right understanding, that I may
perceive the evil of my ways, and repent of all my transgressions: Lord, where
Iniquity did abound, there let thy Grace much more abound; hide thy face from
my sins, and blot out all mine Iniquities, and receive me graciously; and that
for his sake who died for Sin, and knew no Sin; even that Immaculate Lamb, thy
dear Son Jesus Christ the Righteous, my only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
ADDITIONAL DEVOTIONS FOR Several Occasions, ORDINARY AND EXTRAORDINARY.

Phil. iv. vi. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing, by Prayer and
Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1692

ADDITIONAL DEVOTIONS.
A Prayer for Christmas- Day.
O BLESSED Lord, who as upon this day took our Nature upon thee, and wast born
of a pure Virgin, keep me from defiling my self with sinful pollutions, or
abasing, or enthralling it to Satan; let thy Spirit quicken me, thy Flesh
nourish me, thy Wisdom guide me, thy Grace sanctify me: Let thy holy Ghost of
whom thou wast conceived, beget thee in me, by the Immortal Seed of thy Word;
let my Faith conceive thee, my Profession bring thee forth, my Love embrace
thee, and Devotion entertain, and continually keep thee with me, unthy second
coming.

Amen.
A Prayer for New Years Day.
O Lord, who this day wast Circumcised and Bleddest for my sins, have pity and
compassion, who with weeping Eyes and a bleeding heart come unto thee;
beseeching thee, that those drops of blood which fell from thee this day, may
satisfy for the sin of my unworthy Birth; and as thou have begun a new Year,
begin in me a new reformation, make me, I beseech thee, a clean heart, and
renew a right Spirit within me; let me now cast off the old Man, and put on the
new; and from this day to the end of my life, walk in newness of life, that I
may become a fit guest to be admitted into the new Heaven, where dwells
Righteousness, and to be entertained at thy Table, and drink new Wine with
thee, in thy Heavenly Kingdom, for evermore.

A Prayer for Twelfe Day.
O GOD, thou light of all the World, who guidedst the Heathen Sages by a Star,
to seek after thee, give me Grace to hearken to the more sure Word of Prophesy
in thy holy Scripture, till the day dawn, and the day star arise in my heart,
the Star guided them, till they approached thy presence, so, O Lord, let the
light of Faith guide me in all the Paths of this Life, even till I come to
behold thee, not in a poor Stable littered with straw and dung, but in a
celestial Palace founded, upon Pearls, and built with Saphyrs; not receiving a
present of Gold which fades away, but wearing a never fading Crown of Glory;
not having a quantity of Frankingense or Myrh in thy hand, but a golden Censor
full of Sweet odours, which are the praises of thy Saints and Angels; amongst
which I beseech thee offer up the Prayers of me a Sinner, that I may become a
Saint thy Heavenly Kingdom.

Amen.
A Prayer for Ash Wednesday.
O ETERNAL God, who did fast forty days in the wilderness, accept of my
humiliation these forty days; and grant that I may not only fast from
accustomed Meats, but that all my senses may be restrained from their usual
affections of this World, let no object delight me till I behold my sins
removed like a mist, and the light of thy Countenance shine upon me: Let no
sound or voice delight my Ear, till I hear thee by thy Spirit, speak peace to
my Conscience, and say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation: Let no other pleasures
take hold of me, till with the lower Herbs of Sorrow and anguish I have Eaten
the Christian passover, the flesh of thee, that Immaculate lamb, slain from the
beginning of the World: Hear me, O belssed redeemer, and as thou wrotest in
dust when thou tookest the woman in a adultery: So I beseech thee write my sins
in dustand bury them all in the ashes of oblivion.

Amen.
A Prayer on good Friday.
O MOST Merciful and Gracious Lord God, who by thy obedience unto Death, even
the Death of the Cross, did become the Sacrifice of the whole universe, the
magnificent example of patience, the Lord of Life, the good shepherd laying
down thy Life for thy sheep, and the only Mediator between God and Man; let thy
bleeding wounds heal, thy precious blood cleanse, thy shameful death make me to
live, and thy holy Spirit make me to work righteousness all my days; that I
may by thy aid, and example obey my Heavenly father with all my powers and
faculties, reason and affections, with my Soul and Body, time and Estate in
prosperity, and in adversity; that I may bear my Cross patiently, do thy work
cheerfully, and be ready to benefit mankind, with great Charity and industry,
that being a follower of thy Life, and a partaker of thy death, I may receive a
part in the Resurrection of the just in thy inheritance for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer on Easter Day.
O MOST glorious redeemer, thou did pass from a painful life to an
Ignominious death, and from the bitterness of it to the darkness of the Grave,
and by thy Divine power did raise thy self from thence to Life; I give thee
thanks for thy infinite love to me and all Mankind; I acknowledge thee to be my
Lord, and confess thee to be my God, I adore thy Majesty and rejoice in thy
Mercies; I humbly pray thee, to enable me with thy Spirit to believe all thy
Doctrines, and obey all thy Commandments, that after a holy and religious life
spent in doing honor to thy holy Name, I may be a partaker of thy holy
Resurrection, passing from death to life, from the darkness of the Grave, to
the light of Heaven, from an imperfect duty to the perfection of holiness in
the fruition of the joys of God in thy Heavenly Kingdom.

Amen.
A Prayer upon Ascension Day.
O BLESSED Jesus, thou did ascend to thy holy Father and did open the
Kingdom of Heaven to all believers; thou have espoused thy Church unto thy self
with the Everlasting circles of thy providence, with thy Love and with thy Care
with thy Word and with thy Spirit, thy promises and thy holy intercession; thou
had a feeling of my infirmiteis, and art my Merciful high Priest making
intercession for me for ever; O be thou pleased to represent all my wants, and
supply them, and excuse all my infirmities pity all my Calamities, pardon my
Sins and send down thy holy Spirit of Grace into my heart, that though I wander
here upon Earth, yet my Conversation may be in Heaven, where let my inheritance
be for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer on Whitsunday.
O GOD, the Father of all Spirits, who did send thy holy Spirit upon thy
Church in the day of pentecost, and have promised that he shall abide with thy
Church for ever, let thy holy Spirit lead me into all truth, defend me from all
Sins, enrich me with his gif^s, refresh me with his Comforts, rule in my heart
for ever, Conduct me with his truth and lead me in the way* Everlasting, that
living by thy Spirit and walking in him, I may by him be Sealed up to the day
of my redemption; O let thy Spirit witness to my Spirit, that I am thy Child,
and make me to be so* for ever, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer, who lives
and reigns with thee in the unity of the same Spirit, one God, world without
end.

Amen.
A Prayer upon Trinity Sunday.
O HOLY, Blessed and glorious Trinity, the Angels are amazed in the beauties of
that glorious presence, how then can I poor sinful wretch praise thee either
according to my Duty, or thy Glories; I confess and glory in thy omnipotency,
thy omniscience, thy truth, and thy Mercy, O let me also receive thy blessings
and gracious influences, that I may adore thee with all my power for ever, and
serve thee with my best and earliest industry; that being here wholly
inebriated with Love, and employed in thy service and the Duty of a holy
obedience, I may to all eternity rejoice in the beholding of those Glories
which are above all capacities, even those Glories which stream forth from the
Throne of the Eternal God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to whom be Glory and
Dominion, Honor and adoration, world without end.

Amen.
A Prayer to be used upon any Apostles Day.
O ALMIGHTY God, who has built thy Holy Church upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, I bless and
magnify thy holy Name, for thy great Graces thou gave to thy Apostles,
Prophets, and Martyrs, in the days of their Flesh, and this day I have thy
Servant [ Here name the Apostle] in remembrance, praising thee for the benefit
the Church has received by his Ministry and Example; and I beseech thee give
me thy Grace, that obeying thy Doctrine which he taught, and following his
Example as he followed Christ, I may also with safety and holiness pass through
this Valley of Tears, that serving thee in my Generation, advancing thy Honor,
and obeying thy Laws, I may in the Society and Communion of Saints and Angels,
Sing eternal Hallelujahs to the honor of thy Mercy, and of thy Majest^,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Church.
O LORD God Almighty, I beseech thee keep thy holy Church, in Peace, Unity, and
Safety, preserve it against all Storms, Temptations and Enemies, that she
offering to thy Glory the never-ceasing Sacrifice of Praise and Yhanksgiving,
may advance the honor of her Lord, and be partaker of his Glory, through the
merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for the King and Queen.
ALMIGHTY God, by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, I humbly
beseech thee to save, and with the choicest of thy Benedictions, bless thy
Servants, and our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary;
preserve their Royal Persons in Health and Honor, their power in Wealth and
Dignity, their Dominions in Peace and Plenty; the Churches under their
Protections, in Piety, Knowledge, and a strict and holy Religion. Let not the
Wicked approach to hurt them, nor any Weapon that is formed against them
prosper, but keep them perpetually in thy fear and favor, and Crown them at
last with Glory and Immortality.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Royal Family.
BLESS, O Lord, I beseech thee, Katherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness
the Princess* Ann of Denmark, with the rest of the Royal Family; keep them in
thy fear, and protect them with thy favor, and after this life is ended, Crown
them with everlasting happiness in the World to come.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Clergy.
O ALMIGHTY God, protect thy Stars in thy right hand, the mo^^ Reverend the
Archbishops, the right Reverend the Bishops, with all other Inferior Priests
and Deacons; grant that all Congregations committed to their charge, may edify
by their Doctrine, and live Godly and Peaceable lives under them, to the saving
of their Souls in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for the High Court of Parliament.
BLESS, O Lord, I beseech thee, the great Council of the Nation, the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, grant that all their Consultations may tend to
thy Glory, the good of thy Church, and the Safety, Honor, and Welfare, of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, and their Kingdoms; let Justice run down like a
stream, and Righteousness like the mighty Waters, that there may be no leading
into Captivity, nor no complaining in our Streets, but that Mercy and Truth may
meet together, and Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other; grant this, O
Lord, for thy Sons sake, and my alone Redeemer.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Navy and Army.
O ETERNAL God, thou art the Lord of Hosts, and the strength of all Nations is
from thee, and no Victory can wait upon the justest Designs, upon the wisest
Councels, upon the strongest Armies, if thou teach not their hands to War, and
their fingers to Fight. Lend us, O Lord, thy assistance, by Land and Sea, be
with our Armies, and the Armies of our Allies and Associates by Land, and be
with our Navy at Sea; be not from the one, nor from the other, until thou have
brought them back with Honor, Victory, or a settled Peace: Let not that proud
Disturber, and Destroyer of Mankind, any longer Insult over thy People, but
turn his Sword into his own Bosom. O Lord, thy Servants are unfeignedly
sorrowful for those Sins they have committed against thy Divine Majesty, O do
thou pardon us, and receive us graciously, and then we may trust in thy
goodness, that thou will pour down all thy Blessings upon this, and all other
designs and actions of this State, undertaken for thy Glory, the Honor of our
most gracious Sovereign Lord and Lady, the Peace and Welfare of the whole
Church, and Their Majesty's three Kingdoms; grant this, O Lord, for Jesus
Christ his sake, our only Mediator and Advocate.

Amen.
A. Prayer for Gods People in General.
MOST gracious God, I humbly beseech thee to bless all thy People, wheresoever
dispersed, or howsoever distressed, over the face of the whole Earth, more
especially in these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland; give us all
humble and obedient hearts to thee our God, Loyal hearts to our Sovereign Lord
and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, and charitable thoughts one toward
another; Convert and bring home thine own People the Jews, and bring in the
fullness of the Gentiles; save and have Mercy upon all Asiaticks and Affricans,
and all those that never heard of a Crucified Savior; this I humbly beg for
thy Sons sake, my alone Savior.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving for our deliverance from the Spanish Invasion.
WE laud and magnify thy holy Name for this thy wonderful deliverance from
Roman Slavery, and Popish Usurpation, which would have destroyed the Renowned
and Glorious Queen Elizabeth and her Kingdom; their Galleys and Ships came to
assault us, being full of pride, and nominating themselves Invincible; but
thou, O Lord, our strength, did awake us out of sleep, and like a Giant
refreshed with Wine, and smote our Enemies in the hinder parts, and did put
them all to Confusion. Grant, O Lord, that we may never want thankful hearts to
praise thee, for this and all other thy Mercies, even to our lives end.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving for our great deliverance from the Powder Treason, and from
Popery and Slavery, and Arbitrary Power.
O MOST mighty God, whose Allseeing Eye of Providence did discover to us that
Train which Popish malice had laid to destroy the King, his Nobles and Commons,
then assembled in Parliament; they had contrived by their barbarous Invention,
to have blown up the Bodies of that great and wise Council, but thou, O God,
did defeat their Bloody Enterprise, whereof we rejoice.

WE likewise praise and extol thy great Name, for this second and never to be
forgotten Deliverance; O let after Ages, and the Children that are yet unborn,
when they come to understand this thy wonderful Mercy, let it never slip from
their memory. Thou, O Lord, did raise up thy Servant, our Sovereign Lord,
King William, who like Moses, stood in the Gap between us and Roman Slavery,
which like a Torrent was pouring upon us; O let us never forget thy double
Mercy extended toward us this day, thou have plucked us as a Firebrand out of
the burning, and have restored to us those good and wholesome Laws, and
Liberties, which our Ancestors have enjoyed; inspire our hearts that we may
extol thy Name, O Lord, for these great Mercies and Deliverances, and let all
the people with one voice say,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving for the happy success of Their Majesty's Arms in reducing of
Ireland, and for His Majesty's safe return to England.
O GOD, the great Preserver of the Universe, I offer up unto thee all Praise
and Thanksgiving, for putting an end to those troubles and disorders which were
in Their Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland; thou have done great things for us, O
Lord, whereof I rejoice; thy Servant, and our Dear and Dread Sovereign King
William, did expose his Person to the danger of the Enemy, but thou did
protect him from their Malice, gave Success to his Arms and Royal
Undertaking, and did cover his Head in the day of Battle, and at last, thou
have brought him safe home with Joy and Victory. Prosper, O Lord, I beseech
thee, both Their Majesty's with long Life and Happiness, and grant that all
their Subjects may be furnished with Loyal and Obedient Hearts toward them,
and Love and Charity one toward another; give Peace in our time, O Lord, and
put an end to all differences amongst us, for thy Sons sake, our only Lord and
Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for Charity.
GRANT, O Lord I beseech thee, that I may abound in Charity, yiedling up my
self first to thy service, and then according to thy blessed will to the
service and relief of my poor Brethren; let me ever remember, that thou, O
Lord, made thy self poor, that I might be made rich; and he that Sows
sparingly, shall also reap sparingly, but he that Sows liberally, shall also
reap liberally; for thou love a cheerful giver: Make me to abound, O Lord,
with thy Grace that I may be plentiful in every good word and work; and never
let me hide my Face from the poor and needy: Thou, O Lord give seed to the
Sower, and Bread to the Eater, increase my wealth and augment the revenue of my
Righteousness, whereby I may be enriched in all frankness of liberality.

Amen.
A Prayer to renounce the World and affect Spiritual things.
O GOD the Father, who raised from the dead, our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered
up himself a Sacrifice for the sins of the whole World; to the end he might
withdraw our affections from Temporal, and fix them upon that which is Eternal;
give us hearts to obey thy truth, and infuse into us thy Spirit, which may
produce thy virtues in us: And because we are thy Children, send the Spirit of
thy Son into our hearts whereby we may cry Abba Father, that' being thy
Children, we may be heirs through Christ, and walk according to the Spirit, not
fulfilling the Lusts of the flesh, knowing that what a Man Sows, that shall
he reap, for he that Sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption,
but he that Sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life Everlasting.

LET us glory in nothing; save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
the world may be drucified unto us, and we unto the World; that in him we may
become new Creatures, not growing weary of well-doing, knowing that we shall
reap in due season, if we faint not: Wherefore while we have time, let us do
good to all Men, but especially unto the Household of Faith, and all they that
shall walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, and upon the Israel of
God.

A Conclusive Prayer.
O ALMIGHTY God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in
thy Sons Name, I beseech thee mercifully to incline thing Ears unto me, who
have now made my Prayers and Supplication unto thee, and grant that those
things which I have faithfully asked according to thy Will, may be effectually
obtained, to the relief of my Necessity, and to the setting forth of thy Glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The Blessing.
THE Peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep my heart and mind in
the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the
blessing of God Almighty the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, with the
Virtue of Christ's blessed Cross, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension, be with
me now, at the hour of Death, and in the Day of Judgment.

Amen.
GRACES.
A Grace before Meat.
O GOD, who art the giver of every good and perfect Gift, sanctify we beseech
thee, these thy Creatures now prepared for us, ma^e them wholesome for our
Bodies, and ou^ Souls and Bodies serviceable unto thee for them, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Or this.
MOST merciful Father, which openest thy hand, and fillest all things with
Plenteousness, we pray thee sanctify these thy good Creatures unto us, that we
may eat to preserve life, and living serve thee our God, through thine only
Son, our Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Or this.
O LORD our God, by whose Providence it is that we live, move, and have our
Being, send thy Blessing upon us and our Provision, and grant that whether we
Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever we do else, we may do all to the Glory of thy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
After Meat.
THE Lords most holy Name be now and ever blessed and praised for all his
Mercies, and for his blessings at this time bestowed upon us. Lord, as thou
have fed our Bodies with corporal Food, so feed our Souls likewise with
spiritual Food unto life Eternal. Save thine Universal Church, these Realms,
the King, the Queen, and all the Royal Family, and grant us thy Grace, Mercy,
and Peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Or this.
THE God of all Grace and Goodness, who at this time has fed and plenteously
refreshed us, his most holy Name be blessed and praised, from this time forth,
and for evermore. God save his Universal Church, etc.

Or this.
WE laud and praise thy Name, O Lord, for all thy blessings and favors, and
for feeding us so plentifully at this time, desiring thee of thy Grace, that
our thankfulness may not be in Word and in Tongue, but expressed by our careful
study to glorify thee our God, in all our Words and Works, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Save thy Universal Church, etc.

THE END.
THE TABLE.
WHat Prayer is, and the parts of it page 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Ejaculations at
uprising p. 7 A Morning Prayer for a private Person ibid. When you depart Home
p. 9 Ejaculations for the Evening p. 10 An Evening Prayer for a private Person
p. 11 Ejaculations on several Occasions. When you awake in the Night. p. 13
When the Clock strikes ibid. When you intend any Business or Journey. ibid.
When thou art Persecuted p. 12 Upon some sudden fear ibid. Upon any disorderly
thoughts ibid. Upon any occasions of sadness ibid. Upon any diffidence ibid.
When thou performest any good Work p. 15 When thou art provoked to Anger ibid.
For thine Enemies ibid. Upon any Deliverance, or Mercy received ibid. Upon any
Loss or Adversity p. 16 When you hear the Bell Toll for one Departed ibid. Upon
thought of thy Sins ibid. When thou art weary of the Cares and Vanities of this
World. ibid. Meditations for Sunday p. 17 A Prayer for Sunday Morning p. 18
Sunday Noon p. 20 Sunday Night p. 21 Mondays Meditations p. 23 A Prayer for
Monday Morning p. 25 A Prayer for Monday Night p. 27 Tuesdays Meditations p. 28
A Prayer for Tuesday Morning p. 30 A Prayer for Tuesday Night p. 31 Wednesdays
Meditations p. 33 A Prayer for Wednesday Morning p. 34 A Prayer for Wednesday
Night p. 36 Thursdays Meditations p. 37 A Prayer for Thursday Morning p. 39 A
Prayer for Thursday Night p. 40 Fridays Meditations p. 42 A Prayer for Friday
Morning p. 44 A Prayer for Friday Night p. 45 Saturdays Meditations p. 47 A
Prayer for Saturday Morning p. 48 A Prayer for Saturday Night p. 50 Meditations
on the Lords Supper p. 51 A Prayer before the Communion p. 53 An Ejaculation
before receiving the Bread p. 54 An Ejaculation before receiving the Cup p. 55
A Prayer after the Communion ibid. A Prayer before hearing the Word p. 57 A
Prayer after hearing the Word p. 58 A Prayer for necessary Blessings of this
life p. 59 A Thanksgiving for Gods Benefits p. 60 A Prayer for Wisdom p. 61 A
Prayer for Defense against our Enemies p. 63 A Morning Prayer for a Family p.
64 A Collect for the Day p. 68 An Evening Prayer for a Family ibid. A Collect
for the Night. p. 72
Prayers for several Persons. The Husbands Prayer p. 73 The Wives Prayer p. 75
The Child's Prayer p. 76 The Widows Prayer p. 77 The Orphans Prayer p. 78 A
Prayer for a Young Man or Maid p. 79 The Servants Prayer p. 80 A Prayer for the
Fruits of the Earth p. 81 A Prayer for seasonable Weather p. 82 A Thanksgiving
after a good Harvest p. 83 A Prayer for a Woman with Child p. 84 A Prayer for a
Woman near the time of her Travail p. 85 The Midwives Prayer before Deliverance
p. 86 A Thanksgiving after Deliverance p. 88 A Prayer for one near any
Temptation p. 89 A Prayer for one Afflicted in Mind p. 92 A Prayer to be used
in behalf of one troubled in Mind p. 95 Meditations for the Sick p. 97 A Prayer
to be used by a Sick Person p. 100 A Prayer to be said by the Friends of the
Sick p. 103 Another Prayer to be used by those that are about the Sick p. 106 A
Prayer to recommend the Soul to God when it is departing p. 108 A Prayer for a
Soul departing p. 109 An Act of Resignation when a Friend is deceased p. 109 A
Meditation after Recovery from Sickness p. 111 A Thanksgiving after Recovery
from Sickness p. 113 A Prayer before a Journey p. 114 A Thanksgiving after a
Journey p. 116 A Prayer before a Voyage p. 117 A Thanksgiving after a Voyage
ibid. A Prayer in a Storm p. 120 A Thanksgiving after a Storm p. 122 A Prayer
in time of Thunder and Lightning p. 123 The Mariners Prayer p. 125 The Soldiers
Prayer p. 126 The Magistrates Prayer p. 128 A Prayer of a Debtor in Prison p.
129 A Prayer of a Malefactor in Prison p. 131 A Submission to the Sentence of
Death p. 132 A Preparation for Death p. 134 A Prayer for pardon of Sin p. 135

Additional Devotions.
A Prayer for Christmas. Day p. 141 For New Years Day p. 142 For Twelfth-Day
ibid. For Ash Wednesday p. 143 On Good Friday p. 144 On Easter Day p. 145 Upon
Ascension-Day p. 146 On Whitsunday p. 147 Upon Trinity-Sunday p. 148 Upon any
Apostles Day p. 149 For the Church p. 150 A Prayer for the King and Queen ibid.
For the Royal Family p. 151 For the Clergy ibid. For the High Court of
Parliament p. 152 For the Navy and Army p. 153 For Gods people in General p.
154 A Thanksgiving for our Deliverance from the Spanish Invasion p. 155 For our
great Deliverance from the Powder Treason, and from Popery, Slavery, and
Arbitrary Power ibid. For the haypy success of Their Majesty's Arms in reducing
of Ireland, and for His Majesty's safe return to England p. 157 A Prayer for
Charity p. 158 To renounce the World, and to affect Spiritual things p. 159 A
Conclusive Prayer p. 160 The Blessing p. 161 Graces before Meat p. 161-2 Graces
after Meat p. 163-4
FINIS.

