AN ABSTRACT OF THE CONTENTS Of Several LETTERS Relating to the MANAGEMENT OF
Affairs with Rome, BY THE D. of Y. and Others. Published for Satisfaction of
the People, with a Preface. Showing our present Dangers, and the Authors
thereof. By a Protestant.
To all Protestant English.
YOU cannot think it possible without a Miracle, that the bottom of this
execrable Popish Plot, contrived and carried on at this time, under the Umbrage
and Countenance of many of our Grandees, Favorers and Professors of the Popish
Religion, for Murdering the King, and Subversion of our Religion and
Government, should appear to the World under the Hand Writing of the
Conspirators, seeing the power and influence they had upon the Government, when
Mr. Oats offered his first Information of the Plot, gave them confidence, it
may be not without Reason, to assure themselves, notwithstanding such
Discovery, to be safe under the Accusation, and certain of accomplishing their
Designs, and thereby the Conspirators being at the first handled gently, had
opportunity and were helped to convey away their Papers and Letters, which had
they ever appeared in view, would have told the whole matter beyond
contradiction. And had not Coleman by a strange confidence and infatuation,
left in his House some Papers not valued by him (though yet containing enough
to demonstrate the Bulk of the Design) we had had but very little of it under
the Plotters hands, but those Letters and Papers containing transactions past
Three Years since, did not so fully make out the Design, as the later Letters
and Papers would (without doubt) have done which by the vigilance of our
Enemies, and the Treachery of our pretended Friends have been concealed burnt
and destroyed.

The Abstract of some of those Letters that escaped are here presented to
public view, whereby it will appear to all Protestants, who have been our
greatest Bosom Enemies in Conjunction with Rome for our Destruction, and what
power and influence Rome had over the Councils of this Nation, most of the
Persons therein mentioned, being well known to be great Zelots in the Romish
Superstition, and one of them the very occasion of the Plot, which the late
House of Commons has in a Vote for that purpose, grounded upon undeniable
Evidence and Demonstration it self, worthily and truly signified to the Nation.

Can any Man in his wits, but apprehend from what springs flow, the present
hopes the Papists have of playing an after game, and replanting their
Superstition once more in this Kingdom? Are not all their hopes in a Popish
Successor, who is come lately from beyond the Seas, with a mind we fear, as
little Agreeable to the temper as the Religion of the English Nation?

All that you have is now at stake, a King that is an Idolater makes his people
like himself (as the many Examples in the Old Testament will sufficiently
illustrate) so that whosoever is for a Popish King, let their pretenses be
never so specious is for Popery. And the Idolatry (which some miscall Religion)
now exercised by the Papists, much worse then that practiced in old Rome, and
the Laws of the Realm (whereby our liberties and properties are fenced and
maintained) are inconsistent; the same hour your Religion is altered (which a
Popish King (if ever God shall be pleased to punish us with such) will
certainly effect) the same day the whole Law will be destroyed, and the English
Nation will be reduced thereby to absolute slavery, under the most malicious
Enemy it has, furnished with a revengeful mind, which nothing but Slavery,
Ruin, and an Ocean of English Blood can satisfy.

It may be at present his pretenses may be modest, though his own party gives
out, he intends to make a Bargain with the People by turning Protestant, if the
hard hearted Heretics will accept thereof for all they have, but my dear
Countrymen, you may not rely upon such Counterfeit Jesuitical shams, in case
he should renounce his Idolatry, upon peril of loosing your selves, Religion
and Estates, you can have no assurance that this turn is real, and be assured
it is all Imposture and Juggle, which the Tenets of the Romish Superstition, do
not only allow, but command him to Act for the advancement of the Holy Church,
do but reflect upon his present Carriage and the Carriages of his Accomplices
in ridiculing the Plot, and slandering and contemning the Discoveries and
Evidences thereof. And then you can never be seduced to imagine he Acts a
Protestant, with any other design then the entire ruin of your Religion and
Government.

All his fine Speeches and promises are to be looked upon as nothing, you know
it is an established Doctrine in one of their Councels, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics, And such he esteems you.

I have heard that it is as Common as Dispensations from the Pope, that the
Serpent always before he Drinks, Vomits up his Poison, and when he has Drank
his Fill, licks it up again; so it is possible may the D. his Idolatry, till he
and his Accomplices may be in a capacity to Drink the Blood of the Protestants
at will and pleasure.

Call to mind the Story of Queen Mary, who did not without our D. hate the
Nation, how she persuaded our Forefathers, and especially the Suffolk-men to
Fight for Her, under many promises, and assurances, that She would establish
them in their Protestant Religion, but She having obtained her end, and got
into the Throne by their Assistance, She Burnt more Protestants of Suffolk,
then of any other County in England.

Therefore if you believe like men or Christians, acquit your selves like men
for the Glory of God, the safety of the Kings Person, and the benefit of your
selves and posterity in opposing such designs (of which (if effected) will
render you of all men most miserable.)

Cardinal of Norfolks Letter to Mr. Coleman.
By his Letter of the Fourth of January 1676. It appears Sir Henry Tichborn was
a Messenger to Rome. He rejoices at the Prorogation -- says if the King would
do well all would be well. Hopes to serve the Duke to good purpose.

In his Letter of the Eighth of February 1676. Says he does all he can to
serve the Duke -- Has writ to Mr. Haies at his Brothers -- moves that the
Kings Ministers may join with the Popes Ministers about P. Furstenburge, and
about the peace, and the Pope will send a Minister on purpose.

His Letter of March 1676. was signed Cardinal of Norfolk, Mr. Coleman to be
asked who the Messenger was
was sent by an express that was to return with what his Master and Mistress
had to Communicate -- this was a Letter of Credence.

In his Letter of March 14th. 1676. he odrers Mr. Laburne his Auditor to write
-- understands the Duke received his -- uses to direct his Letters to the
Portugal Ambassador for Mr. Coleman. Takes notice of Plunket having the Letter
of Archbishop Talbot at Rome -- offers his service to the Duke and all the
Catholics whether they will or no -- says Talbot is enough to spoil all --
his constant custom is forging Letters -- says if the Duke make use of him he
will much disgrace himself, and the cause and put the Catholics in derision,
which is the way to destroy them -- which if then Cardinal Norfolk and his
Confriers may shut up their Shops -- If he had not taken care the Match had
been broken off with the Duchess -- that a Friend of his at Paris first set the
Match on foot -- says he promoted the Match to serve the Duke and the
Catholic Religion in England, and that he and his are in great Power with Rome
and Spain -- says it will prejudice the Duke if he be partial -- complains of
want of Countenance from the King -- proposes a Barony to be got of the King
for him to get Money for -- proposes the Duke may manage it -- says, it would
be no Scandala Magnata though for a Catholic more then when Sir Francis
Radcliff was in motion -- takes notice the Pope is not satisfied with the
Education of the Dukes Daughters. Despairs not of getting a Pension from Rome
for the Dutchesses Secretary.

In his Letter of the 24th. of March owns the Receipt of Letters of the 17th.
and 20th. of March. Takes notice of the Dukes being advanced to the Catholic
Religion to the Joy of the Pope, but by his of the 27th. fully completed their
Joy -- hopes the Duchess will bring forth a Happy Roman Catholic.

In his Letter of the 20th of June rejoices, that the Duchess will write to
the Pope, This confirms Mr. Oats.
takes notice that there is and has been Long a Bishop for England. That they
intend to send him with others when due time will be.

In his Letter of the 21th of September -- We promise our selves, that he will
do much for the Catholic Religion -- That the Cardinal has writ to the Duke
and Duchess, and invites their Highnesses to write to the Pope -- The Pope and
the Cardinals rejoice at the Dutchesses Delivery of a Daughter.

In his Letter of April the 18th 1676. takes notice that Sir Henry Tichbourn
had Audience of the Pope. That there was a dispensation granted for the
Dutchesses Marriage, which was delayed before, because the Pope was not fully
satisfied of the Duke's being a Catholic -- The Pope desires not the Duke to
declare himself a Roman Catholic rashly and unadvisedly, but would have him
not conform to the Church of England, -- wrote for 100000 Crowns to Rome for
the Duke -- hopes in time to get a pension for the Dutchesses Secretary --
Takes notice of one that called himself the Dukes Agent at Rome, supposed to be
an Italian. He left a Letter at Cardinal Barbarin's. Cardinal Norfolk offers
John Laborn to be the Dukes Agent, for that it is fit for him to have one, and
that the Cardinal will supply what he cannot do, and desires it may be offered
the Duke in his Name -- Takes notice that he is now the Queens Servant -- That
he writ by Sir Henry Tichborn to the Duke and Duchess lately.

In his 16th of May 1676. says, if the Duke or Duchess employ the Archbishop
of Dublin it will confound their Affairs.

This Letter of the 5th of September 1676. takes notice that Cardinal Norfolk
has received Letters from the King and Duke, enjoining his adherence to the
French -- Takes notice that he has writ to the Lord Arundel, Mr. Haies etc. --
That he has refused Bishoprics from France and Spain.

This Letter is signed John Laborn.

Laborns Letter to Coleman.
In his Letter of July 10th. takes notice of the Popes receipt of the Dukes
Letter, which made him shed Tears. That an answer will shortly be sent, though
upon the matter it has been done anticipatedly -- makes great expressions of
his esteem of the Duke.

In his Letter of January 1st 1678 -- says the Dukes Letter to the Pope, about
the Marriage of his Daughter to the Prince of Orange has been delivered -- The
Pope remains satisfied that the Duke was in no fault, but his intended answer
will not touch that fault --

In his Letter of the 18th December 1677. takes notice, that the Duke of Modena
intends a Voyage to London --

His Letter of the 28th of November, says Mr. Coni's naming to Duchess
Lauderdale Mr. Colemans Correspondent is much wondered at here --

In his Letter of the 20th of November, takes notice of a Brief sent to the
Queen, from the Pope by an Irishman, who delivered it to the Lady Fingal --

In his Letter of September 11th 1677. Cardinal Norfolk would know whether the
Brief sent the Queen be received --

In his Letter of the 23th of June 1677. takes notice that the Brief to the
Duke is in Cardinal Norfolks hands, and that nothing finer or fuller could be
expected in that kind -- that two pair of Beads were sent the Duke and
Duchess, from the Pope, with ample Indulgences -- It Is desired some English
Priests may be with the Popes Nuncio at Nineguen.

In his Letter of July 24th. says Mr. G. R. has this day a Brief of the Pope
in answer to the Letter of the Dukes --

Cardinal Norfolk's Letter of 27th. of July 1677. Takes notice of the Brief in
Answer to the second Letter of his Royal Highness, prays God to grant this new
correspondence a Blessing, whereof the whole Nation may experience happy
effects --

In Laborns Letter of July 20th. nothing of Moment.

His Letter 16th of July, speaks of a Match for the Lady Ann with the Duke of
Florence --

His Letter of the 9th of July, shows the design of Rome to remove Plat, and to
set the Inquisition upon him -- He has writ more particularly to the Lord
Arundel.

His Letter of June 25. says Plat has been so impertinent as to own himself a
Protestant.

In his Letter of October 1st 1678. nothing material.

In his Letter May 29th. acquaints him with the Miscarriage of the Duke's
Letter to the Pope, sent by Con with a Brief, will be sent to the Duke by Mr.
Thomas Howard -- The Duke's Letter was delivered to the Popes Nuncio in France.

In his Letter of August 6th. owns the Receipt of a Letter from the Lord
Arundel.

In his Letter of August 20. nothing Material.

His Letter of August 17th, says the Duke's Letter to the Pope miscarried,
desires a Duplicate to supply it.

In his Letter of April 30th. the Lord Arundel is writ to, to get Plat out --

His Letter of August 13. says the Duke of Florence is acquainted with what
the Lord Arundel and Coleman writ about, Plat takes it kindly.

There are many other Letters of much greater Moment, which were never
Abstracted, that we cannot yet come to the sight of, being among other pass
sealed up, and in the Custody of the late secret Committee of the House of
Commons, and are not to be opened until the next Parliament.

FINIS.

