AN EPHEMERIS for the year 1651.

Amplified with Rational Predictions from the Book of the Creatures.

1. Of the State of the Year. 2. What may probably be the effects of the
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, July 9. 1650. in Scotland, Holland, Zealand,
York, Amsterdam, etc. and about what time they may probably happen.
By Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Astrology and Physic, in Spittle-fields,
next Door to the Red Lion.

Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows
forth his Handiwork. Printed by Peter Cole, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1651.

A brief Description of the partilar things contained in this ALMANAC.
IN the Almanac are Four Rows or Colums, divided severally by black Lines in
each Month: The First is the Number of Days; The Second is the Days of the Week
set down in several Letters, and E for Sunday; In the Third are the Holy Days
and other both fixed and moveable: In the Fourth is the Sun Rising.

To the Reader.
I Know no great reason any has to trifle out much time in admiration, that I
peep out in print in this nature, I account it as lawful for me as for another,
and for a third, as for me; and for any that can as well as any of us all: let
time witness whether my Predictions be true or false, mean season wise men will
suspend, and the vain glorious only carp: I am not sensible I have given just
occasion of offense to any body, I was born a Gentleman, and brought up a
Scholar, I hate a Sycophantick course of life, or to flatter any body, and can
patiently pass by the Scandals cast upon me by such who keep Mendacium as a
constant page to their tongues, I am sorry wise men should be so credulous to
believe things they know no more of then I know what language is spoken in the
Moon.

The Planets places did then Aspects are calculated for the Meridian of London,
there is no harm in that; There is such difference amongst Ancient writers in
this art, (almost as much as is between Episcopales, Presbyterians, and
Independants) about the General Figure of the world, which I take to be the
reason of their difference in calculating the Planets places, Ptolomy held his
own, Copernicus derides and detrudes him, and sets up anoother, Ticho had a
third, and Argol a fourth. I hold to Copernicus as the truest, quot homines tot
sententiae, and I durst, ( si utriusque disceptator aequus adesset) maintain in
dispute.

I give my reasons for most of my Predictions, and if any ask the reason why I
do not always tell them, the reason is want of paper, not of good will, let
young Students heed what I have written if they prove true, they may know how
to do the like, if not true, they may know how to avoid my errors; I scorn to
assume any bodies name to my writings, much more to fetch one from Utopia, or
to write any thing that I am afraid or ashamed to set my own to, therefore take
notice that the Author of the book is called

August 3. 1650 Nich. Culpeper.

To Mr Simpson, who Pretends he Preaches at Alhallows in Thames Street.
SIR,
WHilst such as fear God and admire at his Works in the Creation, beholding the
luster of the Creatures magnifying the Glory of the Creator, you spend your
study and time in Railing at Astrologers (which although I can bear, yet let
him of your Coat that has no sin, throw the first stone at them) and against
Astrology it self, and the wonderful Works of God in the harmony of the
Creation, and this is something intolerable: Let your MODERATION be made known
to all men: You know who it was said so; but your Moderation herein was so
small, that it was not discernable by a Perspective-glass. I beseech you
Consider with me in the Spirit of Meekness (if you know but what it means) The
Spirit of God is Humble and Meek; Was yours so? The Spirit of Satan is Proud
and Presumptuous; Was not yours so? The Spirit of God is Peaceable and Loving;
Was yours so? The Spirit of Satan is Rash and Furious; Was not yours so? The
Spirit of Christ comes out of a sight of Weakness; Did yours so? The Spirit of
Satan comes with Hatred and Disdain, speaking evil of what it knows not; Did
not yours so? The Spirit of Christ is still Enquiring; Was yours so? The Spirit
of Antichrist is Confident and Raging; Was not yours so? And yet (forsooth) you
would have the States to be your Boys, as Pilate was your forefathers, to act
what you desire: You mistake Sir, they have more Wit, more Honesty: Be pleased
to look your Face in a Glass, be it the Glass of the Sanctuary if you please:
Do not you look like a pretty Fellow to rule the State? but in truth it is not
insolent [unusual] for men of your Iacket to be insolent (Bold) My Desire to
you, which I Publish to the World, is this, That you would be pleased to Print
your Sermons; I promise you in the word of a Christian to Answer them, that so
the Vulgar may be no longer Bewitched by a subtiler Spirit then had the WITCH
OF ENDOR, and the World may no longer Halt between two Opinions; but if God be
God, they may Serve him: but if Baal, then Follow him. I rest

Yours, so far as you are Christ's, Nicholas Culpeper.
From my House in Spittle-Fields next Door to the Red-Lyon. Aug. 3. 1650.
The Apogaeum of Anno. 1651.
D M S 27 36 6 8 27 57 29 56 27 6 35 32 0 46 0 2 11 26

The Sun ingress into the Cardinal Points.
D H M S March 10 2 5 6 P. M. June 11 5 30 9 P. M. September. 12 20 45 34 P. M.
December. 11 7 59 49 P. M.

January 1651.


February 1651


March 1651.


April 1651.


May 1651.


June 1651.


July 1651.


August 1651.


September 1651.


October 1651.


November 1651.


December 1651.


January 1651. The daily motions of the planets and


January 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


Febr. 1651. The places of the Planets and at Noon.


February. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


March. 1651. The Planets places at noon.


March. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


April. 1651. The Places of the Planets and at Noon.


April 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


May. 1651. The Planets places at Noon.


May. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


June. 1651 The places of the Planets and at Noon.


June 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


July 1651. The places of the Planets and at Noon.


July. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


August. 1651. The daily motion of the Planets and


August. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


September. 1651. The places of the Planets at noon.


September. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


October. 1651. The daily motions of the planets and


October 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


November. 1651 The places of the Planets and at Noon.


November. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


December. 1651. The Places of the Planets and at Noon.


December 1651. The Lunar Aspects.


The Diurnal Latitude of the Moon.


The Moons Latitude.


Of Eclipses happening this year.
THere happens but two Eclipses this year, and therefore both of them must
needs be of the Sun, but neither being visible in our Horizon, I forbear
further discourse of them.

The next year 1652 appears a most formidable Eclips of the in 19. d. 15. m.
20. s. upon the 28. of March near noon. upon the cusp of M. C. upon the cusp of
the Ascendent, is lord of the Eclips, and coelum Mars solus habet.

The Princes of Europe shall almost all drink deeply of the effects of this
Eclips, and the Chemarims (ask Sr. John Presbiter the meaning of the word)
shall before hand like the three frogs mentioned in the Revelation go to gather
them together to the battle of the Great God: Rejoice o ye Saints, in whom God
dwells who are moved and guided by his Spirit, for a short work will your God
make upon the face of the earth, and the days shall be shortened for mine and
your sakes.

The Effects of this Eclips will begin speedily, because the angles are
moveable, and operate violently, torrenti similes, as dreadful will the
effects of it be to Kings, as well as Co^mon-people. Man that is in honor and
understands not, is like the beasts that perish. For my part I have not so
learned Christ to be afraid of the signs of Heaven, let them look to it that
lead a beastial life. If what I write now please, I shall hereafter write more
of this Eclips.

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Aries.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Taurus


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Gimini.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Cancer.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Leo.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Virgo.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Libra.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Scorpio.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Sagitary,


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Capricorn.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Aquary.


A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min.
Sol in Pisces.


A TABLE of the Essential DIGNITIES of the PLANETS.


I Hope I may crave Pardon, and as easily obtain it, for beginning my
Prognisticks a little before the Year begins, it being the first time that ever
I wrote in this nature: I shall but entreat you to look back to the 19 of July,
on which Day was a of and in 8. 34. of, the Effects of which will do those
Nations and People upon whom its Influence falls as much good to the full, as
Sampson's Foxes with their Firebrarnds at their tayls did in the Philistims
Corn.

I here present you the Scheam for Lat. 57. where the Inhabitants shall find
the Effects most forcibly operate: The reason why I Calculated it not by the
Tables of Regio Montanus, was, 1 It Is needless. 2 Not want of Skill, but want of
Time.



In this Figure I shall mind but briefly, 1 The part of Heaven afflicted. 2 The
Planets afflicting. 3 The Houses they are Lords of. 4 The Simpathy or Antipathy
they bear to the former of and.


1 The Sign afflicted is, thence we may partly guess what Places are subject to
the Influence of this, viz. Scotland, Holland, Zealand, Prussia, Algiers,
Tunis, Constantinople, Venus, Millan, York, Amsterdam, etc. The sign is
absolutely a Sea-sign, and therefore signifies all Towns taken out of, or
environed with the Sea. The part of Heaven afflicted is the Ninth House, which
signifies Voyages beyond Sea, Clergymen of all sorts, even from the Pope to
the Journey-man-Priest, Church Livings and Benefices, Anglice, Gleabland and
Tithes, all Authors hold it signifies, Religion, and I believe it signifies
that Monster which People call Religion, viz. The Ordinances of men and the
like; as also the predominant Religion of the Times and Countries, the States
Religion be it what it will, Turkish, Jewish, or Popish, for it is at present
my Opinion, That the true Religion will scarce ever flourish by public
Authority, till Jesus Christ be set upon his holy hill of Zyon; in the mean
season I look to see the beginning of the 2d Psalm accomplished: At present, I
know not what belongs to that Religion Presbytery would establish; all the
Religion I know, is Jesus Christ and him Crucified, and the indwelling of the
Spirit of God in me: this I am sure is real Gospel, and Supernatural, (the
influence of the Heavens is purely natural, therefore their operation upon
natural things; and if my present Prognostics be but heeded by the eye of
Reason, you may see who they be that call natural parts divine) as for the
Practical part (as it is so called) I am as yet ignorant of; I have as much
Faith in the Synods Directory, as I have in the History of Bell and the Dragon,
or the Fable of Arion and the Dolphin; I dare not Deifie humane Learning,
though my self have been an Accademick, nor make a little god-almighty of the
present Clergy; a few, a very few Months will show they are but men, and
perhaps none of the best of men neither.

2 The Planets afflicting are and, both bad, and therefore not like to do good,
they does hate one another, both hate the Sign and House they are in; of this,
see more is the writings of Mr Lilly upon the year, 1650.

3 They are Lords of the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 Houses.

4 In the Conjunction of and it is in the 7 House; the profection of and being
in the 9 from the as this is in the Ninth of the Heavens.

My Judgment I shall deliver, 1 Generally, 2 Particularly:

1 Generally, It sets hard on the Clergy, and before the Effects of it be half
over, Sr John will find it wisdom to pawn his JUS DIVINUM for a SUPERSEDEAS DE
NON MOLESTANDO. The Sea will be exceeding dangerous, both by Pirates and
Shipwarck; Holland and Zealand, look well to thy Dams, I fear the Sea will
break in upon thee: God preserve York from Fire and Faction: And thou o
Scotland (ungrateful Scotland) art now come into remembrance, thou could
never find in thy heart to love thy Friends, therefore shall thou now be forced
to fear thy Enemies; for let whoever reads my writings, take notice what I say,
If the Stars did ever in their courses fight against Sisera, so will they now
against Scotland: The first is Scripture proof, and a little time will prove I
am no Liar in the second: In Scotland had Presbytery its beginning, there shall
it expire; and very speedily may that saying that Vegetius of the Chariots
armed with Sythes and Hooks be applied to Presbytery, At first they were a
Terror, and afterward a Scorn.

The dreadful Effects threatened by this Conjunction, which almighty God by the
Book of the Creatures gives you fair warning of, according to Guido Bonatus are
these, It signifies killing of Kings (for want of them take Supreme Magistrates
in their stead) subversion of Kingdoms, terrible Strifes, Contentions and
wranglings, ill Disposition in Creatures, Slaughters Captivities, burning of
Towns, much effusion of Blood, Famine, Mortality, Pestilence; thus honest
Guido: And intruth the Conjunction happening in the Ninth House, I shrewdly
suspect the Clergy will have a great hand in this, and for ever defile their
Ecclesiastical garb, with a purple stain.

I told you before what Places were by the course of Nature subject to the
Effects of this Conjunction, and which of them God may in mercy be pleased to
spare is unknown to me, or whether any: this I am confident, They are all
threatened: God promises because he would perform: He threatens because he
would not perform; And therefore O York, Scotland, Holland, Zealand, Amsterdam,
etc. Let my Counsel be acceptable to you, Break off your sins by repentance,
and your iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor, it may be a lengthning of
your tranquillity; be sure ye prepare to meet your God: And thou O Presbyter,
Thou have seen what God has done to thy fathers the Bishops, how for their
Pride and Ambition he laid their Honor in the dust, yet have not thou humbled
thy self for all thou know all this; I assure thee two years will not pass
(for so long the Effects of this Conjunction will last) before thy name will be
Odious to men (except thou make thy peace with God, for the angry Angel has
drawn his SWORD against thee) You would be Statesmen, nay State-Rulers
(forsooth) would you not? Indeed it is denied you, Repent, repent, I and that
quickly before the dreadful writing, Mean, mean, tekel upharfin (you know the
meaning of the words) be verified upon you also: I have delivered my own mind
heartily, and drawn from rules of Nature: Look to your selves, or if you will
not, I cannot help it.

Whether this Conjunction should be the forerunner of some new and Monstrous
Tenants in Religion, worse then the Ranters, if worse can be; or whether
monstrous Pride and saucy Actions, in our present Clergy I leave for time to
determine, sure I am there will be much striving, contending, controverting
about Religion, and such Principles as shall bring neither content nor
felicity, but only vast expense of brain and time.

Thus much for the general.

As for Paariculars, I desire you to take them as in respect of Time, not in
respect of particular Actions, which Ptolomy Cent. Aph. 1. affirms none but mad
men ([ Qui furore incitantur] which Mr Lilly so learnedly translates men
inspired (not with the spirit Python) but with the Spirit of God) will
undertake to do.

SEPTEMBER, 1650.
EIther upon the very latter end of August, or very beginning of September,
1650. transists the place of at the; I assure you gentle Clergy the Magistrate
begins to smell out your knavery, why will not you give Caesar his due? Caesar
has given you more then yours, and if you be not the wiser, he will give you a
Rope to boot; it is wisdom and honesty, not Sophismes must save you: Now I expect
a Rout in Scotland, prehaps great Guns and little Guns, together with all their
Oatmeal and Salt lost: If our Ships be Northward, a hundred to one if they meet
not with a Prize. The States of Holland this Month begin to smell a great RAT,
Are you not all wise enough to make a Trap big enough for him? The 8. 16. 22.
and 29. days of this Month, or either of them, may prove Fatal both to
Scotland and the rest of the Places subject to the Effects of this Conjunction.

The truth is, It was my Opinion diverse years before the last of and, that that
Conjunction was the forerunner of an alteration both in Church and
Commonwealth; and it is something observable, That the Sun in this Conjunction
is upon the very degree of the 8 House in that; it may signify the time at
hand, of a strange Epidemical, nay mortal Disease to the Clergy; I would they
would learn to be wise, but they (say Astrologers) are under, and I believe
they have more of in them then of, Anglice, more Money then Wit, that I may not
say Honesty.

OCTOBER, 1650.
I expect more wonders this Month to be either agitated or transacted, or
prepared for transaction by our State, then either our eyes or the eyes of our
Fathers, Grandfathers, or great-grand-Fathers ever saw, ever dreamt of: I hope
for, (and indeed the Heavens promise no less) a Rectification of the Law, I
never looked for it before, there is need enough of it: It Is a sad thing men
must trot up from the remotest parts of the Nation to London about every
trivial Suit in Law: be quiet brother Commoner, this Month promises thee much
Redress that way; I doubt if the State should fall a Rectifying the Clergy,
they would Rectify the greatest part of them away, and set them to Preach
against Astrology to the Posts.

NOVEMBER, 1650.
THere was a small Eclips of the Moon the last Month, and but a very small one
neither, and that small one according to Ptolomy, will be a great while ere it
begin to operate: Origanus he questions Ptolomy, in this particular, and so
indeed do I; The Angles being fixed may indeed seem somewhat to retard its
Operation; yet is the Eclipse Angular, and the Luminary Eclipsed in her
exaltation; Must the glory of a Queen be Eclipsed? The Figure of the Eclipse is
almost the same with that of the Conjunction of and, the which shall according
Guido Bonatus operate speedily because they are Oriental, and therefore it is
probable they are more like to help forwards the Effects of the Eclips, then
the Eclips is to retard theirs: The Commonalty lack Money, and such an evil
Spirit as entered into the Herd of Swin, possesses the Presbyterian with a
madness to undo himself.

The beginning of this Month seems to speak fair for an Accommodation between
us and the Scots; I fear the News is too good to be true; and it is very probable
their young King being a CHIP of the old BLOCK, may prove as good an Alchymist
as his Father, viz. To sublimate all Treaties into Air: I wish from my heart
Venice were so wise to make Agreement with the Ottoman Family. Scotland is
Retrograde, and so art thou; take heed of the 6. 13. 26 days of October: the
2. 16. and 29 of this Month; it is time for thee to enter into those few poor
Garrisons thou have, thou by this time find by experience, That the Field
conduces not to thy health, but troubles thee with a Vertigo, viz. To turn thy
Face where thy Arse was. Farwell Irish Rebel.

DECEMBER, 1650.
IF the season of the year were suitable, this would be a Month of grand Action
in the Field; Well, let it be as it is, we shall make it up in grand
Consultations at home: I expect many Fomenters of the Scotch Divisions to be
found out here, and they no small Fools neither: Who ere loses the Hangman
gets; it is an ill wind blows no body to profit: Bitter Divisions at home, bitter
Weather abroad; let a Plaster of Patience mixed with a little Oil of
Contentment salve up our Sores.

The 11 day enters, the latter end of ascends, 28. mediates the Heaven, is
weak, the applies to him, he is still, and my Brethren of the Commonalty lack
no Wit this quarter, though they may happily want Money.

This having premised, I come to this present Year, 1651. A general Judgment on
which I shall give you when I come to March.

JANUARY, 1651.
NOw Mars has newly left the Square of Saturn, and his Square to the place he
was in at the Conjunction; now Mars marches through the Ninth House of the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, it is something strange that so many
Influences should threaten the Clergy; who knows but that is the reason they
rail so at Astrology? we use to do so when we were School-boyes against those
that told tales of us. The propinquity of this Month to the former or latter of
the last year (if you will conclude the year at Christmas, which perhaps was
first invented because they would end it merrily) is such, that this Month
cannot choose but participate of the evil Influence of the former; I find Mars
in his detriment, though with Spica Virginis, a benevolent fixed Star, as if
some honest minded People should labor to pacify his fury; but he is in the
Ninth of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in the Twelfth of the
Conjunction of himself and Saturn, in the Seventh of the inition of this
present Parliament, as if the Clergy should go about to Oppose the State; nay,
to set the World together by the ears: Oh Heavens! What the Pigmies assault
Hercules again! Learn your duty (Clergy) from an Astrologer, it is not allotted
you to be Statesmen, your Office is to teach Jesus Christ, and he was, he is
the Prince of Peace, your Commission reaches no further, if you go beyond your
Commission, look to suffer for breach of it; if you be pressed in Spirit, then
teach that Jesus is THE Christ, meddle with your Charge, but 'twas the Costome
of your Fathers before you, go on in your Sins, they will be the sooner full,
and your Judgment the sooner come; believe me, the time hastens when People
will be Priest-ridden no longer.

I had forgotten that the last Month threatens great Dissension in Scotland,
great ones against great ones: Do! fall out, and Fight to, it shall not trouble
me.

The Sea is extreme dangerous, the Merchant loses much, who can help it? we
have much ado to crush those, who make Fancy, Lust and Apetite a Religion,
because they have no better, and yet believe me this Month is in probability
like to end better then it began.

I would willingly have ended this Month, but when I remember Charles the First
lost his head on the latter end of this Month let me give a timely Admonition
to his Son; Oh! that he would be but so wise to hear: I question not, but some
will have the Honesty to him, or the Malice against me, to tell him of it. It
is only, Ier. 45. 4, 5. alittle applied to his Person; Iehovan has said thus,
That which I have built will I destroy, and that which I have planted will I
pluck up, even thy whole Family; and seek thou great things to thy self?
seek them not. If I speak to wise men, this is enough.

FEBRUARY, 1651.
HOw merrily does this Month begin with my brother Commoner? The Nation smiles,
every one is merry with his Mistress, and think the worst is past; I wish it
were from my heart, Latet hoc sub melle venenum: Our Soldiers and our Enemies
plot Mischief one against another, when we poor Commonors know it not, neither
is it fit we should, it is not our places; and if every one had kept the place
God set him in, this Nation had not been in the picle it is in; let me mind my
Physic, let the Plowman mind his Plow, and the Clergyman mind his Bible; we
know not, neither was ever any man able to tell us, what Sin it was the Devils
first Committed, only, Jude 6. God spared not the Angels that left their
station: Let not us leave ours to turn Statesmen: I am confident, were it
Pride, or Ambition as Priests tells us, some of themselves are as deeply guilty
of it Qucad posse, as Lucifer could be.

Mars falls Retrograde: Treaties break off: It Is the SWORD must end the
Difference when all is done: The Magistrate outwits both the Scot, and Jack
Presbyter his Son: Our neighbor Kingdoms are afraid of us, they have cause
enough; we fear neither what they, nor the Devil can do against us: Once more,
Presbyterian, let me advise thee to be wise; why should thou bring thy self
into a Praemunire, and fall before thy time? Be wise, or else thy Motto shall
be, Miserum est suisse.

MARCH, 1651.
enters


It Is a thousand pound to a penny, if there be not some difference in this
Annual Scheam between me and others; if they would be loath to be denied their
own Judgments, why should they be loath to deny me mine? Be it, Sol entering
Aries, or Ceres entering Libra, it is all one.

The very Degree of M. C. in the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars is Ascendent in
the Revolution; on the Cusp of I. C. jupiter in the latter end of the House,
who is Lord of the year the Moon combust in the Eight, in Pisces. The degree of
the Eight House in the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, is not far off from
the Ascendent in the Revolution, nor the place of the Sun in that Conjunction
from the Eigth House in the Revolution: I want Paper and Time to make all these
speak English; let the great ones whom it concerns beware.

in the Fourth, shows much search after hid Treasure, and to as much purpose as
to go about to piss down Paul's: vast expense of Money that way, and incuring
much displeasure by over curious Inventions; Inventions did I say? I would have
said Searchings.

I cannot but conclude some, nay much good to the Commonalty this year, for if
the Lord of the year be well seated, as here he is, he signifies a good
fruitful year, Prosperity and good fortune: Surely Justice will this year come
down again from Heaven to visit the Earth: Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity seems
to attend the English Nation, I aspire to no Kingdom; I am afraid to take a
Public Office for fear I should turn Knave as others have done.

Jupiter being Lord of the year, Oriental, show a hot and moist Spring, a
wholesome Air, inclining generally to cleerness, gentle Northren blasts, by
which, both Seeds and living Creatures are comforted.

I will not deny but the Sun is very near approaching to the Quartile of Saturn
from Cardinal Signs, which according to Guldo Bonatus threatens such Places as
are under the Sun and Leo, viz. Room, Italy, Gallia Togata, etc. If the
Pestilence rage in those Places this year, I cannot help it.

My own Opinion is, That the year will be far more plentiful then healthful;
men's bodies will be vexed exceedingly with Coughs, Catharrs, Asthmaes, and
other Diseases proceeding of cold and moisture, will be Epidemical, and of long
continuance.

Much Contention concerning Lands, perhaps Deceits and Conycatching betwixt
Father and Son about some such business: It signifies death of Women, and
Queens be no other Creatures: indeed in all probability there may die three
Women for one Man this year.

I shall weave in the rest of my Judgments Monthly.

When Saturn passes by Transit the degree of his Conjunction with Mars, he
unhapily meets with the Quartile of the Sun: On this pass without memorable
Action? It happens in the Twelfth House of the Revolution: but the Ninth of
that Conjunction: Sol being in the Ninth of the Revolution, it is but a scurvy
Trade to be a Pyrate, and in truth not much beter to be a Presbyterian, both
suffer deeply; So let all thine Enemies perish, o Lord: For the Sun has no
sooner left the Square of Saturn, but he applies to the Trine of Jupiter:
Justice will speedily take place, which is the hearty prayer of all true
Englishmen: At the time of the Square of Sol and Saturn, the Moon is just in
the place of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars; sure without a Miracle, I
shall hardly fail: About this time shall our Parliament find out who has
Cheated them and us all this time: A faithful Friend may now be discerned from
a Flatterer: When Achan is taken away, the Children of Israel may expect to
prosper: About this time our Parliament shall want no Enemies, nor scarce get a
good word among the vulgar; Oppression will make a wise man mad: How happy
might our States be, if they would but ease the Commonalty alittle of their
extreme Taxes: And my Advice to my Brethren of the Commonalty is, That they
would be quiet; it is quietness and not Tumults best beseems them: He that
strives against the Parliament shall find (as some about this time will) that
he strives against the stream: Must the latter end of this Month produce a Sea
fight? Well! If it do, look to it France, for thou will suffer: Beware
Portugale: There Is not a Nation under the Moon shall offend us, and escape
unpunished.

APRIL, 1651.
THe Sun is Eclipsed this Month upon the very last degree of Aries, but it is
in the night, therefore not to be seen of us, unless we could see through the
Earth, which is impossible; and that is the reason so few rich and learned men
see Christ, because the Devil has dawbed up their eyes with the World: This
may be beheld by such as sail through Mare Pacificum, and those that inhabit
the parts Adjacent.

It is probable many of my Prognostics last Month, may come to maturity, or be
visible this Month, and toward the middle of it; at which time the Sun passes
the Tenth House in the Revolution: Much rainy weather, not without some sharp
winds, are like to begin this Month, Thunder and Storms end it: Adulteries
enough may be found out, and the Statute against such Misdemeanors executed.
Take heed Pope, thou art but a man.

MAY, 1651.
ME thinks this Month begins merrily as it should do; and yet it being
Cookoo-time, Citizens Servants will be subject to run away apace; believe me,
they will find but an untoward time with them, untoward dealings by them:
Beware France, thy turn comes next; let but us alone this year, if thou want
Employments at home, or can find time to molest us next year, do it and spare
not: I think our STATE will lack Money to Eternity. Robbing abroad, scurrilous
seditious Libels at home, with as many Lies as Lines in them conclude the
Month; Men are Phrenitick, or as the Vulgar call it, Frantic: Miserable is
that man's life that lives by inventing Lies.

JUNE, 1651.
SOL enters in the Seventh House, the Moon being in in reception with him;
corrupts the Tenth by his presence: The having left the of applies to the of
who is in to as though the beginning of the Summer should be molested with Wind
and Rain, unseasonable weather has the Country Farmer cause enough to fear, to
the prejudice of his Hay, Let him stay till the Sun shines; yet if this were
the worst it might be born Majus opus moveo: This Month cuts the degree of the
of and, comes to another of, and to the body of; and the two Fortunes when they
should be helping are at ods one with another.

Hei mihi qui strepitus quique tumultus adest.
Surely the Devil or Robin Goodfellow is in the Scots: Scotland! Scotland!
Do not thou see how thy Clergy cheats thee! If ever mortal men were mad to
be undone, you are of that number: And you Clergymen of my Country England,
You have already smarted for meddling with that you had nothing to do with: And
those moderate Souls in the Countries, of which are some of your Trade, have
smarted for your sakes: And now, because no warning would serve your turn, your
House is left to you desolate: How osten has Mr Lilly warned you of yonr
downfall, and you would take none? Now you may sing Lacrymae instead of a Psalm:
Algier and Tunis smart for their Piracy: Holland and Zealand thrive not what
ere the matter is: And Amsterdam (which Town I exceedingly love and respect)
might have been wiser then to have lost the wit she so dearly bought: The
Actions of the latter end of this Month and the beginning of the next amaze all
Europe, I had almost said, The World: If any happen to be Headless about this
time, they will fall the lighter.

JULY, 1651.
IF any ask how this Month will begin, the Answer is ready, viz. Just as the
last ended, finding out Knaves, such as set the Nation together by the ears,
such as sowed the seed of Sedition in stead of the Truth; such as Wdidows and
Fatherless Children daily pray against; such as one day shall dearly answer for
the Blood that has bin spilt in this Civil War; such as have endeavored to
Make themselves by Marring others; such as thought Justice had taken Opium, and
would never awake more: and the Answer is as ready if you ask how the Month
shall continue and end? for unless the Sixth, Fourtenth, or Twentieth days
cause a Batel Northward, to crown our Friends and Armies with Laurel, it will
both Continue and End in Execution of Justice upon Malefactors. If we have no
Enemies about this time, which I can hardly be brought to believe, I am vilely
afraid we shall fall out amongst our selves (which the Lord defend us from) Let
the Army score their Valor upon the heads of their Enemies in the name of God,
but let Peace and quietness be amongst themselves, for though Discord make a
Harmony in Music, yet it does not so in an Army.

AUGUST, 1651.
ON the very beginning of this Month, the Sun cuts the Ascendent of the year,
and the Mid-heaven of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars; and sure the honest
Commoner begins to love the Parliament: Many see now who has done them good,
and preserved them and theirs from Egiptian Bondage: the Winds are high, and
not without Thunder and Lightning about the 14 or 15 days of this Month: Mars
cuts the degree ascending at his Conjunction, threatening some Epidemical
Disease of his own Nature, I pray God it be easy to be cured; Headache and
Fevers are very rife, I could almost afford to be afraid of a scurvy fashion
called poisoning of men about this time, the Lord grant my fears to be in vain;
the Month ends with Luxurious living amongst too too many, which will cause
virulency, and so make work for the Chyrurgians. The latter end of the Month
looks as though the Heavens promised a Reconciliation of some Differences
between the Commonalty and their Masters, or Servants, which you will.

SEPTEMBER, 1651.
SOL enters Libra, at which time he is in the Southern Angle, Venus upon the
cusp of the Tenth, both of them weak, and old Saturn is in the Ninth, all this
does not much trouble me, were not Jupiter and Mars in Conjunction in the
Ascendent, any body that pleases may set the Figure, I gave you the time at
the beginning of the Ephemeris; and as I was thinking what the Effects of this
Conjunction might be, I concluded to be a little Critical; and first to
consider what Sign they meet in, which I find to be Sagittary.

I suppose the sign to be violent, I know Origanus, and from him Mr Lilly hold
the contrary, and that Aries, Scorpio, Capricorn Aquary and Libra, are the only
violent signs: I admire how they, or any body for them, can make Libra, which
is the Emblem of Equity, to be Violent! It is as strange to me, as how they can
take on to make Mars and Venus friends, whose Houses, Natures, and qualities,
and what not, are opposite.

Again, I am loath to be altogether so led by the Nose by Ptolomy, as not
consider a little the Summer, and Autumnal, and Winter quarters though the sign
Ascending in the Spring were fixed, it is possible they may not be so
efficacious, yet my mind gives me, That there is some heed to be taken of them.

Taurus descends upon the Sixth House at Sol his entrance into Libra, and Venus
is in Trine to it from the Tenth, and therefore Sickness is not very like to be
the Effects of it, and yet some Effects out of question twill have: Haly says,
It signifies Strife, War, Mortality, and the Death of some King in that part
signified by the sign in which they are joined. I think Spain is under
Sagittary. I pray God it stir not up a new War this Quarter about the Eastern
parts of this Nation; Have not Kent and Essex had enough of it yet, they say
Jupiter signifies the Clergy, if he do, then are they in ill Case, headaches
are very rife, and men's heads full of Consultations; some smart deeply in
Estate.

OCTOBER, 1651.
THe last day of last Month, Sol transists the degree of Mars, in the
Revolution; God send us Peace: it is pity Brethren should not agree; certainly
the worlds mad, and therefore 'twill not live long: On the fourth day the Sun
is Eclipsed, it is above the Earth, yet they say not visible to us, but to those
about Brasil, etc. It may be though we see it not, yet we may feel the Effects
of it in some measure: the truth is, were it not for the things before
mentioned, this Month would look with a pretty quiet face, and seems to promise
some fair accord amongst our selves, which the Lord grant us, and then let Men
and Devils be our Opposers.

NOVEMBER, 1651.
THis Month begins serenely, it is pity it is not likely to hold; I hope my
Brother Commoner will like the Law a little better then he was wont to do; if
not, (which is not likely) let but Neighbors live quietly, and there will be
the less need of it.

This Month cannot, nor will not leave us till it have set Saturn and Mars
together by the ears: Is not Scotland quiet yet? or have they not been beaten
enough? Iockey, Iockey, if God gives thee Physic once more, he will give thee
such as shall either Mend thee, or End thee. The Islands Orkades seem now to
suffer, which till this time have been pretty quiet: old Matters are rubbed up
in Scotland: neither is Oxford free from wrangling.

DECEMBER, 1651.
THe Sun begins to shine on the beginning of this Month, affording us
seasonable weather, temperate Actions, but suddenly the wind rises high, and
men's brains are entoxicated; they sit by the Fire and ponder in the Winter what
they will do next Spring; invent Tales and Lies, by a second kind of
Transubstantiation convert Fictions and Fables into Truth: neither can Women
agree well with their Husbands, who can help it? if the Sheets cannot make
them, Friends, I cannot: bitter cold weather ends this year, and begins the
next.

An Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the Human Virtues in the Body of MAN:
Both -- Principal. Administering.

Human Virtues are either Principal for Procreation. Conservation.
Administering Attractive. Digestive. Retentive. Expulsive.


Virtues Conservative -- Vital, Natural, Animal.

By the Natural are bred -- Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy.

The Animal Virtue is -- Intelective, Sensitive.

The Intellective is -- Imagination, Judgment, Memory.

The Sensitive is -- Common, Particular.

The Particular is -- Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting. Feeling.

THe Scope of this Treatise is, To preserve in soundness, vigor and acuity, the
Mind and Understanding of Man, to strengthen the Brain, preserve the Body in
health, to teach a man to be an able co-artificer, or helper of Nature, to
withstand and expel Diseases.

I shall touch only the principal Faculties, both of Body and Mind, which being
kept in a due decorum, preserve the Body in health, and the Mind in vigor.

I shall in this place speak of them only in the general, as they are laid down
to your view in the Synopsis, in the former Pages, and in the same order.

Virtue Procreative.] The first in order, is the Virtue Procreative; for Nature
regards not only the conservation of its self, but to beget its like, and
conserve its Species.

The Seat of this is in the members of Generation, and is governed principally
by the influence of Venus.

It is augmented and increased by the strength of Venus, by her Herbs, Roots,
Trees, Minerals, etc.

It is diminished and purged by those of Mars, and quite extinguished by those
of Saturn.

Observe the Hour and Medicines of Venus, to Fortify; of Mars, to Cleanse this
Virtue; of Saturn, to Extinguish it.

Conservative.] The Conservative Virtue is, Vital, Natural, Animal.

Vital.] The Vital spirit has its residence in the Heart, and is dispersed
from it by the Arteries; and is governed by the influence of the Sun. And it is
so to the Body, as the Sun is to the Creation, as the Heart is in the
Microcosm, so is the Sun in the Megacosm: for as the Sun gives Life, Light, and
Motion to the Creation, so does the Heart to the Body; therefore it is called,
Sol Corporis, as the Sun is called, Cor Coeli, because their Operations are so
like.

Inimical and destructive to this Virtue, are Saturn and Mars.

The Herbs and Plants of Sol, wonderfully fortify it.

Natural.] The Natural Faculty or Virtue, resides in the Liver, and is
generally governed by Jupiter, Quasi juvans pater; its Office is to nourish the
Body, and is dispersed through the Body by the Veins.

From this are bred Four particular Humors, Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy.

Blood is made of Meat perfectly Concocted, in quality hot and moist, governed
by Jupiter: It is by a third Concoction transmuted into Flesh, the superfluity
of it into Seed, and its receptacle is the Veins, by which it is dispersed
throughout the Body.

Choler is made of Meat more then perfectly Concocted; it is the spume or
froth of Blood: it clarifies all the Humors, heats the Body, nourishes the
Apprehension, as Blood does the Judgment: It is in quality hot and dry;
fortifieth the atractive Faculty, as Blood does the disgestive; moves man to
Activity and Valor: its receptacle is the Gall, and it is under the influence
of Mars.

Phlegm is made of Meat not perfectly digested; it fortifies the Virtue
Expulsive, makes the Body slippery, fit for Ejection; it fortifies the Brain by
its consimilitude with it; yet it spoils Apprehension by its Antipathy with
it: It qualifies Choler, cools and moistens the Heart, thereby sustaining it,
and the whole Body, from the fiery Effects, which continual motion would
produce: its receptacle is the Lungues, and is governed by Venus, some say by
the Moon, perhaps it may be governed by them both; it is cold and moist in
quality.

Melancholy, is the sedement of Blood, cold and dry in quality, fortifying the
Retentive Faculty, and Memory; makes men sober, solid and staid, fit for study;
stays the unbridled toys and sooleries of lustful blood, stays the wandering
thoughts, and reduces them home to the Center: it is like a grave Counselor
to the whole Body: its receptacle is in the Spleen, and it is governed by
Saturn.

Of all these Humors, Blood is the chief, all the rest are but superfluities of
Blood; yet are they necessary superfluities, for without any of them, man
cannot live.

Namely, Choler is the Fiery superfluity; Phlegm, the Watery; Melancholy the
Earthly.

Animal.] The third principal Virtue remains, which is Animal; its residence is
in the Brain, and Mercury is the general Significator of it. Ptolomy held the
Moon signified the Animal Virtue; and I am of an Opinion, both Mercury and the
Moon dispose it: And my Reason is, 1 Because both of them in Nativities, either
fortify, or impedite it. 2 Ill directions to either, or from either, afflict
it, as good ones help it: Indeed the Moon rules the Bulk of it, as also the
Sensitive part of it: Mercury the Rational part; and that is the reason if in a
Nativity the Moon be stronger then Mercury, Sense many times over-powers
Reason; but if Mercury be strong, and the Moon weak, Reason will be master
ordinarily in despite of Sense.

It is divided into Intellective, and Sensitive:

1. Intellective.]

The Intellective resides in the Brain, within the Pia matter, is governed
generally by Mercury.

It is divided into Imagination, Judgment and Memory.

Imagination is seated in the forepart of the Brain, it is hot and dry in
quality, quick, active, always working, it receives vapors from the Heart, and
coyns them into Thoughts; it never sleeps, but always is working, both when
the man is sleeping and waking; only when Judgment is awake it regulates the
Imagination which runs at random when Judgment is asleep, and forms any Thought
according to the nature of the vapor sent up to it, Mercury is out of question
the disposer of it.

A man may easily perceive his Judgment asleep, before himself many times, and
then he shall perceive his Thoughts run at random.

Judgment always sleeps when men does, Imagination never sleeps, Memory
sometimes sleeps when men sleeps, and sometimes it does not; so then, when
Memory is awake, and the man aasleep, then Memory remembers, what Apprehension
coyns, and that is a Dream: The Thoughts would have been the same, if Memory
had not been awake to remember it.

These Thoughts are commonly (I mean in sleep, when they are purely natural)
framed according to the nature of the Humor called Complexion which is
predominate in the Body; and if the Humor be peccant, it is always so.

So that it is one of the surest rules to know a man's own Complexion, by his
Dreams, I mean a man void of Distractions, or deep Studies: (this most
assuredly shows Mercury to dispose the Imagination, as also because it is
mutable applying it self to any object, as Mercury's nature is to do) for then
the Imagination will follow its old bend; for if a man be bent upon a business,
his Apprehension will work as much when he is asleep, and find out as many
truths by study, as when the man is awake; and perhaps more too, because then
it is not impedited by ocular objects.

For the notion of the predominate Complexion, by the dreams, I have read some
most excellent Verses, made by Thomas May, Esquire which I shall here insert, by
which, if the Complexion be not altered much in quantity nor quallity, you may
know, by your most usual Dreams, not only your own Complexion, but also what
every Complexion, is most prone and inclinable to: (I suppose, and really
believe, That many Men and Women may know strange truths by their Dreams if
their Nativities be accordingly either by Nature, or perhaps if the business be
rectified by Art, of which I may happen to write something hereafter.)

They are these: Sanguine Complexion.
There altogether fly in Companies,
Of different Colors, Shapes and Qualities,
Bright sanguine Dreams, that seem to cheer the night,
With beauteous Shapes, and rosy wings as bright,
As in the Morning, or those Flowers that grace
In midst of Spring the painted Flora's face,
Within the Temple merrily do sport,
To whom the little Cupids often resort:
The little Cupids, from fair Venus Grove,
Stealing by night, do thither come and love
With those bright sanguine Dreams, to pass away
The hours of night, in sport and amorous play.
Chollerick Complexion.
There Dreams of Choler in a flamelike hue,
Through the Air, like little fiery Meteors flue,
With swift and angry motion, to and fro,
As if they sought within that place, a foe.
Sometimes up to the Temples roof, on high,
They soar, as if they meant to scale the sky:
Or some impossible Atchievment sought,
TO allay the thirst of an aspiring Thought.
Melancholic Complexion.
But down below, with sad and heavy cheer,
On dead men's Tombs, and every Sepulcher,
The dusky Dreams of Melancholy light,
With sable wings, like Bats or birds of night,
Fluttering in darkest corners, here and there,
But all alone, and still each other fear:
Courting dead Skuls, and seeming to invite
The dismal Ghosts, for Company by night.
Phlegmatic Complexion.
There all along the Temples whited Wall,
Phlegmatic lazy Dreams, not winged at all,
But slow, like slimy Snails, about do crawl,
And evermore, are thence afraid to fall,
And so be drowned, for on the floor below,
They do suppose, great Pools of water flow.


And thus much for Imagination, which is governed by Mercury, and fortified by
his Influence; and is also strong or weak in man, according as Mercury is
strong or weak in the Nativity.

Judgment is seated in the midst of the Brain, to show that it ought to bear
rule over all the other Faculties; it is the Judge of the little world, to
approve of what is good, and reject what is bad; it is the seat of Reason, and
the guide of Actions; so that all failings are committed through its infirmity,
it not rightly judging between a real and an apparent good. It is hot and moist
in quality, and under the influence of Jupiter.

Memory is seated in the hinder cell of the Brain, it is the great Register to
the little World; and its Office is to Record things either done and past, or
to be done.

It is in quality cold and dry, Melancholic, and therefore generally
Melancholic men have best Memories, and most tenacious every way. It is under
the dominion of Saturn, and is fortified by his Influence, but purged by the
Luminaries.

2. Sensitive.] The second part of the Animal Virtue, is Sensitive, and it is
divided into two Darts, Common and Particular.

Common Sense is an imaginary term, and that which gives Virtue to all the
particular Senses, and knits or unites them together within the pia Matter. It
is Regulated by Mercury, (perhaps this is one Reason why men are so
fickle-headed) and its Office is to preserve a harmony among the Senses.

Particular Senses are Five, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling.


These Senses are united in one, in the Brain, by the Common Sense, but are
operatively distinguished into their several seats, and places of Residence.

The Sight resides in the Eyes, and particularly in the Christalline Humor; It
is in quality cold and moist, and governed by the Luminaries: They who have
them weak in their genesis, have always weak sights; if one of them be so, the
weakness possesses but one Eye.

The Hearing resides in the Ears; is in quality, cold and dry, Melancholy, and
under the dominion of Saturn.

The Smelling resides in the Nose, is in quality hot and dry, Chollerick, and
that is the reason Chollerick Creatures have so good Smells, as Dogs. It is
under the Influence of Mars.

The Taste resides in the Pallat which is placed at the root of the Tongue on
purpose to discern what food is congruous for the Stomach, and what not; as the
Meseraik Veins are placed to discern what nourishment is proper for the Liver
to convert into Blood; in some very few men, and but a few, and in those few,
but in a very few Meats these two Tasters agree not; and that is the reason
some men cover Meats that make them sick, viz. The Taste craves them, and the
Meseraik Veins reject them: In quality hot and moist, and is ruled by Jupiter.

The Feeling is deputed to no particular Organ, but is spread abroad, over the
whole Body; is of all qualities, hot, cold, dry, and moist, and is the Index of
all tangible things; for if it were only hot, alone, it could not feel a
quality contrary, viz. cold; and so might be spoken of other qualities. It is
under the dominion of Venus, some say, Mercury: A thousand to one, but it is
under Mercury.

The Four Administering Virtues are, Attractive, Digestive, Retentive, Expulsive.


The Attractive Virtue is hot and dry, hot by quality active, or principal, and
that appears because the fountain of all heat is Attractive, viz. the Sun. Dry
by a quality pasive, or an effect of its heat; its Office is to remain in the
Body, and call for what Nature wants.

It is under the Influence of the Sun, say Authors, and not under Mars, because
he is of a corrupting nature, (Experience is more worth then Tradition ten
thousand times told over) yet if we cast an impartial Eye upon Experience, we
shall find, That Martial men, call for Meat, none of the least; and for Drink
the most of all other men, although many times they corrupt the Body by it; and
therefore I see no reason why Mars being of the same quality with the Sun,
should not have a share in the dominion.

It is in vain to Object, That the Influence of Mars is Evil, and therefore he
should have no dominion over this Virtue; for then, 1 By the same rule, he
should have no dominion at all in the Body of man. 2 All the Virtues in man are
natural Evil, and corrupted by Adams fall.


This Attractive Virtue ought to be fortified when the Moon is in fiery Signs,
viz. Aries and Sagitary, but not in Leo, for the sign is so violent, that no
Physic ought to be given when the Moon is there: (and why not Leo, seeing that
is the most Attractive sign af all? and that is the reason such as have it
ascending in their Genesis, are such greedy eaters) If you cannot stay till the
Moon be in one of them, let one of them ascend when you administer the Medicine.

The Digestive Virtue is hot and moist, and is the principal of them all, the
other like handmaids attend it.

The Attractive Virtue draws that, which it should digest, and serves
continually, to feed and supply it.

The Retentive Virtue, retains the substance with it, till it be perfectly
digested.

The Expulsive Virtue casts out and expels, what is superfluous by
digestion.

It is under the influence of Jupiter, and fortified by his Herbs and Plants,
etc.

In fortifying it, let your Moon be in Geminis, Aquary, or the first half of
Libra, or if matters be come to that extremity, that you cannot stay till that
time, let one of them ascend, but both of them together would do better,
always provided that the Moon be not in the Ascendent. I cannot believe the
Moon afflicts the Ascendent so much as they talk of, if she be well dignified
and in a sign she delights in.

The Retentive Virtue is in quality cold and dry; cold, because the nature of
cold is to compress, witness the Ice; dry, because the nature of dryness, is to
keep and hold what is compressed.

It is under the Influence of Saturn, and that is the reason why usually
Saturnine men are so covetous and tenacious.

In fortifying of it, make use of the Herbs and Plants, etc. of Saturn, and let
the Moon be in Taurus or Virgo, Capricorn is not so good, say Authors, (I can
give no Reason for that neither) let not Saturn nor his ill Aspect molest the
Ascendent.

The Expulsive Faculty is cold and moist; cold, because that compresseth the
Superfluities; moist, because that makes the Body slippery and fit for
Ejection, and disposes it to it.

It is under the dominion of Luna, with whom you may join Venus, because she is
of the same nature.

Also in whatsoever is before written, of the Nature of the Planets, take
notice, That fixed Stars of the same Nature, work the same effects.

In fortifying this, (which ought to be done in all Purgations) let the Moon be
in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pises, or let one of these signs Ascend.

COurteous Reader, if thou ever intendest to study Physic, and turn neither
Fool nor Knave in that famous Science, be well skilled in this foregoing
Discourse; here is enough for thee to whet thy Wits upon: Sympathy and Antypathy
are the two Hinges upon which the whole Body of Physic turns: Thou have the
Radix of them here. Here Is a Foundation for thee to erect the whole Fabric
upon, if thou be wise; if not, thou art unfit to make a Physician: I love
well, and am as willing to help all ingenious men, though their parts be never
so weak: but I hate Pride in whomsoever I find it: I now bid thee Farewell for
this time, only take Notice, in all this Treatise I have not spoken one Word of
the College of Physicians.

Aug. 4. 1650. Spittle-fields. Nich. Culpeper.

FINIS.
The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Exchange, LONDON.
A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY; or, a Translation of the London DISPENSATORY. Whereunto
is added, The Virtues of the Simples and Compounds. And in the Second Edition
are 784 Additions, the general Heads whereof are these, Viz. 1 The Dose (or
quantity to be taken at one time) and Use, both of Simples and Compounds. 2 The
Method of ordering the Body after Sweating and Purging Medicines. 3 Cautions
(to all ignorant People) upon all Simples and Compounds that are dangerous.
With many Additions in every Page, marked with the letter A.

Seven Books of M. Jer. Buroughs, lately Published:
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. 2 Gospel Worship, on
Levit. 10.3. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1.27. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness, on Phil. 3. part of verse. 19. 5 An Exposition, with
Practical Observations, on the 4th, 5th 6th and 7th Chapters of the Prophecy
of Hosea. 6 On the 8th 9th and 10th Chapters, etc. 7 On the 11th 12th and 13th
Chapters, etc.
Twelve several Books of Mr Will. Bridge, in one Volumn.
1 The great Gospel-Mysterie of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly-Office. 2 Satan's power to tempt; and Christ's
love to, and care of his People under temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in
every Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, The overflowings of Christ's Fullness
received by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual acting of Faith, through natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 A Vindication of
Ordinances under the Gospel. 10 Grace and Love beyond Gifts. 11 The Saints
Hiding Place in time of God's Anger. 12 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight.
Six several Books of Dr Hill 's, in one Volumn.

FINIS.

