AN Abstract or Abridgment, OF A Decree Made, and often Confirmed in the High
Court of Chancery, concerning the Payment of a Tyth or 10th. Part of Lead-Oar
in the County of Derby.
CAROLUS Secundus Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Georgio Savile, Willielmo Savile, Jacobo Hopkinson, Rogero Newton, Alveredo
Motteram, Generosis, ac cuicunque Personae sive quibuscunque aliis Personis
quos Decretum vel finale Judicium aliqualiter tangit, sive concernit and little
Cuilibet salutem:
Cum quoddam finale Judicium sive Decretum coram Nobis in Curia nostra
Cancellariae antehac fact' extitit in haec Verba.

WHEN before this Time, that is to say, in the Term of St. Michael, Anno Dom.
1628, Richard Carrier, Clerk, Vicar of Wirksworth in the County of Derby,
Complainant, Exhibited his Bill of Complaint into the High and Honorable Court
of Chancery against Ephraim Fern, Richard Wigley, Anthony Coats, and William
Debanks, Defendants; declaring by the same, That whereas the Complainant and
all his Predecessors, Vicars of Wirksworth, Time beyond the Memory of Man, have
had, and received, and used to have and receive, and do of right, ought to have
and receive a certain Customary Duty of all the Lead-Oar or Lead-Mine, which
had been gotten within the said Parish of Wirksworth, dressed and cleansed from
the Earth and Rubbish, at and by the only Costs and Labors of the Miners and
Getters of the said Oar and Lead-Mine, the said Complainant and his
Predecessors allowing to the said Miners and Getters of the said Oar and
Lead-Mine only one Penny for the dressing, cleansing and washing every the said
10th. Dish without Interruption of any Man, until about the 18th Year of the
Reign of K. James I.

At which time the said Complainant exhibited his English Bill into the Court
of Exchequer Chamber, The first Suit in the Exchequer Court.
against diverse Miners who refused to pay this Duty: The Miners being served
with Subpoena's from that Court, appeared in Michaelmns Term (180 Jacobi) but
gave no Answer.

The Miners upon their Petition to the Privy Council obtained an Order, Removed
(together with the Suits of other Proprietors) to the Privy Council
dated 22d of November, Anno 180 Jacobi Primi, to stay the Suit in the
Exchequer Court, and to bring it before the Council, where also the Proceedings
at Law of John Gell Esquire; (afterward Sir John Gell Bar.) for one third part of
the Tyth-Oar, and of Sir Francis Leak (then Knight, afterward Lord Deincourt)
for the other two parts of the Tyth-Oar in the Parishes of Bakewell, Tiddeswall
and Hope, in the hundred of High Peak in Darbyshire, were then, and for diverse
Years before had been stayed.

And the whole Cause concerning the Tyth or Tenth of Lead-Oar within the said
County of Darby, The Cause of Tyth-Oar for the whole County before the Council.
was then stayed at the Council Board upon Auggession by the Miners of some
Point of State: So that diverse Ministers, Parsons and Vicars, within the said
County, who had a great Part of their Maintenance out of the said Tenth of
Lead-Oar, were forced to forbear all Proceedings at the Law for the same, and
to be content to live without the same, during the time that the Matter was in
question at the said Council Board.

And thereupon The Custom of the Payment of the said Tyth or Tenth of Lead Oar,
The Custom for this Tyth one and the same throughout the County.
being claimed to be all one and the same in all Partishes within the said
County of Darby, where the said Lead-Oar is gotten.

Their Lordships for the avoiding Multiplicity of Suits, which otherwise would
have ensued, The Councels Directions for Trial of the general Custom.
and for the Final settling of this Cause, thought sit for the whole County, as
well concerning the Parsons and Vicars, as other Proprietors of the said Tyth
and Customary Duty of Lead-Oar, to refer the said Custom to a Trial at Common
Law, which accordingly was done by an Order of that Court of 26th of November,
Anno Domini 1619, (with special Directions how and in what manner the said
Trial should be brought on and tried) and that only the said Custom should be
given in Evidence, and both Parties to insist thereupon.

This Trial was had at the Common-Pleas-Bar in Easter-Term 1620, where the
Custom was only in Issue, A Verdict for the general Custom.
and both Parties only insisted thereupon, and after 4 Hours Evidence before
the Judges in the hearing the said Cause, A Verdict passed for the said Custom,
and with the Plaintiff in that Cause.

After which said Trial, The Miners litigiously desire a second Trial.
the Miners not yet satisfied, but endeavoring to weary out the said
Complainant, and the rest interessed in the said Duty, upon Pretense of having
some old Witnesses not before examined, obtained from the Lords of the Council,
an Order of the 21st. of June, Anno Dom. 1620, for another Trial at Common Law,
under particular Directions (as before) which Trial was had at the
Common-Pleas-Bar in Michaelmas-Term, Anno Dom. 1620. upon the very point of the
said Custom. And there also upon full and long Evidence, A second Verdict for
general Custom.
a second Verdict passed for the said Custom, and with the said Plaintiff in
that Suit [ viz. Mr. John Gell.]

Notwithstanding which Verdict, The Proprietors Petition the King.
the said Complainant [Carrier] together with the said Mr. Gell, and the Lord
Deincourt, and the other Ministers interessed in the said Customary Duty of the
Tyth or Tenth of Lead-Oar within the said County of Derby, in respect they
could not quietly enjoy the same according to the said Verdicts, were forced
for their Relief against the said Miners, being a Multitude, and making a
general Purse, thereby to weary out the said Complainant, and others
interessed, to petition His Majesty (King James I.) for to establish them in
the said Tyth or 10th of Lead-Oar as aforesaid.

The King refers the Consideration of this to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
The King refers it to some Lords.
and to the Lord High Treasurer, (afterward Lord Privy Seal) with special
Directions that upon due Examination of the Cause, they should take Effectual
Order for the Petitioners Relief, and to certify what course might be taken to
put them in Possession.

According to which Reference, their Lordships having heard the said Cause at
large debated thereof, did in July 1621, Certify unto His Majesty, that they
had seen the former Proceedings before the Council, and at Common Law by
Directions from the Lords of the Council, that Mr. Gell aforesaid, had
prevailed at Law for his 3d part of this Tyth; and the Lord Deincourt had
obtained a Decree in the Exchequer for the other two 3d parts of this Tyth, in
the Parishes of Bakewell, Tiddeswall and Hope.

So as it appeared unto them Just and fit, that the said Tyths or Tenth should
be established according to the said Trials at Law, and the said Decree in the
Exchequer. The Lords certify the Justice and Equity of the said Custom.


After which Certificate by special Order and Direction from the said King
James I, by an Order of Council of the 5th. of October 1621, it was Ordered,
The Cause honorably dismissed from the Councel-Table, with a Declaration of
the Miners false pretense.
That the Complainant and all such others as were interessed, or had any Right
or Title in, and to the Tyth or Tenth of Lead Oar, together with the whole
Cause then depending before them, should be clearly discharged and dismissed
from the said Council Board, and should be left to the full Fruition and
Benefit of the Law.

And because the said Complainant and the Rest, had had loss by being stayed at
the Board, upon Pretense from the Miners of some Point of State, which then
appeared to be otherwise: Therefore their Lordships in an Honorable respect of
the Complainant and the Rest, did wish that they might have all the Speed and
Expedition, which the Law in Justice might afford them.

After which Dismission from the Council Board in Michaelmas Term next
following, The Complainants Bill in Chancery.
being the 19th Year of King James I, the said Carrier exhibited his Bill in
Chancery against these Defendants, viz. Robert Maddox, Thomas Tailor, Thomas
Fogg, Francis Bayley, Thomas Godbehere, And others,
Miners within the said Parish, naming them in all to be 300 or thereabouts:
The said 5 Persons appeared in the said Michaelmas-Term, and took out a Dedimus
to answer in the Country, returnable in Hillary Term following.

The Complainant being thus delayed by a Dedimus, Delays by the Miners.
petitioned the Lord Keeper for an Injunction, which by an Order of Court of
4th of December, 19 of King James I, was granted against all the Miners in that
Parish, requiring them to pay this Tyth as formerly it used to be, until they
answered: And after their Answer given in Hillary-Term 19 James I, wherein they
averred themselves to be more in Number than 300; in Easter-Term the Miners
prayed, That the Injunction might be changed into a Sequestration, The
Complainant was ordered to show cause in Trinity-Term, why it should not so be.

The Matter was then heard and long debated 3d. July, 20 Jacobi Reg. prim. and
then Ordered, that the Defendants and all the Rest, should pay the said Tyth,
and that the Injunction should continue in force till hearing, and the
Complainant also under an Injunction to stay Suits for this in all other Courts.

After all which, and after Bill, Answer, Replication and Rejoinder,
Commissions to take Evidence and Publication of the same, together with the
Petition and Debates about the Injunction aforesaid (all upon record in
Chancery Court.)

The Cause now being ready to be heard in Michaelmas-Term 20th of King James I.
The Miners at last suffer a Decree against them, to pass by Consent.
The then Defendents finding the Proofs to be full against them, desired the
Complainant to take a Decree by consent, against them and all the rest of the
Miners in that Parish, to pay the said Tyth to the Complainant and his
Successors for ever.

This Decree by consent was accordingly passed that Michaelmas-Term, and
subscribed by the then Ld. Keeper.

Unto which Decree, The Miners Submit to the Decree for some Years.
as well the then Defendants as also all others, the Miners within the said
Parish of Wirksworth, did submit, and did by the space of five Years or
thereabouts then next following, pay the said Tyth or Tenth part of Lead-Oar
unto the said Complainant.

And likewise since the foresaid Dismission from the Council Table, Other
Decrees for other Proprietors.
the said John Gell had by due Course and Proceedings, obtained a Decree in
this Honorable Court (of Chancery) against all the Miners within the Parishes
of Bakewell, Tiddeswall and Hope, whereby they were all bound to pay the said
3d. part of the Tyth or Tenth of all Lead, gotten or to be gotten within the
said Parishes, unto him the said John Gell and his Heirs for ever.

Which Decree was ratified and confirmed to stand in force against them all, by
an Order of Chancery of 27 Maii, 3tio Carol. prim. And the said Mr. Gell was
accordingly possessed of the said 3d. part of the said Tyth of Lead-Oar within
the said Parishes: And the Miners ever since the said Decree was confirmed by
the Order aforesaid, had submitted themselves and duly paid the said Tyths of
Lead-Oar to the said Mr. Gell, his Servants or Deputies.

And the said Miners within the said County of Derby not yet satisfied with all
the said Proceedings at Law, Miners bring a Bill in Parliament against this
Tyth.
and at the Council Table, and in this Honorable Court, did exhibit their Bill
against this Complainant, and the Rest interessed in the said Tyth or Tenth of
Lead Oar, for their Relief into the High Court of Parliament, holden at
Westminster 19th February, 21 Jacobi Prim. wherein they did desire that it
might be Enacted, That no Tyth or Tenth of Lead Oar might be paid in any place
whatsoever within the said County of Derby, which Bill was twice read, and
Committed and Reported, The Miners Bill in Parliament against this Tyth
rejected.
and then upon Debate, amongst the Commons assembled in Parliament, it was upon
Wednesday the 12th of May, 22 Jacobi Regis Prim. Rejected and cast out.

Yet notwithstanding all this, in Easter-Term, 3tio Caroli Regis Prim. Miners
promote new Suits, and question the former Decree.
Some of the Miners within Wirksworth by sinister Encouragement of some others
ill-affected to the Complainant, did question whether the former Decree as it
was passed and drawn up, ought to oblige all the Miners in that Parish, or only
the then named Defendants, This question Referred to the Attorney General.
which Question was by Order of Chancery, 4to. Maii, Anno 3tio Carol. Prim.
referred to Sir Robert Heath Attorney General, to examine and certify
concerning it, who upon full Examination, and diverse Hearings of the Matter, in
Presence of Council learned on both sides, and upon Perusal of the said Bill
and Answer, Proofs, etc. made (10th July, 4to Carol. Regis,) his Certificate to
this Effect, viz.

1st. Attorney General his Certificate.
That the Complainant had prayed Process only against the then named
Defendants, yet complaining therein against all the Miners within that Parish,
naming them to be 300 or thereabouts, though the Defendants in their Answer,
did affirm and set forth that they were more.

2. He found that before the said Answer was made, it being delayed by a
Dedimus, an Injunction was awarded by the Ld. Keeper against all the Miners in
that Parish, requiring them to pay this Tyth, which Injunction was upon debate
ratified and confirmed, to stand in force till the Cause was heard.

3d. He did find a general Soliciting in the Suit, and a general Contribution
of the Miners of the said Parish, against the Complainant to maintain that Suit.

4th. He found that for a time, the said Miners did all submit, and continued
some Years to pay this Tyth to the Complainant, but found no Order preced^^^
the said Injunction and Decree, to warrant the Decree against the Miners in
general.

5th. And Lastly, Records of the First fruits Office of this Tyth.
he found by the Proofs published in the Cause, and by the Record in the
First-Fruits-Office, that the said Tithe or Tenth of Lead Oar, had been time
out of mind paid: And by that Record it appeared, that the Vicarage of
Wirksworth being valued in the King's Book at above 40 Pounds, 30 Pounds
thereof was only for the said Tithes of Lead-Oar, and therefore.

His Opinion was, That if in the Lord-Keepers Judgment, the Decree, as then
drawn up, ought to extend to all the Miners in the said Parish until it be
reversed, that then the Complainant should be settled in the possession of
those Tithes till that time, and restored to the Arrearages, the Possession
being taken away since the reference. But if the said Decree should not in his
Lordships Judgment be extended to any others, but such, as against whom Process
was prayed: That then the Lord Keeper should direct a Course for the sinal
Determination of that Question. (As by that said Decree, Order of Reference and
Certificate, all on Record in Chancery, and also by the Bill and Proceedings in
Parliament, to which the Complainant refers himself at large, appears.)

Upon this Certificate of the Attorney Generals, the Complainant prayed that
his Decree before had, might extend to all the Miners in that Parish.

But in regard the Decree aforesaid was not made upon a Judicial Hearing, An
Order obtained for a new Suit in Chancery.
(but by Consent) the Court directed and ordered, that it should only stand in
force against such as Consented to it. But yet further Ordered, that Mr.
Christopher Fulwood, of Council with the Miners, should within a Fortnight
after Entrance of that Order, upon notice given, nominate four Miners to be
Defendants to a new Bill to be exhibited against them by the Complainant, and
what Order or Decree should be made against them Four, the rest of the Miners
in that Parish should be Bound by it.

In pursuance of which Order, Counselor Fulwood named the four Defendants,
(first mentioned in the beginning of this Decree) viz. Ephraim Fern, Richard
Wigley of Cromford, Anthony Coats, and William Debanck.

The Complainant exhibited his Bill against those four Defendants, to the end,
that his Duty and Right to the said Tithe of Lead-Oar, might be settled by
Decree of this Court against all the Miners in the said Parish, who not
satisfied with the former Proceedings, to put the said Complainant to further
Trouble and Charge, did unconscionably refuse to pay the said Customary Duty of
the Tithe or 10th of Lead Oar, gotten, Unjust and Vexatious dealings of the
Miners for forth.
and to be gotten in the said Parish. And the said four Defendants, having by
Casualty, or otherwise, gotten into their own, or some of their Friends hands,
diverse Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Writings and Records, which would plainly
prove the said Complainants Right and Title to the said Tithe or Tenth of
Lead-Oar, had of late upon some causeless Displeasure by them conceived against
the Complainant, and by Plot, Confederacy, and Agreement amongst themselves,
wilfully denied the Payment of the said Tithe of Lead Oar by them gotten within
the said Parish to the Complainant then Vicar of the said Parish of Wirksworth.
And according to the said Plot and Agreement, had all of them absolutely
denied, and wilfully refused to pay any Tithe or Tenth Part at all to the said
Complainant of or for any Lead-Oar gotten by them within the said Parish of
Wirksworth, sometimes affirming, that the said Tithe of Lead-Oar was a Personal
Tithe, and sometimes that the said Complainant ought to take his said Tithe or
Tenth Part undressed, as it was drawn up out of the Lead-Mines or Groves, in
which they get the same.

Whereas in Truth, the said Tithe or Tenth Part of all the Lead-Oar gotten
within the said Parish, had (all the Time whereof the memory of Man was not to
the contrary) been paid, and of right ought to be paid by Custom and
Prescription, in manner and form following.

That is to say, The manner of Payment of this Tyth set forth.
within and over the Wapontake of Wirksworth in the said County of Derby,
(whereof the Mineral Places of Wirksworth Parish were, and are part) there is,
and beyond Man's memory has been, a principal Officer for the said Lead Mine,
called a Barmaster, by whom all the said Lead that was there gotten, is and
ought to be measured before the same were sold or made away. At which Measure
the said Barmaster did see the Lot and Cope paid to the Lord of the Field, or
of the Mine, and the Proprietors and Owners of the said Tithes or Tenth of Lead
Oar for the time being had likewise by all the time aforesaid, received every
Tenth Dish or Measure of Lead Oar from the Miners or Getters of the same. And
they had always received every the said Tenth Dish, being dressed and cleansed
from the Earth and Rubbish, at and by the proper Costs, and Charges, and Labor
of the Miners: The Proprietors and Owners of the said Tyth, or Tenth Dish,
allowing one Penny unto the Miners for the dressing, washing, and cleansing of
every said Tenth Dish.

In which manner the said Tithe or Tenth part of Lead-Oar had been paid as
aforesaid, (time beyond the memory of Man) and so of Right ought to be paid.

Which said Custom for payment of the said Tithe, Custom the same in all
Parishes
or Tenth of Lead-Oar within all Parishes of the said County of Derby, where
the same had been gotten, had been confirmed, entitled, approved, and
established by the said several Verdicts, Decrees, Certificates, Orders, and
other Proceedings formerly set forth and expressed.

And the said Customary Duty had been so paid in manner as aforesaid, to the
said Complainants Predecessors, and to him as Vicar of Wirksworth, time out of
mind of Man, without any Interruption, Question or Contradiction, until of
late, that the said 4 Defendants with the rest of the Miners in that Parish,
Illegal Combinations of the Miners.
had combined and confederated themselves as aforesaid, and did absolutely deny
the Payment thereof, and had given out in Speeches, that They would make the
said Complainants said Tyth or Tenth part of Lead-Oar, bear the Charges of
their Suit; and that if the said Complainant would oppose, and stand out in Law
with them, They would make him not worth a Groat; which Opposition and
Combination was contrary to all Equity and good Conscience. And would tend to
the great Loss and Disinherison of the said Complainant and his Successors, of
the said Tyth or Tenth part of Lead-Oar, if due and speedy Remedy were not had
therein.

In tender Consideration whereof, and for Prevention of Multiplicity of Suits,
and to avoid further Expenses, and to the intent, that a final Decree might be
made in the Cause; to conclude, all the Miners within the said Parish of
Wirksworth, (according to the Direction of this Court formerly made in that
behalf) and the Quiet Possession established and continued with the said
Complainant and his Successors, and in regard the Tyth of Lead-Oar was two
thirds of the whole Profits of that Vicarage (there being neither Glebe nor
Tyth-Corn, nor Tyth-Hay belonging to it) and so the said Church would be
disinherited, and the Complainant impoverished, if not timely prevented;
Therefore he prayed process of Subpoena against the said 4 Defendants, which
being granted, and they served therewith, and after Bill, Answer, Replication,
Commissions to examine Witnesses, and Publication, and all other Proceedings
(on ^^ord in Chancery) had and made. A Day was appointed for Hearing, at which
the Defendants being not ready or prepared, as their Council pretended, to go
to hearing, Delay of Hearing by the Miners.
a further Day was appointed for hearing the said Cause.

On which Day it then appeared, that a Decree had been taken by Consent (as
aforesaid) against the 5 former Defendants, viz. Maddock, Tailor, Fogg, Bayley,
and Godbehere, for Payment of this Tyth to the Complainant by them and the rest
of the Miners in that Parish; notwithstanding which, the rest not named Parties
then, had refused to be bound by that Decree, whereupon a new Bill was ordered,
and 4 new Defendants named, (as abovesaid) by whose Success the Rest should now
be concluded, which Cause came now to be heard.

And upon the full hearing and long debate of the matter before the Right
Honorable the Lord Reeper, in presence of Council learned on both sides; It
appeared, that the constant and general Custom within the said Parish for the
space of 50 Years and upwards, had been to pay the said Tyth or 10th Dish of
Lead-Oar dressed and cleansed from the Earth and Rubbish, Tyth not taken of the
Lot-Dishes which are the Kings part.
saving that the Lot Tishes had not been reck'ned or accounted as part of that
out of which the said Tyth or Tenth should be paid.

And the Complainants Council offered to read Depositions of old Witnesses
(taken in the former Cause) now dead, to prove this Custom in the said Parish
for fourscore Years.

It appeared also by a Copy of a Record in the First Fruits Office, that the
Vicarage of Wirksworth being valued at above 40 l. per Annum in the
Kings-Books, 30 l. thereof was only for the said Tyths of Lead-Oar.

But the only Question was concerning the Recompense which the Plaintiff and
his Predecessors had used to allow to the Miners for cleansing and washing the
said Tenth Dish. Debates about the recompense for Washing the Tenth dish.


Where it was proved by the Plaintisss Witnesses, the constant course and usage
had been to allow only a Penny for washing and cleansing the said Tenth Dish.

On the other side it was proved, that some of the Plaintiffs Predecessors had
allowed sometimes to the Miners, when their Work fell in hard and rocky Ground,
and in places much annoyed with Water, a greater proportion, viz. sometimes
Four Pence the Dish; and it was alleged on the Defendants part, that the
cleansing of a Dish was worth Eight Pence; And therefore it was against Reason
to enforce the poor Miners to do it for a Penny.

Nevertheless His Lordship was well satisfied, notwithstanding any thing
objected by the said Defendants Council to the contrary, that the said
Complainant ought to be paid his Tyth of Lead-Oar; And that the most constant
Custom had been to allow but a Penny for cleansing it.

And that the said Miners of the Parish of Wirksworth ought to be in the same
state and coudition as other the Miners in the High-Peak were; The Miners in
the Wapontake of Wirksworth ought to be in the same condition with those in the
High-peak
against whom a Decree had been made in this Court, and Trials at Law upon the
Point of Custom for payment of Tithes or Tenth of Lead-Oar as aforesaid.

Nevertheless His Lordship considering that the Alteration of times, might
beget great Inequality and Disproportion in the said Payment; for although in
ancient times, the foresaid rate of a Penny might be a competent Recompense for
the labor of washing the said 10th Dish, yet in these times it may be
otherwise. And considering, that whatever the Plaintiffs right in that behalf
is in Law, according to the strict Custom; yet he could not expect, that A
Court of Equity should Decree the said Custom in such a point as may tend to
the undoing of the poor Miners: Therefore His Lordship thought sit without
prejudice to the Plaintiffs Right, or to the aforesaid Custom, if at any time
he shall think good to make use thereof at Law; to take such a middle Course
whereby the Plaintiff without Multiplicity of Suits, might have his Tyth by
Order of this Court, and yet the poor Miners not be too much pinched by the
Rigor or Strictness of the said Custom.

It is therefore this present Day, that is to say, on Saturday the 4th day of
July, Anno 5to Regni Caroli Regis, etc. primi. By the Right Honorable Thomas
Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and by the Authority
of the said High Court of Chancery, The Tyth of Lead-Oar Decreed.
Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed, that the said Defendants, and all other the
Miners, within the said Parish for the time being, and for the Time to come,
shall pay to the said Complainant, and to his Successors, Vicars of Wirksworth
for ever; The Tyth or 10th Dish of All Lead-Oar gotten or to be gotten within
the said Parish; dressed and cleansed from the Earth and Rubbish at the Charge
and Labor of the Miners. A Commission about the Equity of the Recompense for
washing the Tyth, but without prejudice of the general Custom.


And as touching the Allowance to be made by the Complainant and his
Successors, for washing, dressing and cleansing every 10th Dish; albeit his
Lordship does not intend to alter or control the ancient Custom in that
behalf; yet in regard it tends to settle peace and quietness hereafter, and
for other Reasons before expressed, and because the Council on both sides could
not agree about it: Therefore his Lordship, for his fuller Satisfaction
therein, and that a moderate Consideration may be had thereof, if the matter so
require, but without prejudice of the General Custom, formerly held, and used
in that behalf, thinks fit, and does order, that a Commission be awarded to
Sir Henry Willoughby, Knt. and Barronet, Sir Henry Lee, Sir Henry Agard, and
John Bullock, Esquire; or any 3 or 2 of them, to consider and examine, whether a
Penny a Dish be a sufficient Recompense, for washing and cleansing every 10th.
Dish, one with another, giving them power to view all sorts of Oar, and to
examine Witnesses about this Matter, if need be: And upon return of the said
Commission and Certificate from his Lordship, will give further Order: Till
which time the Complainant is only to pay a Penny for cleansing his Tithe Oar
as formerly, and if his Lordship shall order the Miners to have a better
Allowance, then the Complainant shall make up and satisfy the same unto them.

Vobis igit' praefat' Georgio Savile, etc. and vest' cuilth' sirmit' injungend'
percipim' quoth omnia and singula in Iudicio sive Decreto praedict' content' and
specificat' faciatis and perimpleatis -- juxta tenorem, etc. -- sub periculo,
etc. Testte meipso apud Westm' 28 Iulij Anno Reg' 15.

Grim. Longuivillo.

Short Remarks on the aforesaid DECREE.
1st. BY this Record it appears, that the Right and Claim of a Tyth of
Lead-Oar, is one and the same in all Parishes in Terbyshire, where Lead Dar is
dug; and as such, has been tried and adjudged at Common Law, upon general
Issues and Evidence for avoiding Multiplicity of Suits. For if the Issues and
Evidence had not been General, but Local, and particular (as of late Years has
been attempted) there must have ensued as many several Suits, as there were
Parishes, or Proprietors who claim this Tyth.

2dly. By this also appears the illegal Combinations, Confederacies, and other
manifold vexatious and unjust Dealings of the Miners, in defending Suits
against this Tyth; removing this Cause from one Court to another upon false
Suggestions and Pretenses; refusing to be bound by former Decrees (though taken
by consent against them) on purpose to weary out the Complainants. They have
also taken Advantage from the Change or Poverty of diverse Incumbents of that
particular Parish, to which this decree relates, to enforce and oblige them to
defend, renew, and confirm this very Decree five or six times (since the first
beginning of it,) at the Expense and Charge of many hundred Pounds each time.

3dly. By this Record (as well as by the Iournals of Parliament to which it
refers) it appears, that this Custom for payment of a Tyth of Lead-Oar in all
Parishes within the County of Derby where it is gotten, has been examined,
debated, and approved amongst the Commons assembled in Parliament, by rejecting
and casting out a Bill formerly brought against it: Which we hope will be
looked on as a good Precedent to bring this Cause once more before that High
and Honorable Court, by a Bill for preventing such Multiplicity of Suits, and
final Settling this Tyth in the said County, according to the Tenor, Equity,
and Establishment of this and other such like Decrees.

The common Prejudices or Objections which will be urged against the
Establishment of this Tyth, are these.
Object. 1st. TYth is only due of Things growing or increasing above Ground,
and may as well be claimed of Coal-mines or Lime-kilns, as of Lead-Mines.

Answ. Tyth though ordinarily, or of common Right due of things growing above
Ground, yet by Custom may be paid of any thing whatever, as is known in many
Instances in diverse Parts of this Kingdom. Coals and Lime are not under the
same Laws, Customs, Privileges, and Acknowledgments of Tyth, as the Lead-Mines
in Derbyshire are. Nor do the Ministers or Proprietors of Tyth pay Tenths
yearly to the King for Tyth of Coals or Lime, as they expressly do for Tyth of
Lead-Oar. And the Objectors know well enough, that in diverse Parishes of
Derbyshire, where a Tyth of Lead-Oar has been, and is at this day paid, there
are Limekilns, and in some places Coal-mines also. from which never any Tyth
was pretended to be claimed.

This also (we hope) will prevent all Prejudice in such Gentlemen, who have
Interest in Mines in other places of the Kingdom, which are not under the same
Customs and Privileges, nor liable to the same Duties with those in
Derbyshire. This Establishment being only desired for the County of Derby,
where this Tyth has been abundantly acknowledged by the whole Body of the
Miners, and is in most places paid at this day.

Object. 2d. The payment of this Tyth will injure or obstruct the King's Duty.
Note, That the King's Duty is called the Lot and Cope: The Lot is every 13th
Dish, or Measure of Oar paid to the King, as Lord of the Field: The Cope is in
some places 6 pence, in others 4 pence for every Load of Oar, (9 Dishes making
up a Load) which is paid by the Buyers of the Oar, as a Composition for the
King's Right of Praeemption of the Oar which he formerly had.

Answ. The Cope being paid by the Buyer of Lead-Oar, cannot be at all affected
by payment of the Tyth; and the Lot-dishes are never reck'ned as part of that
out of which Tyth is paid. In the old Laws and Customs of the Lead-mines (which
are on Record) the Duties to the Church and King are mentioned always together
as necessary Conditions of some Privileges: And we hope the Farmers of his
Majesty's duty, will not think it their just Interest, to destroy the one, upon
pretense of advancing the other; since the payment of each to the distinct
Proprietors does best secure the Accounts of both, and prevents either from
being cheated. For in places where this Tyth is unjustly witheld from the
Church, the King is more easily cheated by the Miners, who are as ready to
conceal and defraud the King's part (where they can do it) as they are to deny
the Churches Right.

Object. 3d. The Payment of this Tyth will ruin the poor Miners, or discourage
them from working.

Answ. It is paid in all Parishes adjoining to the Petitioners, yet has no such
effect; nor had it such effect, when it was paid in the Petitioners Parishes.
The poor as well as rich Miners have all of them acknowledged the Churches
Right, when it was for their Service, either to set out their Privileges, or to
obtain a Relaxation of Taxes by such Acknowledgment. But the Clergy have always
used the greatest Clemency to the poorer sort of Miners, taking little or
nothing from them; and they are ready, and believe it to be their Interest
still to use the same Clemency; provided it may not be urged against them, to
destroy their Claim at common Law (as of late has been done.) However the Rich
Owners and Maintainers of Mines, (who get many hundred pounds yearly out of
them, and turn up into barren Heaps, whole Fields of good arable, meadow, and
pasture Land, which would otherwise yield a good Tyth in another kind to the
Parson) have no reason to make this Objection: The poor Miners generally
working under them, for Wages only.

Note, That both his and the former Objection were formerly considered and
disproved before the Privy-Councel, when the Cause of Tyth-Oar for the whole
County of Derby was brought before them by the Miners, upon pretense of some
Point of State, which their Lordships declared to be otherwise.

Object. 4th. Trials at Common Law have in some places been had, and Verdicts
passed against this Tyth.

Answ. These Trials were upon wrong Issues, directly contrary in their Effect
and Intention to the former general Issues directed by the Privy Council for
the whole County. The Former were for preventing multiplicity of buits, these
Latter were for promoting as many Suits as there are Parishes where Lead-Oar is
dug. The former Trials were solemn, by Gentlemen of Worth and Estates at the
Common Pleas Bar in Westminster; the Latter were by meaner and prejudiced
Country juries, some of them interessed in Mines, or related to such as were
so. The Former were upon full and long Evidence; the Latter were upon most
false, perjured, and partial Evidence (as shall be made appear if it be
examined.) The Miners in these last Trials swearing for their own Interest
against the Payment of this Tyth in that Parish where the Suit was: And then
upon the Verdict passed against it there, denying it in 3 or 4 of the
neighboring Parishes also where till that time it had been constantly paid or
compounded for. So that though the Issues in these last Trials were (contrary
to the former Establishments, then not understood by the Plaintiffs) made local
and particular; yet the Consequence and Effects of the Verdicts of those Issues
were (contrary to both Law and Equity) made general and universal by denial of
this Tyth in neighboring Parishes.

Object. 5th. The Petitioners have Glebe-Lands and other Tyths and Profits of
their Benefices, sufficient for them to live upon, without this Tyth of
Lead-Oar.

Answ. We know not what the Objectors are pleased to account sufficient for a
Clergy-man's and his Families Maintenance, and to enable him to keep such
Hospitallity, and exercise such Charity, as in that poor Country is expected
from him: But we profess we can gladly be content with the just Rights and
Perquisites of our Churches be they more or less; Some of us have not 50 l. per
Annum clear profits of our Benefices: Others of us not 70 l. and none of us (we
believe) have 100 l. per Annum, except one who has 2 Medieties of the same
Parish, which formerly, when the Tyth of Lead-Oar was paid in that Parish, did
maintain 2 several Ministers, and their Families, and now though both Medieties
are conjoined, they hardly exceed 100 l. per Annum.

But the Opponents of this Duty of Tyth-Oar were always ready to overvalue the
poor Clergy's Benefices, and of late to over-tax 'em also, some of them being
taxed at an higher value, than when their Predecessors received this Tyth of
Lead Oar. In a Suit against the late Rector of Matlock, the Defendents swear
(in their Answer) that that Rectory was worth above 100 l. per Annum in Tyths,
and Rectorial Dues, over and besides the pretended Duty of Tyth-Oar: Some
Persons examined as Witnesses in that Suit, swear that Rectory to be worth 100
l. per Annum besides or without the Tyth of Lead-Oar: And the Desendents
Solicitor in that Cause, instructs their Council to affirm it worth sometimes
120 l. and sometime 140 l. per Annum without Tyth Oar: And yet to show the
Falsehood of all these Assirmations; the present Incumbent of that Parish could
never yet Let or Lease out his Benefice for 70 l. per Annum, and he has diverse
times prossered to Let it for 60 l. per Annum.

However, all these Objections would be of more force (if they had any at all)
against diverse Noblemen, Gentlemen, and other Proprietors of Tyth in the said
County (who have many Thousands per Annum to live upon, And yet (having a just
Right and Title to this Tyth) receive more yearly Revenues out of it, than any
or all the poor Clergy Petitioners are likely to do. But against those great
Persons these Objections are never made. It may be further added here, That the
Petitioners praedial Tyth of Corn, Hay or Grass, is yearly hindered and
decreased by the multiplying of Groves or Mines in their Parishes, which spoil
the Land, and make it barren. And lastly, the chief Proposers of this
Objection, who are the rich Owners and Maintainers of Mines, have gotten great
Estates out of the Mines, of more yearly value, than any of the Petitioners
Benefices amount unto in the whole profits of all their Tyths together.

This we hope will satisfy all just and charitable Gentlemen of the Justice of
our Cause, and the Wrong which We and our Churches suffer.

FINIS.

