AN ABSTRACT OF THE Unnatural REBELLION AND Barbarous Massacre OF THE
PROTESTANTS, In the KINGDOM of IRELAND, In the Year 1641.

Collected from the most Authentic Copies.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janemay in Queens-head-alley in
Pater-noster-Rowe, 1689.

AN ABSTRACT OF THE Unnatural REBELLION, and Barbarous MASSACRE of the
PROTESTANTS in the Kingdom of IRELAND, in 1641.
THE implacable Rancour and restless Attempts of those in Communion with the
Church of Rome, tho they have in all Ages displayed themselves in the most
bloody Characters, and have had the barbarous Effects of depopulating Regions,
Countries and Kingdoms, by Massacres, Sword and Fire, in order to the setting
up and establishing their Religion, by destroying the Lives and Properties of
those of different persuasions: Yet perhaps amongst all their Efforts of that
Kind, none have deserved greater abhorrence, nor given a blacker Testimony of
their Inhumanity, than the barbarous and bloody Irish Rebellion, which brake
out in the Year 1641. and was carried on with that Rage and Violence, that it
laid almost all the parts of that deplorable Country in Blood and Confusion,
depriving by a most horrid Massacre, above two hundred thousand Persons, of all
Ages, Sexes, and Qualities, of their dearest Lives: Leaving Children without
Parents, Wives deprived of their Husbands, and Husbands robbed of their Wives;
sometimes without distinction burying whole Families in the same Fate. And
though there be many Histories of large Volumes, that have Chronicled this
Affair, to be still kept alive in the Memories of Posterity, yet it must not be
accounted a Work improper at this time, to remarque some of the most important
and best attested Passages relating thereunto. This little Collection presents
you with nothing but what comes under the Hands of the Great Ministers of
State, and those which at that time had a share in the management of the
public Affairs, and Administration of that unhappy Kingdom.

The Priests and others of that Communion, of the Irish Nation, have not been
wanting to decrie, and as much as in them lies, to blast all Evidences of that
Kind, and have taken all occasions to Remonstrate the Pressures which they
pretend to have suffered under the then Government in that Kingdom, and spare
not to term it Tyrannical: They intimate as if their Case were like that of the
Israelites in the Land of Egypt, and equal to those Persecutions for Religion
in the Primitive Times.

In a Remonstrance of Grievances presented to his then Majesty, in behalf of
the Catholics of Ireland, and given in to his Majesty's Commissioners at
Trime, the 17 of March, 1642. they Express themselves to this purpose.

THat only some Catholics, considering the deplorable and desperate Condition
they were in, and apprehending the Plots laid to Extinguish their Religion and
Nation, did take Arms in the North, in Maintenance of their Religion, and for
the Preservation of Life, Liberty and Estate, together with his Majesty's
Rights, and that the Lords and Gentlemen dwelling within the English Pale, were
likewise by the great Rigor and severity used by the State toward them,
enforced to take up Arms in their own defense.

This is the language of that Remonstrance, whereby they endeavor to cast the
Odium of their infamous Treasons and Butcheries upon his then Majesty, and the
Principal Officers of State within that Kingdom; of which there needs no other
Confutation, than a true and Impartial Relation of the beginning and Progress
of that Rebellion.

The Kingdom of Ireland was brought in subjection to the Crown of England, by
the victorious Arms of Henry the second, the beginning of whose Conquests bear
Date from the year of our Lord, 1172. The Towns and Villages were contemptible,
their Buildings so poor, that when the King arrived at their chief City of
Dublin, he set up a Long House made of smoothed Wattles, after the manner of
their Country, and therein kept his Christmas; finding there no place fit for
his Reception and Entertainment. The Inhabitants were as uncultivated as their
Lands, being generally void of all manner of Civility, governed by no settled
Laws, but living like beasts of Prey, biting and devouring one another; without
any reasonable Constitutions for determining of their Properties, or to fence
them against open Force and Violence: Murders, Rapes, and the most notorious
Robberies, and other Acts of Inhumanity and Barbarism, raging amongst them
without Control or means of Redress. For the first Century almost the English
kept themselves in Bodies distinct and separate from the Irish, not suffering
them to inhabit or mix amongst them, but in aftertimes by Degrees they
admitted them into a fatal familiarity, which polluted them with their beastly
Customs and Manners; for prevention of which, in the times of that most
excellent Prince, Edward the third, many good and wholesome Laws were Enacted.
Notwithstanding which, they have not sailed at all times to Rise up and imbrue
their hands in the Blood of their English Neighbors; so that Ireland has for
a long time been a true Aceldama, or Field of Blood, and a devouring Sepulcher
of the English Nation.

For by the Histories of those times, we cannot find that there was any settled
Peace or good Establishment, from the first coming over of the English, until
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which contained above three hundred and eighty
years; during the greatest part of which time, they were in Perpetual Troubles
and Combustions, being extremely Harassed and over-worn with Misery: whereupon
that Blessed Queen, even in the beginning of her Reign, sent over Prudent and
Religious Governors, to advance the Work of Reformation; and enacted many more
wholesome Laws against the Barbarous Customs of the Irish. Notwithstanding which
Care, and all the Circumspection of that wise Princess, still there was one
Rebellion breaking out upon the Neck of another, even amidst their repeated
Submissions and pretended Obedience to the English Crown; which occasioned her
to send over a Royal Army under the Conduct of her most Renowned and Choice
English Commanders. Nevertheless it was not without great difficulty and
Effusion of much English Blood and Treasure, that that Glorious work of
reducing the Traitor Tyrone, was accomplished. The calamities of that War, and
the raging of a Famine, had reduced that Kingdom to a deplorable Condition, in
the days of King James the first; who seized the six Counties within the
Province of Vlster, which had belonged to the Rebels; some part of which were
reserved to gratify the well-affected Natives, and the rest distributed, in
certain Proportions amongst the English Undertakers; who settled themselves,
and many of their Families, in those parts, laying the Foundations of some good
Towns, encompassed with Stone Walls; raising several Castles and Houses of
strength in the parts of the Country, to the great Comfort, and security of
the British Inhabitants; who with great cost and much Industry cultivated the
Land, and introduced Civility amongst the Natives; the whole Kingdom began
exceedingly to flourish, the People to multiply and increase, and the very
Irish themselves seemed satisfied with the Tranquillity they enjoyed.

Upon the Accession of Charles the first to the Crown, the Affairs of Ireland
look with a more calm and benign Face than in Times past; many Applications
from the Popish Nobility and Gentry, for the Redress of their Grievances, were
with great Clemency received, and with great Moderation recommended to the Care
of the then two Houses of Parliament sitting at Dublin. The Catholics were
permitted to the private Exercise of their Religion, with great Freedom; they
had their Orders of Bishops, Vicars, Priests and Nuns permitted amongst them;
and by the Inter-Marriages of the English, with some of the better refined
Natives, all things presented as if inclined to Amity: the advantages they
received by the English Improvements and Commerce, caused many of the Native
Gentry and others, to displace their Irish Tenants, and set their Lands to the
English; of which they found the Benefit by a great advance of their Rents and
Securities: so serene and full of Lenity was the conduct of the Government,
that the late Irish Army raised for the Invasion of the Kingdom of Scotland,
were Peaceably disbanded, and their Arms and Munition laid up in his Majesty's
Stores in the Castle of Dublin; there seemed to be no more remains of former
Disorders, nor was there any more noise of War heard. In this great calm the
English were in a profound Security, under the Hopes of a Blessed Peace. All
sat pleasantly enjoying the Fruits of their Labors, without any Apprehensions
of the approaching Storm, when on the twenty third of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, brake out that dreadful Rebellion, and universal Defection
and Revolt, wherein not only the Native Irish, but almost all the old English
that adhered to the Church of Rome, were generally concerned. It would be a
large Task to trace out the Progress of the Rebellion, so execrable in its
self, so odious to God, and the whole World, as no Age, no Kingdom, nor People
can match the horrid Cruelties, the abominable Murders, that have been almost
numberless, as well as without Mercy, committed upon the English and Protestant
Inhabitants throughout the Land. And this carried on with such a deep
reservedness and Secrecy, as is enough to beget Admiration: for it could not
be understood that any English man (besides the uncertain Presumption which Sir
William Cole had of a Commotion to be raised in the Province of Vlster, about a
fortnight before this dreadful Rebellion broke forth;) I say, that any English,
man had Notice, or the least Apprehensions of it. It Is true, the said Sir
William Cole upon his first conceiving that something was hatching amongst the
Irish, did write a Letter to the Lords Justices and Council, Dated the eleventh
of October, One thousand six hundred forty one. Wherein he gave them Notice of
the great resort made to Sir Phelim Oneal, in the County of Tyrone, and
likewise to the House of the Lord Mac-Guire in the County of Fermanagh, and
that by Persons much suspected to be fit Instruments for Mischief; as also that
the said Lord Mac Guire, had lately made several Journeys into the Pale, and
other places: And had spent much time in writting Letters, and sending
Dispatches abroad. The Lords upon receipt of those Letters from Sir William
Cole, required him to be very Vigilant, and use his utmost Diligence to find
out the occasion of those meetings, and to give them the most speedy
Advertisement thereof, or of any other matter that might tend to the service of
the State. The twenty third of October, was the day appointed for seizing the
City and Castle of Dublin, and for murdering the Lords Justices, and Council of
Ireland, and the rest of the Protestants, and to seize upon all the Castles,
Forts, Seaports and Strengths, that were in the hands of the English: Notice
hereof was brought to the Lord Justice Parsons, the Evening before, by Owen O
Connally, a Person of mere Irish Extraction: His Lordship gave little credit to
it at first, as proceeding from an obscure Person, and one who at that time
seemed disguised with Liquor; but however the Lord Parsons gave him order again
to go to Mac Mahon, and to get out of him, as much certainty of the Plot, and
as many circumstances, as he could; charging him to return unto him that
Evening, with an Account of what farther particulars he could get.

Immediately strict Orders were given to the Constable of the Castle to have
the Gates thereof well guarded, as also to the Mayor and Sheriffs of the City,
to have strong Watches set upon all the parts of the same, and to stop all
Strangers. About ten that night they found the said Connally seized by the
Watch, and carried to Prison, and from thence they brought him to the Lord
Borlaces House; where upon Examination, upon Oath, he declared, that finding
Col. Hugh Oge Mac-Mahon, at the Lord Mac Guire's Lodging, the said Hugh told
him, that there would that Night be great numbers of Noblemen, and Gentlemen
of the Irish Papists, from all the parts of the Kingdom, in that Town, who with
himself had determined to take the Castle of Dublin, and possess themselves of
all his Majesty's Ammunition there, to morrow morning, being Saturday; and that
they intended first to batter the Chimnies, and if the City would not yield,
then to batter down the Houses, and so cut off all the Protestants that would
not join with them. And that the said Hugh then told him, that the Irish had
prepared men in all parts of the Kingdom, to destroy all the English inhabiting
there, to morrow Morning by ten a Clock; and that the Protestants in all the
Seaports, and other Towns in the Kingdom should be killed this Night; and that
all the Posts that could be, could not prevent it; that he moved the said Hugh
to forbear executing of that Business, and to discover it for the saving of his
own Estate, who said he could not help it. But said, they did owe their
Allegiance to the King, and would Pay him all his Rights, but that they did
this for the Tyrannical Government, that was over them, and to imitate
Scotland, who got a Privilege by that course. This is the main Scope of the
first Examination that was taken before the Lords Justices, which occasioned
the following Proclamation.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons. John Borlase.
THese are to make known and publish to all His Majesty's good Subjects in this
Kingdom of Ireland, that there is a Discovery made by Us the Lords Justices and
Council, of a most disloyal and detestable Conspiracy intended by some
evil-affected Irish Papists, against the lives of Us the Lords Justices and
Council, and many other of His Majesty's faithful Subjects, universally
throughout this Kingdom, and for the seizing not only of His Majesty's Castle
of Dublin, His Majesty's principal Fort here, but also of the other
Fortifications in the Kingdom: And seeing by the great goodness and abundant
Mercy of Almighty God to His Majesty, and this State and Kingdom, those wicked
Conspiracies are brought to Light, and some of the Conspirators committed to
the Castle of Dublin, by Us, by His Majesty's Authority, so as those wicked and
damnable Plots are now disappointed in the chief parts thereof: We therefore
have thought fit hereby, not only to make it publicly known, for the comfort
of His Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts of the Kingdom, but also
hereby to require them, that they do with all confidence and cheerfulness
betake themselves to their own Defense, and stand upon their Guard, so to
render the more safety to themselves, and all the Kingdom besides; and that
they advertise Us with all possible speed of all Occurrents, which may concern
the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, and now to show fully that Faith and
Loyalty, which they have always shown for the public services of the Crown and
Kingdom, which We will value to His Majesty accordingly, and a special memory
thereof will be retained for their advantage in due time. And We require that
great care be taken that no Levies of men be made for Foreign Service, nor any
men suffered to March upon any such pretense. Given at His Majesty's Castle of
Dublin, October. 23. 1641.

R. Dillon. To. Digby. Ad. Loftus. J. Temple. Tho. Rotheram. Fr. Willoughby.
Ja. Ware. To. Meridith.
God save the King.
Before we come to the Particulars of this bloody Execution, it will not be
amiss to recite a passage from the Excellent Pen, of that great Peer and
Statesman, the Earl of Orrery, in his Answer to P. Welsh. The Wifest of men
thought the Irish Papists fastened to his Majesty in the Year, 1641. by the
best of Governments, and to the English Protestants, by the strictest ties of
Interest and Friendship, Marriage, and which is more in their Esteem, Gossiping
and Feasting; to the public Peace, by their, as flourishing, so free
Condition; and to all, by those Royal Graces, which his Sacred Majesty at that
time Indulged their Commissioners; such as themselves desired, 'twas but to Ask
and have: Yet all this Honey was turned into Gall; for at that very time,
wherein the King was Exercising such High Acts of Grace to them, the Irish
Papists Plotted, and soon after perpetrated the worst of Rebellions; the worst
Extensive, Exulcerating generally; and Intensive, breaking forth, with more
Perfidy, Barbarism and Cruelty, than can be paralleled in any History. So far
that extraordinary Person.

But whilst by the great Care and Conduct of the Lords Justices, and Council,
the intended surprise of the Castle of Dublin, was defeated, diverse of the
Chief Ringleaders seized and in Custody, their other Confederates brake forth
in the North of Ireland, with an uninterrupted and Tragic Execution of their
Hellish Purposes; and dividing their Forces into several Parties, according, as
they had determined amongst themselves, at one time surprised by Treachery, the
Town and Castle of the Newry, the Fort of Don-Gannon, the Fort Mont-Joy,
Charl^, Ton-Rages, Carick, Mac-Rosse, Clough-Cutter, Castle ^ley, Castle of
Monagham; being all of them considerable ^es of strength, and in diverse of them
Companies of Horse and Foot, belonging to the standing Army. They likewise m^de
themselves Masters of a multitude of other Castles, Houses of strength, Towns
and Villages well Peopled with English Inhabitants, who had much enriched the
Country as well as themselves, by their painful Labors. The English thought
themselves secare in the friendship of their Irish Tenants, Servants or
Landlords, and the surrounding Neighborhood, whom they had endeavored to
oblige by all the kindnesses of Friendship: So that when the Fire first began
to break out, and the whole Country began to rise about them, some had their
recourse to those they esteemed their Friends, for Protection, relying on their
Tenants, Neighbors, or Landlords for Preservation, or at least present
safety, and with great confidence, put their Lives, their Wives, their
Children, and all they had into their Power. But Oh Inhumane and Perfidious!
these confiding Innocents, were by these their Irish Friends, either betrayed
into the hands of other Rebels, or most inhumanely Butchered by their own
hands; such Maxims had their bloody Priests instilled into them, that they held
it mortal sin to give any manner of relief or Protection to the English: No
ties of Faith or Friendship, could restrain their Rage: Irish Landlords
devoured their English Tenants; Irish Tenants and Servants made a Sacrifice of
their English Landlords and Masters; one Neighbor cruelly Butchered and
destroyed another: the Venom descended in the Veins of their Children; those of
the Irish Nation, in the very beginning fell to Strip and Kill the Children of
the English: 'Twas thought meritorious in them that could by any means bring
the English to Destruction; Servants were killed as they were Plowing in the
Fields; Husbands cut to pieces in the presence of their Wives; the Childrens
Brains dashed out in the Presence of their Parents, and in a moment their Goods
and Cattle were seized, their Houses burnt, the Places of their Habitation laid
desolate; and those that had their Lives, exposed to the greatest miseries of
Nakedness and Famine.

Where the English stood upon their Defense, and in small Parties endeavored
to oppose the violence of the Rebels, there they entrapt them with promises of
safety of Pass-ports, of Protections for themselves and Goods. This they
confirmed to them sometimes by Oaths and deepest Protestations, sometimes under
Hand and Seal; but no sooner were they in their Power, but they took themselves
to be discharged from the Sacred Obligations of Faith and Justice, and with
more than Pagan Barbarism, cut in pieces those whom they had taken into their
Protection; Permitting their Soldiers after all the forementioned securities,
to destroy and Butcher them at their Pleasures.

Nor were the sacred Walls of the Cathedral Church at Armagh any defense
against the Sacrilegious Violences of Sir Phelim Oneal, and his Brother Turner:
Besides, many others by the same Artifices inveigled and betrayed out of
Churches, Castles, and Places, to which they had fled for security. The Rebels
were embodied and dispersed in Parties through all the Neighbourhoods, so that
the English durst not draw out of their own Houses, to form a Body to oppose
them: whereas if they had left their Houses upon the first rising of the Irish,
and in several Counties put themselves into a Posture of Defense, they might
have undoubtedly prevented the effusion of much of that Blood which for want of
some such Conduct, was so barborously spilt. Other Policies they made use of,
to heighten and Protract the Calamities of the Innocent. Of some they took
Plate, Money, or whatever other movables could be produced; promising them
under such consideration to convey them safe to Dublin; notwithstanding which,
by an unpresidented perfidy, they either exposed them into such unsufferable
Calamities upon the way, under which they could not subsist, or else dispatched
them by an immediate Butchery, after they had undertaken their Conduct.

At the first breaking out, they did not in many places murder many of them;
but the course they took, was to seize upon their Goods and Cattle, and all
they could strip them of, leaving themselves, their Wives, and Children naked,
and in that miserable plight exposed to the severities of most bitter Cold and
Hunger; forcing many of them to the Mountains, to seek their way through Woods
and Boggs; and if by any means they procured other covering, so but of Rags,
they were immediately stripped of that too, and none suffered to give them any
shelter or relief, without falling under the heavy displeasure of their Priests
and Officers.

Mr. Creighton, who by his Charity relieved great numbers of them, and for that
time preserved them from Perishing; testifies upon his Examination, that in one
company there passed by his House fourteen hundred Persons, besides diverse
other lesser numbers, all without any Weapons, or any thing but their Clothes,
which they suffered them not to carry away with them, but most cruelly stripped
many of them to their Skins, and betrayed them into the hands of other Rebels,
by whom they were barbarously killed or mangled: Thirty Persons of one Company
being slain outright, and a hundred and fifty others miserably wounded; so
that Tracts of Blood issuing from their Wounds, lay upon the Highway for
twelve miles together. Many very young Children, to the number of sixty or
thereabout, were left, and perished by the way, because the bloody pursuit of
the Rebels were such, that their Parents and Friends could carry them no
further. Some of the Cannibals vowed, that if any dug Graves to bury their dead
Children, themselves should be buried therein: So these miserable People were
compelled to leave most of them unburied, exposed to ravenous Beasts and Fowls;
some few of the distressed Parents were forced to carry a great way, to cover
them with Earth. A Woman great with Child, was left upon the Road stripped to
her Smock, who was set upon by three Irish Women and some Children, who rent
and miserably tore the said poor English Woman, leaving her Naked in a bitter
Frost and Snow; Insomuch that she fell in Labor under their hands, and both
she and her Child died together. Many of those Men, and Women, and Children,
that escaped into places of Safety, not long outlived the bitterness of their
passage, but either with Grief, or weary with Travel, Hunger, Cold and
Nakedness, contracted those Diseases, which put a Period to their Pilgrimage.

Whilst these Outrages, and Desolations ravaged in diverse parts of the
Country, especially the Northern parts, (for they had not yet discovered their
united Treasons in other places,) the Lords Justices, and Council, issued a
Commission of Fire and Sword, for the destruction of the Rebels and their
Associates, and withal to receive as many of them as would submit to Mercy into
his Majesty's Favor: They likewise gave out what quantities of Arms and other
Ammunition the present Exigences would afford, to preserve the Peace, and
obstruct the Irruption of the yet undiscovered Flames, which were ready to
breakforth in the nearest adjoining Counties to the City of Dublin: These
Commissions and Arms were put into the hands of the Popish Nobility and Gentry,
who pretended great Loyalty and affection to the Public, as well as into the
hands of the English: By which it is apparent, the great Confidence the
Lords-Justices and Council were pleased to Repose in them, seeking by this
means to have made them Instrumental for the Preservation of much of that
Blood, and many of those Lives, which notwithstanding all their endeavors were
overwhelmed by the Uncontrollable torrent of that Bloody Rebellion; which now
no longer confines it self within the Limits of the Northern Counties, but
brake out in the Neighborhood of the Chief City, about the middle of November.
The Barbarous Irish in the County of Wiclow, most furiously fell upon the
English, Robbing, Pillaging, Murdering all within that Territory; their fair
Houses were soon consumed to Ashes, their Cattle and live Goods drove away, and
a siege laid to Fort Carew, wherein was a Company of Foot belonging to the old
Army.

In few days after, this Conspiracy showed it self in the Counties of Wexford
and Caterlagh, who equalled if not exceeded the bloody Cauelties of their
Neighbors. Likewise the County of Kildare, into whose hands the State had
entrusted Arms and Munition for the Preservation of the Public, even those
Arms so designed, were employed against them; nor was the Carriage of the Lords
and Chief Gentlemen of the English Pale, such as exempted them from suspicion.
This indeed was that which heightened the fears and apprehensions of the City of
Dublin, which was now the only Sanctuary of the English Nation; they saw
themselves surrounded with the approaching Troops of Inhumane Rebels on every
quarter. But that which added the greatest Terror to their Consternation, was
the constant Resort of multitudes who came in every moment stripped, wounded
and miserably destroyed from the Northern parts: Persons who had lived in good
Quality, having no covering but Rags; others wrapped round with twisted Straw, to
hide their Nakedness; here you should see some Reverend Ministers, and others
of a grave Aspect, bruised, hackt and wounded, and hardly escaping with their
Lives; nothing was heard but the sad Lamentations of Wives for their murdered
Husbands, Mothers for their Children barbarously Butchered before their Faces;
Poor Infants, battered and benumbed with Cold and Travel, gasping out their
Souls in the Bosoms of their Fainting Mothers.

So great were the numbers of those that perished in the Churches, Streets, and
Corners of the City, that the ordinary Burying-places could not contain them:
Two large Pieces of Ground were set apart for that purpose, these were never to
be forgotten Objects of Testimonies of Popish Commiseration. It is not easy to
form an Idea of the dismal Confusion and Consternation which showed it self in
the Faces of the distracted Citizens; the English Inhabitants saw those
Barbarities, Outrages, and Slaughters, which had fallen upon their Countrymen
in Adjacent parts, now entering in at their own Gates; the Papists Inhabitants,
furnished with Arms ready to execute their Concealed. Villainies, themselves
fenceless, without Fortification or other means to secure them from their
Barbarous Attempts; such a frightful Aspect showed it self in the City, as
seemed an Omen of their approaching Ruin. Nor was it only the Common and
Inferior sort that were the Actors in these dismal Tragedies, but some of the
Chief Gentlemen of the Nation, under pretense of securing the Goods of the
English, took them into their own Custody, without any design of ever making
any Restitution, but having after this peaceable sort deprived them of their
subsistence, they afterward exposed them to the want of all things, without
restoring any part of their own to be a Refreshment to them in their great
Extremities.

Many of the English Protestants had entertained so good an Opinion of their
being kindly dealt with, that they delivered their Goods into their hands by
Retail, giving them Inventories of all they had; they took some of the choicest
Goods out of places wherein they had concealed them, to put them into the
Custody of the Irish; who having, as has been said, either by force or fraud
made themselves Masters of the Protestants Estates, next spared not to strip
Man, Woman and Child, and expose them to the severity of the Weather, in many
places not permitting them the shelter of a Bush, or to remain in the Woods;
forbidding those of their own Nation and Communion, under great Penalties to
give them any sort of Entertainment or Relief.

And perhaps amongst all their Barbarities none look with a blacker Face, or
gives a truer Demonstration of the implacableness of their Temper, and their
natural thirst for Blood, then this carriage of theirs, that those who perished
not under the violence of their hands, should notwithstanding be exposed to
such rigours and insuperable necessities, as they were not able to outlive:
they were not content to have stripped them once or twice, but as often as they
got any covering, tho never so tattered and miserable, the next Irish Woman,
nay even their very Children, would not fail to strip them of them; of which
diverse Depositions were given in before the Commissioners, in that behalf
appointed, especially one John Courley, Deposes upon his Examination, That
when the Town of Armagh was set on Fire by the Rebels; and his Wife joined in
the same Deposition, That their House being consumed in that Conflagration, she
was stripped no less then seven several times, and at last left with not so much
as her Smock or Hair-lace; and that she concealed her self in her Hutch for
three or four days, and then went to seek her Children, two of which had the
Smallpox at that time appearing upon them: This was an infallible way to
accomplish their Inhumane and Bloody purposes, as was too visible by the Issue;
the Highways and Towns through which the English had passed, being covered
with heaps of those which had perished of that great Mortality, which was the
Consequence of the Inhumane Cruelty of the Bloody Rebels: For a further
Confirmation of which, take the following Depositions.

That of James Refern, of the County of Londonderry; which gives an Account,
that in the Town of Colerain, the Mortality was so great, that the Living were
hardly capable of stowing the Bodies of the Dead, which they pa^kt in great
Ranks, in large Graves or Holes, as if they had been packing Herrings.

That of Magdalen Redman, is no less to the purpose, which says, That a great
Company of her Protastant Neighbors, amongst which were twenty two Widows,
having been robbed and stripped stark naked, they covered themselves in a House
with Straw, which some of the Rebels set a Fire, on purpose to burn or smother
them; but some of them being touched with more Compassion, commanded them to
forbear, by which they escaped that fiery Trial: Notwithstanding which they
were driven naked into the Woods, where they were forced to continue in Frost
and Snow, from Tuesday to Saturday, their Bodies being so Cold, that the Snow
lay upon them unmelted, diverse of their Children dying in their Arms: When they
endeavored to escape to the Burre, the wicked Rebels would turn them toward
Dublin, and when they were making for Dublin, they hindered them again, telling
them they should to the Burre. Thus were they tossed from place to place where
there was no shelter, nor any relief; so that many of them dyed under their
hands; and of those that after escaped to the Burre, though they there met with
some Relief, by the Charity of William Parsons Esquire, yet above forty of
their number died there, of the Cruelty they had undergone.

In the Castle of Lisgoole, a hundred fifty two Men, Women, and Children, were
burnt or smothered, as appears by Deposition, of Tho. Wenslaw, and John
Simpson. At the Castle of Moneah, ninety Protestants were slain and murdered:
the same Rebels having promised fair Quarter to the Protestants in the Castle
of Tallah, after they had the Castle and their Arms delivered into their hands,
first stripped them of all they had, and then most barbarously murdered them.
This was attested by Tho. Wenslaw aforesaid.

One hundred Persons, most of the Scotch Nation, were hanged or otherwise
destroyed at Lissenskeah; where Rowry Mac Guire with his Company, having in a
pretended friendly manner desired to speak with one Mr. Middleton, who had the
keeping of the Castle, being Clerk of the Peace, and upon that, the securing
the Records of the Country; these the said Mac Guire having enforced Middleton
to deliver to him, immediately burnt: Taking likewise a Thousand pound in
Money, which he had of Sir William Balfoures: after which he compelled Mr.
Middleton to hear Mass, and to swear never to alter from it, and then with a
Compassion equally extending to Soul and Body, caused both Him, his Wife and
Children to be hung up, and immediately strangled.

At Portnedown Bridge, so famous for the never to be forgotten Cruelties of the
savage Rebels, a thousand Men, Women and Children were in several Parties
unmercifully thrown into the River; for they having broken the Bridge down in
the midst, forced the miserable Innocents to expire in those Waters: Some
Relations speak of four thousand persons that were drowned in that County. The
Barbarous Wretches drove the Poor pillaged Christians before them like Herds of
Swine, wounding, pricking and forcing them forwards with their Swords, and
other Instruments of Cruelty; and if they slackned their Pace, they were either
knocked on the Head, or thrown over into the River.

To diverse, and very considerable Companies, they pretended to give Passes of
safe Conduct under the Hand of that Arch-Rebel Sir Phelim O Neal, and when they
had brought them near some great River, or place fit for their Purpose, they
failed not to cast them into the Water; and if any endeavored to make their
escape, they were knocked on the Head with Poles, or shot with Pistols, or
other firearms, to prevent the saving of their wretched Lives.

It Is very Observable, what in this dismal History is mentioned, of one Mrs.
Cambel, who being by them forced to the River, and perceiving no means to
escape their Fury, suddenly claspt her Arms about one of their Chiefs, who was
most forward to thrust her into the Water, and carried him down with her to the
Bottom, where they both perished together.

So great was the inveterate Rage of that Sir Phelim O Neal, that he caused
another considerable Rebel to summon together the Protestants remaining about
Armagh, pretending to Conduct them to Colerain, and when they were got hardly
one days Journey from him, they were all Butchered and destroyed, as many
others were by Direction from his Brother: By their Order likewise, the Aged
People were taken out of Armagh, and murdered at Charlemont; soon after which
they set fire to the Cathedral and Town of Armagh, where they destroyed above
five hundred Persons, Young and Old. Forty eight Families at the Parish of
Keblaman, were Barbarously murdered by Direction from the said Sir Phelim,
after they had been protected by him three quarters of a Year.

Within two Miles of Kilmore, there were two and twenty English Protestants
burnt in one house; and the Rebels stripped, killed, or murdered all, or the
most of the English in that Parish, which consisted of two hundred Families:
they likewise set many in the Stocks, that would not Confess their Money, and
when they had all they could get, then they Murdered them.

Many other Horrid Inhumane Cruelties were used in the murdering of Multitudes
of poor Innocent Souls. To many these bloody Villains showed so much favor as
suddenly to dispatch them out of their Pain, by no means allowing them leave or
time to make their Prayers! for others they held a sudden Death too easy a
Punishment: Therefore they Imprisoned some in most beastly Dungeons, full of
Dirt and Mire, and there Clapping bolts on their Heels, suffered them to perish
at leisure. Others they barbrously mangled and left Languishing upon the
Highways, crying out for so much Mercy as to be delivered out of their Pain.
Others they buried alive, a manner of Death they used to several of the English
in several places. An Englishman, his Wife, four or five Children, and a Maid,
were hanged, and afterward put all into one Hole; the Youngest Child being not
fully dead, put out the Hand, and crying, Mammy, Mammy, when without Mercy they
buried him alive.

At Clowms, within the County of Fermanagh, there were seventeen, having been
hanged till they were half dead, cast together into a Pit, and being covered
over with a little Earth, lay Pitifully sending out most lamentable Groans for
a good time after. Some were deadly wounded, and so hanged upon Tenter-hooks.
Some had Ropes put about their Necks, and so drawn through the Water: some had
Withs, and so drawn up and down through Woods and Bogs; others were hanged up
and taken down, and hanged up several times, and all to make them confess their
Money, which as soon as they told, they then dispatched them out of the way.
Others were hanged up by the Arms, and with many slashes and cuts they made the
Experiment with their Swords, how many blows an Englishman would endure before
he dyed. Some had their Bellies Ripped up, and so left with their Guts running
about their Heels. But this kind of Cruelty was principally reserved by these
Inhumane Monsters for the Women, whose Sex they neither pitied nor spared,
hanging up several Women, many of them great with Child, whose Bellies they
ripped up as they hung, and so let the little Infants fall out* A course they
often took with them they found in that sad Condition. And sometimes they gave
their Children to Swine; some the Dogs eat; and some taken alive out of their
Mothers Bellies, they cast into Ditches. And for sucking Children, and others
of a Riper Age, some had their Brains knocked out, others were trampled under
foot to Death.

Some of the Rebels meeting one Mrs. Howard, and Mrs. Frankland, both great
with Child, and six of their Children with them, with their Pikes killed and
murdered them all, and after ripped open the Gentlewomens Bellies, took out
their Children, and threw them into a Ditch. Some they cut in Goblets and
Pieces, others they Ripped up alive. Some were found in the Fields sucking the
Breasts of their murdered Mothers. Others lay stifled in Vaults and Cellars,
others starved in Caves, crying out to their Mothers rather to send them out to
be killed by the Rebels, than to suffer them to starve there.

One Mary Barlow deposes up Oath, That Her Husband being hanged by the Rebels
before her Face, she and six Children were stripped stark Naked, and turned out
a begging in Frost and Snow, by means whereof they were almost starved, having
nothing to Eat in three Weeks, while they lay in a Cave, but two old
Calf-skins, which they beat with Stones, and so eat them, hair and all:
Multitudes of Men, Women and Children were found drowned, cast into Ditches,
Bogs, and Turf-Pits, the ordinary Sepulchers of the British Nation. Thousands
dyed of cold and want in all parts of the Country, being neither permitted to
depart, nor relieved where they were enforced to stay. Multitudes enclosed in
Houses, which being set on fire, they were there most miserably consumed; some
dragged out of their Sick-beds to the place of Execution: Such was the
barbarous and inhumane Cruelty of the Rebels, that sometimes they enforced the
Wife to kill the Husband, the Son to kill the Father, and the Daughter to kill
the Mother, and then they world hang or put to Death the last Bloodshedder.

In the Town of Slego, they forced one Lears the younger, to kill his Father,
and then hanged the Son: and in Mogne they forced one Simon Lepers Wife to kill
her Husband, and then caused her Son to kill her, and then they hanged the Son.
Children were enforced to carry their Aged Parents to the places designed for
their Slaughter, Mothers to cast their own Children into the Water, and yet
after these enforced Acts, which no doubt were performed, out of Hopes and
Assurance to have their own Lives saved, always Murdered. And such was the
Malice, and most detestable hatred born to the English by the Irish, as they
taught their Children to kill English Children, and the Irish Women did
naturally express as much Cruelty, as the chiefest Rebels among them. If these
be not sufficient, let us look over the particular Ends of some particular
Persons, and we shall in them behold more Horrid Cruelties than these before
mentioned. What shall we say to a Child boiled to Death in a Cauldron, being
the Child of one Tho. Straton of Newtown.

A Woman hanged on a Tree, and in the Hair of her Head her own Daughter hanged
up with her. A Woman miserably Rent and Torn to pieces. Some taken by the
Rebels, their Eyes plucked out, their Hands cut off, and so turned out to wander
up and down; others stoned to Death. A Man wounded, and set upright in a hole
dug in the Earth, and so covered up to the very Chin, there left in that
miserable manner to Pine and perish. A Man's Feet held in the Fire till he was
burnt to Death, his Wife hanged at his Door. A Minister stripped stark naked, and
so driven like a Beast through the Town of Cashel, the Rebels following him,
and pricking him forward with Darts and Rapiers.

A Company of Men, Women and Children, put into a House, and as they were
burning, some Children that made an escape out of the Flames, were taken by
some of the Rebels who stood by, cut them in pieces with Sithes, and so cast
them into the Fire again.

Neither did these Horrible Tortures, which they put these Innocent Christians
unto, a-slake their Fury, their Malice toward them did not Determine with
their Breath.

But after so many several Bloody Ways and cruel Inventions, wherewith they
rent their Souls from their wretched Bodies, extended even to their dead
Carcasses: In some places they denied all manner of Burial; some they cast into
Ditches, others they left to be devoured by Dogs and Swine, others by Fowls and
Ravenous Birds. Nay several which had been formerly buried, they dug up, and
left them to putrify above ground.

And these truly are but some of those ways among many others, which with most
exquisite pains, and cruel Tortures were used by these merciless Rebels, to let
in Death among an Innocent, unresisting People, that had always lived
Peaceably with them; Administering all manner of Helps and Comforts to those who
were in Distress, that made no difference betwixt them and those of their own
Nation, but ever Cherished them as Friends, and Loving Neighbors, without
giving any cause of unkindness or distaste unto them.

It is not possible to recollect or express the wickedness of their mischievous
Inventions, or horror of their bloody Executions, actuated with all kind of
circumstances that might aggravate the height of their Cruelty toward them.
Alas! who can comprehend the fears, terrors, anguish, bitterness and
perplexity of their Souls? the despairing Passions and Consternations of their
Minds? What strange amazed Thoughts must it needs raise in their sad Hearts, to
find themselves so suddenly surprised without remedy, and inextricably wrapped up
in all kind of outward miseries which could possibly by man be inflicted upon
any humane Creatures! What sighs, groans, trembling, astonishment! what
scrieches, cries, and bitter lamentation of Wife, Children, Friends and
Servants, howling and weeping about them, all finding themselves without any
manner of hope of deliverance from their present Misery and Pain! how
inexorable were their barbarous Tormentors, that compassed them on every side,
without all bowels of compassion, any sense of their Sufferings, or the least
commiseration or pity, the common Comforters of men in Misery. It was no small
addition to their sorrows, to hear the base reviling speeches used against
their Country and Contrymen, some loudly threatening all should be cut off
and utterly destroyed, that had one drop of English-blood in them: The Irish
Women crying out, to spare neither Man, Woman, nor Child, that was English;
that the English was meat for Dogs, and their Children Bastards.

How grievous and insupportable must it needs be to a true Christian soul, to
hear a base villain boast, that his hands were so weary with killing and
knocking down Protestants into a Bogg, that he could not lift his Arms up to
his Head? or others to say, that they had killed so many Englishmen, that the
grease or fat which remained on their Swords or Skeins, might have made an
Irish Candle! Or to consider, that two young Cow-boys should have it in their
Power to murder thirty six Protestants! whosoever shall seriously weigh these
Particulars, will not much wonder that so great numbers of British and
Protestants should be destroyed in so short a time after the first breaking out
of the Rebellion: As Mr. Cunningham Deposes in his Examination, he there
says, that the Account of the Persons killed by the Rebels, from the time of
the beginning of the Rebellion, October 23. 1641. unto the Month of April
following, was, as the Priests weekly gave it in, in their several Parishes,
one hundred and five thousand, April 22. 1642.

When the Castle of Lisgoole was set on fire by the Rebels, and so many
British as are before mentioned, consumed in the flames, those mischievous
Villains that had done that wicked Fact, cried out with much Joy, How sweetly
do they fry! How did the Inhabitants of Kilkenny, a City planted with old
English, where Civility and good Manners seemed to flourish, solace and please
themselves in abusing most unchristianly the Heads of a Minister and six other
Protestants, brought in a kind of Triumph into the Town! Certainly it is not to
be imagined, much less expressed, with what scorn and derision they acted these
great Crueities upon all British which they had gotten into their Power! with
what Joy and Exultation their Eyes did behold the sad spectacle of their
Miseries! what greedy delight and pleasure they took in their bloody
Executions! what Malice and Hatred they expressed toward them! many with the
last stroke of Death giving them, in their last Agony, that fearful Valediction
in Irish, Anim a Duel, Thy Soul to the Devil.

But it is no wonder that they carried themselves after this barbarous manner
to these poor Christians, when they spared not most fearfully to belch out
their Rage against their Maker. What open Hellish Blasphemies were uttered by
these wicked Miscreants! With what Indignation and Reproach did they tear and
trample under feet the sacred Word of God? How dispitefully did they upbraid
the Profession of the Truth, to those blessed Souls, whom neither by Threats
nor Terrors, pains nor Torments, they could draw to forsake their Religion.

But I shall not here touch any further upon those who died thus Gloriously,
this will be a work fitter for some more able Pen.

If we shall take a survey of the Primitive Times, and look into the sufferings
of the First Christians, that suffered under the Tyranny and Cruel Persecutions
of those Heathenish Emperors, we shall not certainly find any one Kingdom,
though of a far larger Continent, where more Christians suffered, or more
unparalled Cruelties were acted in many years upon them, than were in
Ireland, within the space of the first two Months after the breaking out of
this Rebellion. And howsoever some by outward Inflictions and Tortures, were
drawn to profess the change of their Religion, and had presently their Reward;
(for many of those they suddenly dispatched with great scorn, saying, It was
fit to send them out of the World in that good Mood;) yet I dare say, we shall
find many thus Crue^ly put to Death, equal to some of those Ancient Worthies
for their Patience, Constancy, Courage, Magnanimity in their sufferings, but
triumphing and insulting with their last breath, over the Insolency, Rage and
M^lice of their most Inhumane and Cruel Persecutors.

We shall find in the Roman History, during the several Cruel Contestations
betwixt Marius and Scilla, when their Factious Followers filled the whole City
of Rome with streams of blood, strange and most incomparable Passages of
Friendships: One exposing himself to all manner of Dangers, for the
Preservation of his Friend of a contrary Faction; Servants willing to Sacrifice
themselves to save the Lives of their Beloved Masters. But here on the
contrary, what open violations of all bonds of Humanity and Friendship! no
Contracts, no Promises observed; Quarter given in the most solemn manner, with
the greatest Oaths and severest Execrations, under Hand and Seal, suddenly
broken. The Irish Landlords making a Prey of their English Tenants, the Irish
Servants betraying their English Masters; And every one esteeming any Act,
wherein they could declare their hatred and malice most against any of the
British Nation, as Gallant and cruly Meritorious.

It is not to be denied, but that the first and most bloody Executions were
made in the Province of Vlster, and there they continued longest to execute
their Rage and Cruelty; yet must it also be acknowledged, that all the other
three Provinces did concur with them, as it were with one common Consent, to
destroy and pluck up by the Roots all the English planted throughout the
Kingdom; and for this purpose they went on, not only Murdering, Stripping and
driving out all of them, Men, Women and Children, but they laid waste their
Habitations, Burnt their Evidences, defaced in many places all the Monuments of
Civility and Devotion; the Courts and Places of the English Government; Nay, as
some of themselves express it, they resolved not to leave them either Name or
Posterity in Ireland.

Notwithstanding what has been here Related, be nothing but what is matter of
Fact, and that for brevity's sake, many particular Instances of their Inhuman
Barbarity be omitted; yet have those of that Communion had the Forehead to
deny, or Extenuate those monstrous Executions, and to lay the Guilt of all that
Blood upon the Protestants themselves; as if they had been the Contrivers of
their own Executions, and of the Extirpation of their own Families; which is an
Assurance so peculiar to the Papists, that cannot be matched amongst any other
sort of Men, I was about to say Monsters. These are proofs of that Veracity,
and Charity, that Humanity and Sincerity, which is to be expected from those,
the Principles of whose Religion, teach them to stick at no Villainy, no
Butchery, no Perjury, nor Cruelty, for the promoting their Bloody Religion.

FINIS.

