AN ABSTRACT Of the Title to the Lands in Wapping-Marsh, And other Places near
Adjoining, belonging to the MANOR Of Stepney or Stebunheath, Called Ewell
alias Tilehouse.
THE Inheritance of the Manor of Stepney, called Ewell alias Tilehouse,
reaching from St. Catherines to Ratcliff-Town, belonged to the Abbot of Graces,
St. Thomas of Acons, and Thomas Windham; All which Interests, Stepkin (the Lady
Ivie's Ancestor) purchased above one hundred years since.

Part of those Lands were afterward Sold by Stepkin, part by Grants let out
upon long Leases, reserving Pepper-cornes, or some such inconsiderable Rents;
and part in Possession, together with the Reversions of those Leases descended
to the Lady Ivy.

The Leases lately generally expired; the Lady Ivy thereupon claimed, and
endeavored to recover, the Reversions, as her proper Right; but met with these
difficulties.

The difficulties of discovering the Ancient Boundaries, occasioned by the
Buildings, the alteration of Names, the changing Watercourse, the adjoining
to and mixture with some Ancient Purchasers, under the same Title; and Ancient
Lease-holders, under some other Titles: And the Oppositions of diverse men of
potent Interest and Influence: All which notwithstanding she overcame, and made
out her Title by manifest Records, at several Trials.

There have been some Aspersions lately cast upon the Lady Ivie's Title, and by
Consequence upon the Title of the Purchasers, and certain Mortgagees: All which
Titles spring from one and the same Root, and have one and the same Original:
None of which Aspersions (though most notoriously false, as will in due time
appear) affect the Records, by which the Title has been or may be hereafter
fully made out. The Lady Ivy therereupon, in honor to her Ancestors and
Family, in Justice and Respect to the several Purchasers and Mortgagees, and
the particular satisfaction of her own Conscience, has thought good to print
the several Records, by which their respective Titles are made out.

ABout one hundred and thirty Acres of this Manor were drowned about the 25th.
year of King Henry the 8 th. reaching from St. Catherines on the West, to
Ratcliff-Town on the East: It was drained by one Vanderdelff; who, by agreement
of the Proprietors, was to have one Moiety for his pains; which he sold to
Richard Hill.

27 Hen. 8.
Thereupon an Act of Parliament was made, which Enacted, That the said Richard
Hill and his Heirs, should have Vanderdelf's Moiety; In which Act, the drowned
Lands are thus bounded ( viz.) On the highway leading from London to Ratcliff
on the North part; On the River of Thames on the South part; On the Town of
Ratcliff on the East part: And upon St. Catherines, on the West part.

30 Hen. 8.
By a Lease from Henry Moore, Abbot of the Monastery of Graces, to Thomas
Stepkin, dated September 17 th. it appears, That the said Abbot granted that
Lease to the said Thomas Stepkin for Ninty-nine Years of a Wharfe called
Lewin's Wharfe; and a Wharfe called Hermitage Wharfe; and several other Lands
therein particularly named; All lying in the Manor of Stepney, called Ewell.

36 Hen. 8.
By Letters Patent bearing date 21 st. of July, the King grants the Inheritance
of the said Wharfes, etc. in the possession of the said Stepkin ( inter alia)
to Sir Thomas Pope and Nicholas Bacon, and the Heirs of Nicholas Bacon.

5 Edw. 6.
By Deed Enrolled in Chancery bearing date 17 th. of November, the said Nicholas
Bacon conveyed the said Wharfes to Hugh Loss.

Feb. 16.6 Ed. 6.
Thomas Pope released to the said Hugh Loss.

1 Q. Mary.
By Indenture bearing date the 5 th. December, Hugh Loss, and Agnes Loss his
wife, covenant with Machelin Stepkin, Anthony Anthony, and Humphrey Smith, to
Levy a Fine of the said Wharfes, etc. in Easter Term next ensuing, to the said
Anthony Anthony and Humphrey Smith, for the use of the said Machelin Stepkin
and John Stepkin her Son, and the Heirs of the said John Stepkin for ever.

In East' Term Ann. Supradict'
A Fine was Levied accordingly.

30 Hen. 8.
By an Instrument bearing date the 20 th. of October, which is to be found in
the Augmentation Office, it appears, That the Master and Brethren of the house
of St. Thomas of Acons being seized in Fee of a Note, this House and Lands are
the same hereafter mentioned in the Extent 4 Eliz.
House, and certain other Lands in Wapping, upon dissolution of the said House,
surrendered the same into the Kings hands.

36 Heb. 8.
And then the said King, by his Letters Patents bearing date the 22. of August,
grants the said House and Lands in Consideration of Eleven hundred Pounds to
John Champneys, John Allen, and Ralph Allen, and their Heirs.

John Champners, the Surviving Patentee, 1 Edw. 6.
by Bargain and Sail enrolled and Feofment with Livery and Seizin, both bearing
date the 4 th. of July, Conveyed the said House and Lands to Thomas Allen the
Younger, Son of Ralph Allen, and his Heirs.

Then Thomas Allen, 3 Edw. 6.
by Bargain and Sail bearing date the 16 th. of July, conveyed the said House
and Lands to Richard Hill and his Heirs; and on the 6 th. of September
following, made a Feofment with Livery and Seizin of the Premises to the said
Richard Hill.

It Is to be noted, 32 Hen. 8.
That the said Richard Hill did then enter into a Statute of Three Hundred
Pound to Anthony Vivald, and Henry Salvago.

And the drowned Lands being not divided according to the direction of the
aforesaid Statute made in the 27th. Hen. 8. It was Enacted, 35 Hen. 8. Chap.
9th.
That a Division should be made by All Saints day next ensuing; and a Division
was accordingly made.

In Hillary Term, Thomas Windham, and his Wife, suffered a Recovery to Thomas
Stepkin and Machelin his Wife of the Manor of Ewell, 35 Hen. 8.
alias Tilehouse, and Two Hundred Acres of Land, One Hundred Acres of Meadow,
One Hundred Acres of Pasture, Three Acres of Wood, and Ten Shillings Rent, in
the Parish of St. Mary Matfellon without Aldgate, and Stebunheath alias
Stepney; Seventy Six Acres of which being Drowned Lands, upon the Division
Thirty Eight Acres fell to Richard Hills share.

In Trinity Term Jasper Hill, Son and Heir of Richard Hill, by Fine, 3. Eliz.
to make a Tenant to the Precipe for a Common Recovery, and by a Common
Recovery thereupon suffered, (in which one This Bazil Johnson is the same
person hereafter named in the Release 7 Jacobi.
Bazill Johnson was demandant) and by Deed bearing date the 12 of May, 4. Eliz.
to lead the uses of the said Common Recovery, conveyed to the said Machelin
Stepkin and John Stepkin, and the Heirs of the said John for ever, among other
things Twenty Acres of Land, and One Hundred Acres of Fresh Marsh, etc. Lying
in the Parish-Towns and Fields of White-chappel, Stebunheath and Wapping.

On the 17 of January, 4. Eliz.
Benedict Spinola Administrator to the aforesaid Anthony Vivald, who survived
the said Henry Salvago, Conizees of the aforesaid Statute acknowledged to them
by the said Richard Hill 3 December. 32 Hen. 8. Extended (inter alia) One Hundred
and Thirteen Acres of Land Arable, Meadow and Pasture, Besides a House called
Wapping-House, with Orchards, Gardens and Mill-house, and a Wharf in the Tenure
of Robert Cheney lying in Wapping aforesaid; which Extent Stepkin purchased in.

John Stepkin 14. of June, 1573, as surety for William Patent, 15. Eliz.
covenanted to pay to the Queen Seven Thousand Nine Hundred Twenty Eight Pounds
Seven Shillings and Eleaven Pence half penny out of his own Estate in Stepney,
and particularly therein are expressed most of the said Lands mentioned in the
said Extent, 4. Eliz. and particularly all the Lands now in Dispute. And he
gave Bond to perform Covenants; which Bond being forfeited, was extended the 31
of January, 19. Eliz.

19. Eliz.
And afterward, the Queen, the Sixth of May, demised the same to Alice Stepkin,
so long as it should remain in the Queens Hands, at One Hundred Thirty Nine
Pounds Eight Shillings per Annum. The Rents reserved to the Queen, were paid
near Thirty Years together.

7. Jac. 1.
King James the First, the 7th of July, 1609, released to John Stepkin and his
Heirs for ever, all the Lands extended; And in this Patent Bazill Johnson the
demandant in the said Recovery 3d of Eliz. is named, and under this John
Stepkin the Lady Ivy Claims as Heir to John Stepkin her Father, Son of the
aforesaid John Stepkin.

10 Car. 1.
Arthur Hill Aged 84 Years, and Christopher Green Aged 80 Years, deposed the 10
th. of October 1634. That the Breach of Water was in a great Dock called
Stepkins Dock, and the Ancestors of Stepkins, owners of the Marsh, did maintain
the same.

One Richard Glover being in possession of certain Lands, by virtue of a long
Lease from Stepkins, the Lady Ivies Ancestor, sold the same to Sir Anthony
Bateman as Copyhold, in 1647. though the Father of this Richard, the 16 th. of
May the Year before, sold the same as Freehold to one Warren. Both these Deeds
are enrolled.

The Lady Ivy has had Verdicts for her Title in Four Trials at Bar.
Morris versus Johnson Hillary 1673.
First. In the Exchequer before Lord Chief Baron Turner. Lynch versus Ireton.
Mich. Term. 1675.
Second. In the Kings Bench before L. Chief Justice Hales. Bailey versus
Hammond. Mich. Term, 1676.
Third. In the Kings Bench before L. Chief Justice Rainsford. Martin versus
Whichcott. Mich. Tr. 1679.
Fourth. In the Exchequer before L. Chief Baron Mountague.
The King against Johnson and Ireton, Hillary, 1677.
During the whole time of the Trials aforesaid, there was a Conspiracy to
procure Witnesses to swear the Lady Ivie's Deeds, and some other of her
Evidences, Forged: Thomas Duffet, then Husband to the now Witness against the
Lady Ivy, confessed the Conspiracy; upon which the Court of Kings Bench
ordered an Information to be exhibited against the Attorney of her Adversaries,
and one Ireton, for subornation of Perjury: The Attorney was convicted before
the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford: The proof against him was, That he entered
into Articles to give five hundred Pounds to any Person that should swear some
particular Deeds and Evidences of the Lady Ivies forged, and to procure the
Kings pardon for the Person that should Swear it. The Trunck, together with the
Articles, and three hundred and fifty Pounds, part of the said five hundred
Pound, was found in a Gentleman's Chamber in the Temple, and by a Tipstaff sent
by the Lord Chief Justice, brought into Court.

The Lady Ivy is desirous to give this farther satisfaction to all Persons,
who are any ways concerned with Her, that if it shall please God she should
not live to end her Troubles, (which she hopes will not be in her Adversaries
Power to delay much longer) she has left her Estate in that Posture, that every
one will be paid what is their Due.




