An Account of the ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY, Showing The Wisdom of some Renowned Men
of the East;

And particularly, The profound Wisdom of Hai Ebn Yokdan, both in Natural and
Divine things;

Which he attained without all Converse with Men, (while he lived in an Island
a solitary life, remote from all Men from his Infancy, till he arrived at such
perfection.)

Writ Originally in Arabic, by Abi Iaaphar Ebn Tophail;

And out of the Arabic Translated into Latin, by Edward Pocok, a Student in
Oxford;

And now faithfully out of his Latin, Translated into English:

For a General Service.

Printed in the Year, 1674.

An Advertisement to the READER.
THis Book or Epistle of Abi Jaaphar, is to be found in an Hebrew Version,
according to the account of the Latin Translator; and Moses Narbonensis, a
learned Jew, has writ Commentaries upon it. The Author, to wit, Abi Jaaphar,
lived contemporary with Averroes, who died about the year of the Christian
account, 1198. So that the antiquity of this Relation is about five hundred
years old. Since the Latin Version of it came abroad (which was in the year,
1671.) it is translated into Dutch some considerable time ago: after it came
into my hands, and that I perused it, I found a great freedom in mind to put it
into English for a more general service, as believing it might be profitable
unto many; but my particular motives which engaged me hereunto was, that I
found some good things in it, which were both very savoury and refreshing unto
me: and indeed there are some sentences in it that I highly approve, as where
he says, Preach not thou the sweet favor of a thing thou have not tasted; and
again where he says, In the rising of the Sun is that which makes, that thou
have not need of Saturn. Also, he shows excellently how far the knowledge of
a man, whose eyes are spiritually opened, differs from that knowledge that
men acquire simply by hearsay, or reading: and what he speaks of a degree of
knowledge attainable, that is not by premises premised, and conclusions
deduced, is a certain truth, the which is enjoyed in the conjunction of the
mind of man with the supreme Intellect, after the mind is purified from its
corruptions, and is separated from all bodily images, and is gathered into a
profound stillness. These with many other profitable things, agreeable to
Christian Principles, are to be found here. But, Reader, I am far from urging
thee to receive for certain, every thing in this Book; nor do I recommend every
thing in it unto thee for truth: yet whatever may be otherwise in it, does not
hinder to make a good use of the things which are both true and profitable
contained therein, and if thy taste be sound, receive what is agreeable
thereunto, and pass by what is otherwise. The design of the Author is far (I
believe) from persuading men to slight or refuse the help of outward means of
knowledge, such as the testimonies of good and wise men; and indeed it is as
far from my own design, who have undertaken this Translation: It is the too
much relying and resting upon them, and neglecting those native and inward
testimonies in the soul and mind of man it self, that both the scope of the
Book and my design in the Translation does fence against. If it appear unto
thee, that the Author, or yet the person of whom he writes, has been a good
man, and far beyond many who have the name of Christians, that have had better
outward opportunities to learn to be good then he, such as the use of the holy
Scriptures and other helps; think not strange of it, but remember, there have
been instances of good men mentioned in the Scriptures, who had not the Oracles
of God outwardly delivered unto them, such as Job, the three wise men of the
East, Cornelius and others. Yea, Justine Martyr stuck not to call Socrates a
Christian, and that all who lived conform unto that divine reason and word in
them, and which is in all men, (as said the abovementioned Author, in one of
his Apologies) were and are Christians. I shall conclude with a saying of
Augustine, de civitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 47. and another of Ludovicus Vives,
in his Commentary on the same words: Nor do I think (says Augustine) that the
Jews dare contend, that none belonged unto God, but the Israelites. On which
Ludovicus Vives says thus; So great a matter is it to be willing to be good,
although thou have not any from whom thou may be taught virtue: and in this
sort of men, what is wanting but water? seeing they have obtained and received
the holy spirit no otherwise then the Apostles, Peter witnessing, that some
were filled with a divine inspiration, whom the mystical water had not touched:
so the Gentiles not having a Law, and naturally doing the things of the Law,
are a Law to themselves, and that light of so living is the gift of God, and
comes from the Son, of whom it is written, who enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world.

An Account of the ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY, IN AN EPISTLE OF Abi Iaaphar, Ebn
Tophail, Concerning Hai Ebn YOKDAN. In the Name of the Lord the merciful
Commiserator.
THE wise Doctor, the Priest, the Knowing, the Excellent, the Perfect, the
Learned Abu Iaaphar, Ebn Tophail says, Praise unto God, the great, the
greatest, the ancient, the most ancient, the knowing, the most knowing, the
wise, the most wise, the merciful, the most merciful, the beneficial, the most
beneficial, the bountiful, the most bountiful, who taught the use of the Pen,
who taught man that which he knew not, because the goodness of God was great
toward him. I praise him for his excellent gifts, and I give him thanks for
his continual benefits, and I testify that there is not a God but the one God,
who has not a Consort, etc.

O excellent, sincere, and most dear Brother, (God give thee an everlasting
continuance, and bless thee with a perpetual happiness.) Thou desired me to
declare unto thee, what ever I could, of the mysteries of the Eastern
Philosophy, which the Doctor, the chief Priest, Abu Ali Ebn Sina mentions:
But know, that it belongs unto him who would attain to the truth, that he
seek it, and use diligence in the acquiring it; and surely thy demand has
raised in me an excellent motion of mind, which has brought me (praise unto
God) to perceive the state which I saw not before, and has promoved me to so
remote a period, that the tongue cannot declare, nor can the eloquence of
speech express it, whereas it is of another sort, and of another world,
differing from them; but that this state, in respect of the exultation, joy,
pleasure, and gladness which is in it, is such, that he who has attained it,
or has come to any period of it, cannot conceal it, or keep it secret, but
that exultation, cheerfulness, gladness, and delight befalls him, which
drives, him to express it summarily, but not distinctly: But if he be of those
whom the Sciences have not sharpened, he speaks these things of it, which he
does not comprehend; so that one said when it was so with him, O me to be
praised, how great am I! and another said, I am the truth: and another said,
There is nothing under this clothing, but God. But Doctor Abu Hamed Algazali,
when he reached unto this state, he used this Verse Proverbially, And it was,
what it was, of that, whereof I made not mention.
Bat think thou, that it was good, neither enquire thou after what manner the
thing is.
For Letters had polished him, and the Cultivated.
Disciplines had sharpened him: But take notice of the saying of Abu Becri Ebn
Alsayegi, which is joined to his discouorse of the description of the
Conjunction [of the Intellect with man,] for, says he, seeing the Intellect is
the scope proposed in his Book, then it shall appear that the same cannot be
perceived out of the usual Sciences, in that degree wherein it was: but what he
conceived in his mind, of the sense of it, was acquired in a degree, in which
he being placed, he saw himself abstracted from all former things, endued with
other thoughts, which depend not from matter, and are more noble then to be
imputed to the life which is from nature, but are certain properties from the
properties of those who are blessed, very different from the composition of the
natural life, but are properties of them, which are proper to the blessed ones,
which it is fit that we call them, Divine properties, which God (most highly to
be praised) gives to whom he wills of his servants. But this degree is
attained unto, which Abu Becr insinuates, by way of speculative Science and of
cogitative disquisition: nor is it doubtful that he attained it, nor erred from
it. But the degree which we first hinted at, is another from that although it
is the same, because there is not any thing discovered in it, contrary unto
what is discovered in the other. But it is distinction consists in an
^^cession of perspicuity, and because he perceives, by the help of a thing
which we call not a power, but Metaphorically, seeing we find not, neither in
words commonly used, neither in the proper terms of the Doctors, a name which
declares that thing, whereby that form of perception Is perceived.
perceives. But this stare which we mentioned, and to the perceiving of some
taste of which thy question moved us, is of that sort, which Sheich Abu Ali
insinuates, Number.
where he says, Thereafter, when the will and the exercise has come to a
certain period, there appertains unto him pleasant forms, from the Aspect of
the true Light, as if the, were Coruscations, lightly shining Glancings.
upon him, then they depart from him, then are these sudden occursions
multiplied unto him, when he continues in exercise, then he is accustomed to
them, until they come unto him without exercise, and how oeeeeeeet he beholds
any thing shortly, he inclines from it, unto the border of holiness, and he
holds Court or threshold.
somewhat in memory of his matters; and then suddenly it meets him, so that
almost he sees the truth in every thing; then exercise leads him to that
perfection, whose state is turned unto him, into a firm tranquillity of, mind,
and it becomes familiarly known, which used but to steal on, and that which
glanced lightly, becomes a manifest light, and their happens unto him a firm
knowledge, as if it were a continual fellowship. These are the things, with
others, which he described of the orderly progress of the degrees, until they
come to the comprehension, so that his secret Looking-glass is polished,
whereby over against him Smoothed.
he beholds that part in which the truth is; and then most choice delights
flow down abundantly, and inwardly he rejoices in his mind, for the prints of
truth which he sees therein; and when he is placed in this degree, he has a
respect unto the truth, and a respect unto his soul, and he is yet moved hither
and thither, until at last Acted.
he departs from his soul, and only looks unto the border (or Court of
Holiness) Holy Court.
but if he respects his soul, it is because the soul respects that; and
there it is fit that the Conjunction be [with God.] And after those manners,
which he described, he would have his tasting to be; not by way of speculative
apprehention elicited, and premises premised, and conclusions deduced. And if
thou would have a similitude, whereby the difference may appear unto thee
betwixt the apprehension of this sect of men and the apprehention of others;
conceive in the mind the state of one who is born blind, but who is of an
excellent ingine, a sagatious conjecture, firm memory, a well disposed mind and
has grown up from that time, wherein he first was in some Region where he
ceased not to make known to himself the persons of men, there, as also, many
kinds of things both living and wanting life, and the Streets of the Town, the
Ways, the Houses, the Marcat-places, by the other ways of apprehending, which
he has, until he come to that that he can go round about the Town, without a
guide of the way, and should know every one, who meets him, and should
presently salute him, and should discern colors, and know their definition,
by the descriptions of their Names, and some definitions, which should declare
them. Then after he has come unto this degree, that his eyes are opened, and
that he has a perception by sight and when he went through that whole Town and
compassed it, that he found nothing at all contrary unto what he had believed,
and that he had known every thing, which was there and had found the colors
to be after the same manner, which did show the descriptions to be true
wherewith they were described, but that in all these, two great things befell
him following one another, to wit, a greater perspicuity and clearness of
things, and a great pleasure. Therefore the State of Contemplants, who have not
come to the degree of nearness [unto God] is the first state of that blind man,
and the colors, which are known in this state by the explication of their
names, are these things which Abu Becr, said, were more excellent then to be
Imputed to the natural life, and which God gives to whom he pleases of his
servants. But the state of the Contemplants, who have come to the degree of
nearness [unto God,] and upon whom, God has bestowed that thing, which (as we
have said) is not named a power, but metaphorically, is that second state. But
now he is rarely found, who is of that degree, who was always clear in sight,
having opened eyes, who needed not contemplation. Nor do I understand here (God
honor thee with his nearness) by the apprehension of the Contemplants, that
which they apprehend from natural things, and be the apprehention of them, who
are near unto God, that which they apprehend from supernatural things (for
these two manners of apprehending are very differing, among themselves. Nor is
the one mingled with the other) but that which we understand by the
apprehension of the Contemplants is that which they apprehend from things
Metaphysical, like unto that which Abu Becr apprehended, i. e. Beyond Nature.
and in the apprehension of these things this condition is required, that it be
manifestly true, and then falls in Mediate.
a mid-speculation betwixt that, and betwixt the apprehension of them, who are
near unto God, who apply their study unto these things, with an increase of
clearness, and with greater delight. But Abu Becr reproves them, who should
make mention of this pleasure among the vulgar, and he said it did belong to
the immagining faculty, and he promised to discribe how the state of the
blessed ones should be when they had attained this, in clear and manifest
discourse. But it behooves, that it be said to him, Preach not the sweetsavour
of a thing, whichthou have not tasted, neither pass over the necks of the true
speakers. For neither did that man any thing of that sort, neither performed he
his promise: for it is probable, that the straitness of time mentioned by him,
hindered him from that undertaking, and because he was taken up in a Journey
taken in hand to Wahran, or because he saw, if he should describe that state,
the order of the discourse would compel him, to declare the things, in which,
he was, which would be a reproach to him, in the manner of his life, and which
would argue the precepts delivered by him, of a lie, whereby he incited men to
multiply riches, and gather them together, and to use diverse ways of arts to
acquire them. But the discourse has led us off, somewhat to another thing,
then that which thou did move us to, by thy desire, as necesity required. And
from what is said it is manifest, that, what is required by thee does
necessarily include one of these two Rocks, viz. that thou ask of that which
they see, to whom it has happened to see, and to taste, and to be present in
that degree of nearness unto God; and this is of the things which cannot be,
so as they may be described in a Book, as they are indeed, and when any have
undertaken it, and endeavored whether in word or writ to express it, the true
reason of it is changed, and passes unto the Or manner.
parts of another speculative kind; for when it is clothed with letters, and
voices, and becomes near unto the corporeal Bodily.
world, it does not remain in that state wherein it was, in any manner or way,
and the signification of voices differ far in expressing it, so that therein
the feet of some err from the right way, and it is thought concerning others,
that their feet are slidden, when they are not slidden: but the cause thereof
is this, because it is a thing which has no bound in the space of a large
tract, which compasses, is not compassed. But the second of the two Rocks,
which as we said, thy question did necessarily include, is, that thou have
desired that a thing be made known unto thee, in that manner, as they do it who
give themselves to contemplation; and this is a thing (God bring thee near unto
himself) the reason whereof requires, that it be described in Books, and forms
of words to express it: but that is more rare then the Reed Pure Gold.
Sulphur, and especially in these Regions wherein we live, because it is so
strange a thing, that but one after one attaineth it but a little, and who have
attained any thing of it, have not declared it unto men, but by some obscure
tokens: for the Hanisitick Sect, and Mohammedick Law, forbids men to dive
into it, and admonishes them to beware of it. And think not that the
Philosophy which has come unto us in the Books of Aristotle, and Abu-Nasri,
and in the Book of Alshepha, does suffice unto this design which thou desired,
nor has any of the Andaloseni, written any thing of it, which can suffice, for
they who were educate in Andulusia, of men of an excellent ingine, spent their
life in the Mathematical Disciplines, and attained a great degree in them,
before the Science of Logic and Philosophy was propagated in that place, nor
could they do any thing further. Then an age of men succeeded unto them, who
exceeded them in some skill of Logic, to which they gave pains, but so, that
it brought them not to the true perfection. Therefore one of themselves said,
It troubles me that there are two knowledges of men, nor is there any thing to
be added unto them; the one is the true knowledge, which is attained with
difficulty, and the other false, the attaining of which is unprofitable. Then
others more sharpsighted succeeded unto those, and who came nearer unto the
truth, among whom, none was of a quicker ingine, or who perceived things
better, or more truly, then Abu-Becr-Ebn-Alsaijeg, but that the world did take
him up, until death took him away before the treasures of his knowledge were
manifested, or the secresies of his wisdom were published, and most of his
Writings which are found, are imperfect, and mutilate in the end, as his Book
of the Soul, and of the government of him who has given himself to a solitary
life, and what he wrote of Logic, and Natural Knowledge; but his perfect Books
are compendious Tractats, and Epistles hastily written; and this he declared,
saying that, whose demonstration was proposed to him, in the Epistle of
Alette-sal, i. e. the conjunction of the intellect with man, is not altogether
manifest in that discourse, but after great difficulty and trouble, and because
the method of his Explication, in some places is not ordered in so perfect a
way; but if more time were given him, he purposed to change it. And thus is the
matter, as to what has come to us of the knowledge of this man: but we saw him
not, and who were contemporary with him were such men, as cannot be said to be
equal to him in degree, nor saw we any thing done by them: but who succeeded
them that lived in our time, are but yet making progress, or have stood short
of perfection, or how they have been truly, is not known to us. But as
concerning the Books of Abu-Nasri, which has come to us, most of them are of
Logic: and such as are come to us of Philosophy, are full of doubts. For he
affirmed in the Book Almellati Alphadelati, i. e. of the most excellent Sect,
the duration of evil souls after death in everlasting torments; then in the
Politics, he says expressly, that they are dissolved and annihilated, and that
only the souls endowed with vortue, and perfect, do remain. Then he describes
in his Book of Manners, somewhat belonging to the happiness of men, and that it
is in this life, which is of this world: then he utters words having this
sense, Whatever is mentioned besides this, is madness, and old Wives Fables. He
therefore drives all men to despair of the mercy of God, and puts good, and
bad in the same degree, while he makes the end unto which all tend, to be
Annihilation. But this is ane unpardonable error, and a fall after which there
is not a restoration. These things, beside others he brought forth, wherein he
judged badly of Prophecy, and that it properly belonged to the Imaginative
faculty according to his opinion and that he preferred Philosophy unto it with
other things not needful to mention. But touching Aristotle his Books,
Alsheigh-Abu-Ali, supplyeth their vice, in his Explication of them, having
followed his sect, and going in the way of his Philosophy, in the Book
Alshepha, i. e. of suficiency, in the beginning of which he plainly affirms,
that in his opinion, the truth differs from what he delivers therein and
that he made that Book according to the Doctrine of the Peripateticks; but he
who would see the truth, wherein is nothing obscure, should look on his Book of
Philosophy Almoshrakia, i. e. Oriental: but if any take pains to read the Book
Alshepha, and the Books of Aristotle, it will appear they agree in most things
although there be some things in the Book Alshepha, which came not to us from
Aristotle; but when he has received all things which the Books of Aristotle
have given him, and the book Alshepha, according to the outward sound of the
words, not turning the mind to the hidden, and inward sense of them, he shall
no ways be brought unto perfection by them as Alsheich-Abu-Ali in the Book
Alshepha admonishes, but as for the Books of Alsheich-Abu-Hamed-Agasali, he so
far, as he spoke unto the vulgar one time binds another time loses and
reproves some things of infidelity, then he professes them then in the number
of them, for which he accuses the Philosophers of in fiidelity, in the Book
Alta-Haphot (commonly called Destruction) is that, that they deny the
resurrection of bodies, and affirm that reward and punishment belong to souls
apart: then he said in the beginning of the Book Almizan, (i. e. the Scales,)
that this is the opinion of the Supphian Doctors precisely; and again in the
Book Almunkedh. Men-Aldelali-Walmophseh. Bel-Ahwali, i. e. freeing from error,
and explaining the state, he says, his opinion is the same with the opinion of
the Suphij; and that he is brought to it after a long search: And many things
of this kind are in his Books which he shall see, who looks on them and
considers attentively. And he seeks to be excused for this deed in the end
of the Book Mizan-Almal, i. e. the Scales of actions, where he affirms that,
opinions are of a threefold kind, first, that which is common with the vulgar,
in that which they think. Secondly the opinion, according to which ane answer
is given to every enquirer, and that seeks dirrection. Thirdly, the opinion,
which one retains with himself, and which none knows, but who is his
Consort in his opinion: then he says after, But if there be not in these
words, but to make thee doubt of thy opinion, which thou have heritably
received, this is enough to profit; for who has not doubted, does not
consider, who has not considered, shall not perceive, who shall not perceive,
shall remain in blindness and perplexity: then in place of a Proverb, he used
this Verse, Receive what thou see, and let alone what thou have perceived by
the hearing.
In the rising of the Sun, is that which makes, that thou have not need of
Saturn.
And this is the manner of his Doctrine; and the greatest part of it is by
Aenigma's, and obseure Tokens, of which he receives not profit: but who first
diligently looks into these things with the eyes of the mind, then hears
them again from himself, or who is ready to understand these things, excelling
in ingine, and to whom the least beck (or nodd) suffices: But the same Author
says, in the Book Alia-wahar, i. e. of Pearls, that he has Books not to be
communicated, but unto those who are fit to read them, and that he has put in
them the sincere truth; but none of them came into Spain, so far as we know;
but there came Books into Spain, whom some think are those incommunicable
Books, but it is not so; for these Books are Almaareph, Alakliah, i. e.
Intellectual Knowledges, and the Book Alnaphchi-Waltaswiati, i. e. of
Inflation, and Aequation, and besides them, a Collection of diverse Questions.
But these Books, however some hints were in them, contain no great matter
further to the discovery of things, beyond what is scattered in his known
Books. Moreover, in the Book Almeksad Alasna, i. e. Most high marks, is found
that which is Aims.
deeper, than what are contained in these other: and he plainly affirms, that
the Book Almeksad Alasna, is not communicable, whence it is necessarily
gathered, that those who came unto us, are not these incommunicable Books, but
some later Authors persuaded themselves, that in his discourse, which falls
in near the end of his Book Almeschat, i. e. of the little window, there is
some great matter, which has made them fall into a depth, whence they cannot
extricate themselves, and that is, his saying, after he had reckoned up diverse
kinds of them who were encompassed with lights, or who by the shining of the
divine light, are prohibited from an access, then he passed unto the mentioning
of them who came near unto God, wherein he says, that they determined, that
this Great Being is described by Attributes, which overturn the simple Unity,
whence it seemed to them necessarily to follow, that he believed a certain
multiplicity in the Essence of the true God. God is far above what the
unrighteous say: nor is it doubtful among us, that Doctor Abu Hamed is of their
number, who attained the chief happiness, and came unto these noble and holy
places of conjunction, Viz. with God.
but his hidden or incommunicable Books, which contain the knowledge of
Revelation, have not come unto us, nor was the truth clearly made manifest to
us, which we have attained, and which was the Butt (or Mark) which we have
reached unto by knowledge, until we followed his sayings, and the sayings of
Doctor Abu Ali, and comparing them together, and joining them to the sentences
which arose in this our time, to which some are addicted, of them who have
professed Philosophy, until the truth appeared unto us, first by way of
disquisition, and inspection thereafter concerning it, we have found at present
this small taste, from the present sense of things, and then we saw our selves
fit to say something, which may be called our own. But we have determined that
thou should be the first to whom we might give this which is beside us, and
should give it to be looked on, which we have attained, because of the
integrity of thy friendship, and sincerity of thy gentleness: but if we should
propose unto thee the ends of that which we have attained in this sort, before
we give thee the principles thereof confirmed, it would not be any thing
profitable unto thee, more then a thing received by tradition, and generally
said. This is it, if thou think well of us, according to the love and
friendship which is among us, not that we are worthy that it should be received
what we say. Nor do we wish unto thee, but what is above this degree, nor are
we content with it, that thou be in this degree; seeing it suffices not to
salvation, nor to obtain the highest degrees. But we will lead thee through
paths wherein we have formerly walked, and we shall make thee sail in the Sea
which we have first sailed our selves, that it may bring thee whither it has
brought us, and that thou may see of it what we have seen, and by thy own
sight may have a certain knowledge of the things which we have certainly
known, and that it be not needful unto thee to fix thy knowledge on that which
we have known: but this needs a certain space of time, and that not small,
and that one be free from business, and with the whole bent of his mind apply
himself to this kind. But if this be indeed thy purpose, and with a sincere
affection of mind prepare thy self to reach this mark, in the morning thou
shall praise the tedious and irksome travel of thy night-journey, and shall
receive the blessing of thy labor, and thou shall have God acceptable to thee,
and he shall have thee acceptable to him, and I shall be unto thee such as thou
loved and wished with thy whole heart and whole mind: and I hope to lead thee
in a most right way, and most safe from evils and hurts. Although at present
some small glance has offered it self unto me, whereby I may kindle thee with
desire, and may stir thee up to enter into the way, while I shall describe unto
thee the History of Hai-Ebn-Yockdhan, and Absali, and Salamani, on whom
Alsheich Or, Asali.
Abu Ali put these names, in the History of whom there is an example to the
understanding, and an admonition to him who has an heart, or who gives ear,
and let him be a witness.

OUr pious Forbears have reported, that there is an Isle among the Isles of
India, situate under the Aequinoctial Line, wherein Men are born without
Father or Mother. And that in the same, there is a Tree, which for the Fruit of
it, brings forth Women, and these are they which Almasudi calls the
Wakwakian Damsels. For that Isle is of all places of the earth of an Air most
temperate and perfect: the influence of the supreme light which arises upon
it, so disposing the same: Although so to affirm, is contrary to the persuasion
of the most of the chief Philosophers and Physicians; whose sentence is, that
the fourth Climate is the most temperate part of the earth. But if they affirm
this, because they certainly know that the parts situat under the Aequinoctial
are inhabitable, because of some impediment from the earth, some reason would
favor their saying, that the fourth Climat is of the parts of the earth, the
most temperat: but if they will this, that the parts scituat under the
Aequinoctial Line, are extremely hot (which most of them manifestly affirm) it
is false, and the contrary is proven by certain demonstrations. For it is
demonstrated in Natural Philosphy, that there is no cause of the generation of
heat, but motion, or the contact and light of hot Bodies, and also in the same,
it is proved, that the Sun in himself is not hot, nor endued with any such
quality which pertains unto mixture: moreover therein is proved, that the
Bodies, which in the most perfect manner receive the light, are smooth, not
thin, but the Bodies fit in the next place to receive light, are thick Bodies,
which are not smooth, but thin Bodies, wherein is no thickness, receive no
light. This one especially in place of demonstration, Sheich Abu Ali brought
forth, mentioned before by none. This being concluded, and seeing the premises
are true, what necessarily follows, is this: that the Sun does not warm the
earth in that manner, as other hot Bodies, which touch, do warm Bodies; because
the Sun is not hot in himself. Neither is the earth warmed by motion, seeing it
rests, and remains in one state, both when the Sun shines on it, and when
it is absent therefrom; but that its properties as to heat and cold are
contrary, at these two times, is manifest by sense. But neither does the Sun
first warm the Air, and next the Earth, by the mediation and heat of the Air;
for how could this be, when in the time of the heat, we find the Air next to
the Earth, much hotter, than that which is superior, and further distant? It
remains therefore, that the Sun no other way does warm the Earth, then by the
force of its light: for heat does always follow light; so that where it is
intended in Burning-glasses, it kindles whatever is set before it. But it is
proved by certain demonstrations in the Mathematical Sciences, that the Sun is
of a round Figure, and also the Earth: and that the Sun is far greater then the
Earth: and that part of the Earth always enlightened, is above the half of it,
but that which is enlightened, the middle part thereof has the most intense
light, because of all places it is furthest distant from the darkness which is
in the Circumference of the Circle, and because it is obvious to many parts of
the Sun; but these parts nearest the Circumference, have smallest light, until
the last period of the Circle, which contains the enlightened part of the
Earth, it ends in darkness. But some place is the midst of the Circle of
light, when the Sun is vertical over the heads of the Inhabitants, and then the
heat in that place shall be most intense. But if there be any Region where the
Sun is furthest distant from the vertical point, that Region is the coldest.
But it is demonstrated in Astronomy, that in these parts of the Earth, under
the Aequinoctial, that the Sun is only twice every Year vertical unto the
Inhabitants, when it enters the beginning of Aries, and the beginning of
Libra: but through the rest of the Year, six Months it declineth from them
toward the South, and fix toward the North: so that they feel neither excess
of heat nor cold, but for that cause enjoy an equal temper. These things need
further explication, but which belongs not to our purpose. This only we have
hinted unto thee, because it is of them which give a testimony to the truth of
what is reported, A mere fabulous report, contrary to the truth, for all
mankind is of Adam.
that a man in that place can be born without Mother or Father. For there are
of them who downright affirm, and absolutely conclude, that Hai. Ehn. Yockdhan
was of their number, who in that Region are born without Mother or Father.
Others deny, and relate his History in that manner as we shall now mention unto
thee. They report that over against that Isle, there is another great Isle, of
a large tract, abounding with Commodities, inhabited by men, where at that time
a man very proud, and of a suspicious nature did govern: he had a Sister that
was very beautiful and comely, which he kept closs from marrying, because he
found not an equal unto her. But there was one near unto him, called Yokdhan,
who privately married her, according to the Rites of that Sect of men, known in
these times, of whom having conceived, she did bear a Son: She fearing the
discovery of the matter, and that what she had kept closs should be made known,
after she had given the Infant the Breasts, she put it into a little Coffin,
which when she had firmly closed, and brought it to the Shore (some Servants,
and the most faithful of her Friends conveying her) in the forepart of the
night her heart burning toward the Child with love and fear, having taken her
farewell of the Child, spoke thus, O God, thou have created this Infant, when as
yet it was nothing, and thou did nourish it in the darkness of my bowels, and
thou had a care of it until it came forth sound and perfect; I being afraid
of that unjust, proud, and contumacious King, commit the same unto thy
goodness, hoping thou will be bountiful unto him, be thou an help unto him,
forsake him not, who surpassest all in mercy. When she had said these things,
she committed the little Coffin unto the Sea; which the flowing of the water
moved with force of the stream, the same night brought to the Shore of another
Island, whereof we formerly made mention. But the flowing of the water at that
time came as far up on the Land as could be, whither once in the year only it
did reach: the water therefore by its force did cast the Coffin into a thick
Grove full of Trees, a place of a fruitful soil, fenced from winds, and rains,
and defended against the Sun, which at its rising and setting declined from it.
There the water decreasing; and departing from the Coffin wherein the Infant
was, so that it settled in the same place; the Sands, by the blowing of the
winds rose up thither, that they came to a heap, and obstructed the entrance of
the light unto the Coffin, and hindered the coming in of any water unto it,
that the flood might not reach it. And it came to pass, that when the water
thrust the Coffin upon the Grove, the Nails of the Coffin loosed, and the
Boards from one another: and when the Child being very hungry, cried bitterly,
seeking help, and moved it self, its cry did come unto the ears of a wild Goat,
or Roe, which wanted its Hind, which having come from its Den, was caught by a
ravenous Bird; she hearing the voice, and imagining it to be her young one,
follows the voice, until she came unto the Coffin, which she pulled with her
Claws on every side, the Child in the mean time struggling within, so that out
of the upper part a Board of the Coffin did leap off: but she having beheld the
Child, pitied it, and moved with great This is probable, seeing famous History
records somewhat like to this of Cyrus.
affection thereunto, put to it its Duggs, and pleasantly nourished it with her
milk; and constantly coming unto it, fed it, and defended it from evil. And
this is it which they record of its origin, who will not assent that it was
born without Parents: But we shall afterward declare how it did grow, and how
it made several progresses one after another, until it reached unto great
perfection. But who think it was born of the earth, say, that in some low place
of that Island, in process of years and times, a certain Clay does ferment so
far, until heat and cold, moisture and dryness agree in it, in an equal temper,
and in equal strength: and that there was a great mass of this clay, wherein
some parts did exceed others, in the equality of temper, and were more fit for
the generation of a mixed body; and that the midst of it was of a most perfect
temper, and most equal, like unto the humane temper: the matter being agitate
bells (or bublings) rose up, as use to be in the bubling of water, because of
the great clamminess of it: and it came to pass, that some viscous (tough or
clammy) thing was in the midst of it, with a small bell (or bubling) full of a
subtle and aerie body, divided into two parts with a thin vail, of a most equal
temper, which did agree unto it. Then at the command of the most high God, a
Spirit being infused, joined it self unto the same, and did cleave so closely
unto it, that it could scarcely be separate therefrom, either by sense or
understanding; this Spirit still flowing forth from God, as is manifnst and
like to the light of the Sun, which continually influenceth the world. But
among bodies, some do not return the light, such as the thin air, very thin; by
others, the light is returned, but in an imperfect manner of illumination, such
as thick bodies, which are not smooth: but these bodies differing, according to
the reception of light, for the same reason, their colors differ also: but
again, by others the light is returned in a most perfect manner of
illumination, such ar smooth bodies, as Looking-glasses and the like: so that
by these glasses, if they be concavated in a convenient figure, fire is
kindled, because of the excess of light. After this manner, that Spirit, which
is of the commandment of God, is infused continually into all creatures: But
there are of them wherein no print of it does appear, for want of a fit
disposition in them, such are things without life, resembling the air in the
former similitude. Again, some there are, wherein some print of it appears,
as the diverse sorts of plants, according unto their dispositions, and these
answer unto these thick bodies in the same similitude. Again, there are some
wherein the impression thereof is very conspicuous, and these are diverse kinds
of living creatures, which resemble those smooth and shining bodies in the same
similitude. But among those smooth bodies, some more plentifully receive light
from the Sun, because they resemble the figure of the Sun and his similitude,
and are formed according to his Image: such especially is man, which is
signified where it is said, God made man according to his Image. But if this
form prevail so in him, that in comparison thereof, all other forms be, as it
were, reduced to nothing, and it only remains, so that the glory of its light
burn up whatever it takes hold of, then it resembles those glasses which
reflect light in themselves, and burns up other things; but this befalls
none but Prophets, and all this may become manifest in a fit place. But that we
may now return, and speak more fully of what they affirm, who describe this
manner of generation. They say, when that Spirit had joined it self unto that
receptacle, that all the other faculties yielded unto it, and obeyed it, being
universally thereunto subjected by the commandment of God. But over against
that receptacle, another bubling arose divided into three receptacles, among
which, there were thin partitions, and open passages; and they were filled with
a body of air, not unlike unto that where with the first receptacle was filled,
but that that was more thin; and in these three ventricles divided out of one,
some of those faculties were placed which were subject to it, and to the same
was committed their custody and defense, and whatever should arise there, they
should defer it, whether much or little, to the first (or chief) Spirit,
placed in the first receptacle. Also, over against this second receptacle, a
third bubling rose up, filled also with a body of air, but thicker then the two
former, and in this receptacle were placed some others of the inferior
faculties, for the preserving and sustaining of which, it was appointed: and
these were the three teceptacles, to wit, the first, second and third, which
were first made out of the great mass of that fermented clay, in the manner we
have described. But they needed mutual help one of another, and the first
needed the other two, for their obedience and service, and the two needed the
first, as subjects need their Prince, and commanding them who are under
command: yet every one of them, in respect of the members afterward formed,
was a Prince, not a Subject: but one of them, to wit, the second, was of a more
absolute power then the third. But the first, by the force of that Spirit
joined thereunto, and of its burning heat, became into a conical figure of the
fire; and so that thick body which compassed it, was of the same figure, and
became solid flesh, covered with a thick covering for its preservation. This
whole member is called the Heart: Now in respect of the dissolution and loss
of moisture, which follows the heat, something was necessary which might
serve to sustain and nourish it: and continually restore what was consumed,
otherwise it could not endure. Also it was needful, that it should be touched
with the sense of what was convenient for it, and might attract it unto it
self, as also with the sense of the contrary, that it might thrust it back. To
the supplying one of them, in things needful, one member is substitute with the
faculties thereto belonging; another member supplied another with things it
needed. That member which did preside over the things belonging to sense, was
the Brain; that which ordered concerning the nourishment, was the Liver. Both
of them needed that first member, that it might help them and their peculiar
faculties proceeding of them with its heat: And for the good of all, there were
interwoven diverse passages and opens, some wider then others, as the necessity
of the thing required; and so the Arteries and Veins came to be. After this,
they proceed to describe the whole Structure of the body and all its members,
in the same manner as the Physiologues use to depaint the formation of the
Embryon in the womb, omitting nothing till the whole composure be perfected,
and all its members completed, and that it resemble an Embryon presently to
come forth of the womb. And to describe these things fully, they call in for
help, that great fermented mass of clay, which was of that condition, that of
it was formed whatever is required to the procreation of Man, of the coverings
which cover the body, and other things of that sort; and when it was perfected,
that these coverings being rent by it, fell away as in the grief of
childbearing, and that it broke through the other hardened part of the clay.
At length that this Infant, the matter of the nourishment decaying, and hunger
urging it, cried for help, and that the Goat which had lost its young one,
hearkened unto it. Then what they declare after this place, and what those
declare who embrace the former sentence, are agreeable. For both say, that this
Goat which received the child, having got a fruitful and large pasture, became
fat, and had that abundance of milk, whereby to nourish the Infant after the
best manner: and she was always with it, and never departed therefrom, but
when through necessity she went to eat. Also the Infant used the company of the
Goat, so that if she stayed away longer then usually, it would cry bitterly,
which when the Goat heard, presently she ran unto it. Nor was there any
ravenous or hurtful beast in the whole Island. So the Infant increased and
grew, being nourished with the Goats milk, until it was two years old, at
which time it began by degrees to go, and have fore-teeth, and it always
followed the Goat, which kindly entreated it, and embraced it with tender
affection, and led it unto places that were planted with fruitful trees, and
she fed it with the sweet and ripe fruits which fell of from the trees,
breaking them which had a hard shel with her teeth; and when it sought milk,
she gave it her Duggs, and when it desired water, she led it thereunto, and
where the beams of the Sun troubled it, she shadowed it, where it suffered by
the cold, she warmed it, and when night ensued, she led it to the former place,
and covered it, partly with her own body, and partly with the feathers that
remained of those wherewith the coffin was furnished when the Infant was put
into it; and as often as they either went forth at morning, or returned at
evening a company of Goats accompanied them, which in the morning went forth
with them, and at night lay in the same place with them. So the child still
remaining among the Goats, did also imitate their voice with its voice, that
scarce was there any difference. Also in the same manner, whatever voice it
heard, whether of Birds or other liviving creatures, it exactly resembled them,
by a faculty wherein it excelled, of apprehending whatever it would. But the
voices which it mostly resembled were these of the Goats, whereby they sought
help, or called their neighbors, or would that they should come nearer, or go
farther off; for unto these various ends, these living creatures have diverse
voices: and so the Child and the wild Beasts accompanied one another, for
neither did they shun him, nor he them. And now when the images of things
became fixed in his mind, after they were removed from his sight, he was so
affected, that he desired some of them, and had an aversion from others. In the
mean time, while he vieweth, all the kinds of the wild beasts, he saw them all
covered with Wool, or Hair, or diverse kinds of Plumes; also he beheld their
nimbleness and strength, and what armor they had to beat back the things which
contended with them, as Horns, Hoofs, Spurs, and the like; but whereas he
looked to himself, he saw himself naked, destitute of armor, slow in motion,
weakin strength, when they contended with him about the fruits that were to be
eaten, so that they kept them to themselves, and pulled them from him, nor
could he restrain them from him, or flee from any of them. Also he saw that his
neighbors the little Hinds or Kids came to have horns to grow on them, which
they first wanted, and that though they were weak to run, yet that at length
they became nimble, but he perceived none of these to befall himself.
Considering this in his mind, he was ignorant what was the cause thereof; also
he beheld the creatures where in was any fault or defect of members, nor did he
find among them any like to himself; considering also in the beasts the
passages of the excrements which he saw covered, and that the passage which
served to the grosser excrement, was covered with a tail, and that which served
the thinner, was covered with hair, or something of that kind, and that their
secret parts were more covered then his: all these bred grief and anxiety unto
him, which when he he had long considered earnestly, and was now almost seven
years old, he despaired of attaining that, the want of which troubled him. Then
he took broad leaves of trees, some whereof he put on the hinder-parts of his
body, and some on the fore-parts, and having made a Girdle of the Leaves of
Palms and Rushes, where with he girded himself, he hung them to him thereby;
but after a small time the Leaves becoming dry and withered, fell off from him:
therefore he ceased not to take others, adding others to others of them, in
double plyes or folds, by which means they remained longer, but yet it was but
for a short time. Also he took unto him a staff off the boughs of a Tree, and
having made the ends of it handsome, and smoothed the middle of it, he began to
threaten the beasts which opposed him, making an assault upon the weaker, and
resisting the stronger. After this manner he somewat understood his own
strength, and that his hand far excelled theirs, for it sufficed to cover his
nakedness, and to make use of a staff for his own defense, so that now he
needed not a tail, nor yet those natural Darts which he first wished. Things
being thus, he grew up, and passed beyond the seventh year of his age, and when
the frequent repairing of the Leaves was troublesome unto him, wherewith he
covered himself, he thought in his mind to take to him the tail of some dead
beast, and hang it to him, but that he saw the living beasts of its own kind to
shun the dead, and flee from them, so that it would not be fit for him to
enterprise any such thing, until at length he found a dead Eagle, whence he
seemed to get his desire accomplished. Therefore taking an occasion thence,
when he saw that none of the beasts fled from that, he coming unto it, he cut
from it the wings and the tail, whole as they were, and he smoothed the
feathers that were spread' forth, and then he pulled off what remained of the
skin, and dividing it in two parts, he hung the one to his back and the other
to his belly, and to the parts under the same: also he fastened the tail to
himself behind, and both the wings to the upper parts of his arms: after this
manner, he had that which both covered him, and warmed him, and also which
struck fear into the hearts of all the beasts; so that none of them contended
with him, nor resisted him, nor came near unto him, but the Goat which gave him
milk and nourished him, for she never left him, nor he her, till she became old
and weak; and then he led her to the best pastures, and pulled sweet fruits,
and gave her to eat: but weakness and Leanness.
languishing ceased not to prevail over her, and daily to approach, until death
siezed on her, and all her motions became still, and all her actions ceased.
But when the Child saw that it was so with her, he was greatly struck, so that
almost for grief he had expired; and he called upon her with the same voice
which she used to answer when she heard it, and he stirred her up, with crying
as loud as he could, but he perceived no motion nor change in her: he began
therefore to look to her ears and eyes, but found no visible hurt in them, and
in the same manner considering all the members of her body, he found nothing
amiss in them: But he greatly desired to find that place where the defect was,
that he might remove it from her, that she might return to her former state:
but nothing of this sort was in readiness, nor could he do it. That which moved
him to this consideration, was, what he noticed in himself; for he saw when he
closed his eyes, or* covered them with any thing, that he could see nothing,
until that hinderance were removed: also when he would put his fingers into his
ears, and stop them, he would hear nothing until he removed them: also when he
pressed his nose with his hand, he could find no smell until he opened his
nostrils, whence he gathered, that all his senses and actions were obnoxious to
hindrances, which could impede them; but these hindrances being removed, that
the actions returned. When therefore he had viewed all the outward members, nor
found any default in them, and he observed an universal cessation of the whole,
which could not more be imputed to one member then another; at length it came
into his mind, that the hurt which had befallen it was in some member remote
from his sight, and hidden in an inward part of the body; and that that member
was such, that without its help, none of the outward members could do their
office; and so some disease falling into it, that the whole was damnified, and
the want of motion was universal. He desired therefore, if he could, to find
that member, and to remove what had befallen it, so it would become sound
again, and thence a good would redound to the whole body, and her actions would
return to their former condition. But first of all he noticed the dead bodies
of Beasts and other Animals, that all the members were solid, and without any
hollowness, except the scull, the breast, and the belly. Therefore he suspected
that the member thus affected, was no where else but in one of these three
places: but the opinion prevailed most with him that it was in the mid place of
these three. When it was now fixed in his mind altogether, that all the other
members needed this, and therefore it necessarily followed that its seat was in
the middle. Moreover when he considered himself, he felt some such member in
his own breast, and when he thought on the other members, as the hands, the
feet, the ears, the nose, the eyes [or head] he could suppose that these could
subsist without them: and also he supposed the same of the head, and he thought
that he could be without the head: but when he thought of that which he found
in his breast, he did not see that he could subsist without the same for one
moment. Also when he did fight with any of the beasts, with great diligence he
defended his breast from their armor, from the sense of the thing which was in
it: when therefore he had certainly concluded that the member which this hurt
had corrupted was in its breast, he determined to enquire and search into it,
if perhaps he could find it, and when he had perceived the hurt that had
befallen it, to remove it. But then he feared left this his endeavor should be
worse then the hurt which first befell it, and whatever he did might be to its
damage: then he considered with himself, if he saw any of the beasts or other
animals being once so affected, return to their former condition: but when he
found none, hence it came to pass that he despaired of its returning to its
former condition, if he should let it alone, but he had some hope that it might
return to its former condition, if that member being found out, he could remove
the disease from it: therefore he resolved to open its breast, and to enquire
what was in it. Unto this work he furnished himself with the fragments of hard
stones, and splits of dry Canes like unto knives, wherewith to make an incision
among the ribs, until the flesh being cut that is betwixt the ribs, he came
unto that covering that is within the ribs, which when he found it strong, he
much suspected that such a covering belonged to that member, and he was
persuaded when he should get through that, he should find what he sought; so he
set about to dissect it, which was hard to him for scarcety of Instruments, and
that he had none others but them made of stones and Canes. Therefore when he
had repaired his Instruments, and sharpened them, he used his greatest Art in
boring through that cover, until at last he broke through it, and came unto the
lungs, which at the first sight he thought was that member which he sought, and
he ceased not to turn them over, that he might find in them the seat of the
disease. But first he fell upon that half of the lungs, which was on the one
side, and he perceived it leaned to one side, but he had concluded formerly
with himself that that member could not be but in the midst of the body, in
respect of latitude as well as longitude. He did not omit therefore to enquire
further into the midst of the breast, until he found the heart, which being
covered with a very strong covering, and fastened with most strong ligaments,
the lungs also compassing it on that part where he began to make an entrance to
it; he said within himself, if it be so with this member on the other side, as
it is on this, it is certainly in the midst, and so without doubt is that I was
seeking, especially with what I see of the fitness of the place, it has such
excellency of figure firmness and solidity of flesh, and is covered with such a
covering as I find in no other member: so he searched into the other part of
the breast, where when he had found the cover within the ribs, and that the
lungs were after the same manner there as in the other part, he concluded that
that was the member which he sought. So he set to work to remove its cover, and
diffect the pericadium, which at length, having used his utmost endeavors,
with some trouble and difficulty he got done, and having uncovered the Heart,
when he saw it was in every part solid, he viewed if he could find any
observable fault in it; but when he could find none, he pressed it with his
hand, and so there appeared to him there was some hollowness in it: he said
therefore, perhaps within this member is the last which I seek, and I have not
as yet come unto it. So when he had opened it, he found two hollow places in
it, one on the left part, another on the right; that on the right side was full
of a congealed blood, but that on the left was empty, and contained nothing in
it. He said therefore, it cannot be, but the seat of that thing I am a seeking
is in one of these two receptacles: Then he said, as concerning that on the
right side, I see nothing in it but that congealed blood; but without doubt,
that blood had not congealed, until the whole body had come unto the state
wherein it now is: (for he saw the whole blood, when it flowed forth from the
body and passed out, that it congealed and grew altogether, and that this blood
was not unlike to other blood) but I see, that this blood also is found in the
other members, and cannot be appropriat to one member rather than another: But
what I seek is not of this sort, for that is somewhat to which this place is
peculiar, without which I feel that I cannot subsist for one moment, and this I
sought from the beginning. But as to this blood, as often as any of the beasts
assaulted me and wounded me, it flowed from me in great abundance; nor did it
hurt me any thing, nor did it hinder me to perform any of my actions: therefore
what I seek, is not in this receptacle. But as concerning this receptacle
placed on the left side, I see indeed that it is altogether empty, but I cannot
think that it is made in vain; for I see that every member is appointed for
some office proper thereunto; therefore, how can this receptacle that I see is
of so excellent a fabric, serve for no use? I cannot imagine, but that the
thing I seek was placed therein, but that it has departed from it, and left
its place empty; and by this means, that cessation has happened unto this
body, so that it is destitute of sense, and deprived of motion. But when he saw
that which dwelt in this house, that now it had departed before the house was
destroyed, and that it had left the same when it was whole, he thought it most
probable, that now it would not return to the body after it was so torn and
rent. In the mean time, the whole body seemed contemptible unto him, and of no
worth, in respect of that thing, which as he was persuaded, did once inhabit
that body, and had afterward relinquished the same: therefore he applied
himself wholly to think of that thing, what it was, and after what manner it
was, and what had joined it to the body, whither it had gone, out of what gate
it went when it passed out of the body, what cause had driven it away, whether
it went forth unwillingly or willingly, and if it went forth willingly, what
cause had made the body so odious to it, that it had departed therefrom. By all
these things his thoughts were troubled, and all care for its body passed out
of his mind, and he threw it away; and he now felt, that the thing which was
gone was the Mother which did so indulge him, and give him milk, and that all
its actions proceeded therefrom, and not from this unprofitable body, and that
this body was wholly but in place of an instrument unto it, and like the staff
which he himself used to fight with the beasts* So now his desire was removed
from the body, to that which governed the body and moved it, nor was his desire
more to any thing, but to that. In the mean time, that body began to stink, and
noisome smells to fume therefrom, so that he had the greate^ aversion from it,
and wished rather not to see it. Afterward it fell out, that he saw two Ravens
fighting against one another, until the one had killed the other; then the one
that lived began to scrape the earth, till it made a hole wherein it covered
the dead. Then he said with himself, how well has this Raven done, in covering
the carrion of its neighbor, although it did badly in killing it: how much
rather should I do this unto my Mother? therefore he dug a pit, and having
cast its body thereinto, he threw earth thereon. But he proceeded to think of
that thing which governed the body; but he did not apprehend what sort of thing
it was, but that observing all the Goats one by one, he saw them to be of the
same figure and form with his Mother; hence it was fixed in his mind, that
something like: unto that which moved and governed his Mother, did move and
govern every one of them: these Goats he accompanied, and loved them for their
likeness unto her. In this condition he remained for some time, beholding
diverse kinds of living Creatures and Plants, and walking along the shore of
that Island, and seeking if he could find any like to himself, as he saw that
every other living Creature and Plant had many like to one another, but he
could find no such thing. But when he saw the Isle every where compassed with
the Sea, he thought there was no other Land but that Isle. And it happened at a
certain time, in some dry Wood, that by the collision of Branches one upon
another, fire came to be kindled, which he beholding, he saw somewhat that did
terrify him, and being a thing he was not used unto, he stood long admiring
it: nor ceased he by little and little to draw near unto it, and perceiving its
radiant light and wonderful efficacy, that it took hold of nothing, but it
converted it into its own nature; therefore, in admiration of the thing, and
from an innate boldness and courage, which God had put in his nature, he was
induced to put his hand to it, and he would take hold somewhat of it: But when
he felt it to burn his hand, and that he could not hold it, he essayed to take
a stick which the fire had not wholly occupied, and taking hold of that part
which was yet entire, when the fire was in the other part, he did the matter
easily, and brought it to the place where he abode, and he withdrew to his Den,
which he had chosen for himself, as commodious for his dwelling; nor ceased he
to propagate the fire, nourishing it with stubble and dry wood, and frequented
it night and day, for the delight and admiration of it. But that which
increased his converse with it at night, was, that in the night season, it
supplied unto him the vice of the Sun, in respect of light and heat, so that he
was held with a most great desire of it, and he esteemed it the most excellent
of all things present with him. Also, seeing it always to lean upwards and to
ascend, he persuaded himself that it was one of those heavenly substances which
he saw, and he tried its force on all things, throwing them into it, on which
it prevailed more or less, according to the disposition of the body which he
did cast into it, as it was more or less fit to be kindled. Among other things
which he did cast into it, for the trying of its strength, there were some of
these animals which live in the Sea, which the Sea had cast upon the shore,
which being roasted with the fire, and the smell of them rising up, his appetite
was stirred up, so that he tasted somewhat of them; which when it was
acceptable to him, he accustomed himself to the eating of flesh, and he used
arts to catch them both in the Sea and the Land, until he was skilful of them:
and his love grew toward the fire, because by the means thereof, diverse kinds
of good victuals were furnished unto him which he found not before. And when
his affection was vehement thereunto, both for the good effects which he saw it
had, and also for its great strength, it came into his mind, that that thing
which had gone forth out of the Heart of his Mother the Goat which nourished
him, was either of the same substance therewith, or of alike nature. He was
confirmed in this sentence, by the heat which he observed in all living
Creatures while they lived, and by the cold which happened unto them after
death, both continual, without any intermission; also by the great heat which
he found with himself in his breast, anent that place which he had dissected in
the Goat. Hence it came into his mind, that if he did take any living Creature
and did open its Heart, and should look into that ventricle which he found
empty in his Mother; when he opened it, it should come to pass, that in this
living Creature, he should find it full of that which dwelt there, and so he
should be certain, if it was of the same substance with the fire, and if any
light or heat was in it or not. Therefore, taking a wild Beast, he bound its
shoulder, and in the same manner he dissected it as he had done the Goat his
Mother, until he came to its Heart; and having first meddled with its left
side, he opened it, and he saw the receptacle full of air, like unto a vapor
as a white cloud; then putting in his finger, he found it so hot, that it burnt
him: but immediately that living Creature died; whence he certainly concluded,
that that moist vapor was it which gave motion to the living Creature, and so
in all the living creatures of whatever kind, that there is somewhat like
thereunto, which departing, the living creature dies: Then a great desire
siezed on his mind to enquire into the other members of the living creatures,
that he might find out their disposition and place, quantity and quality, and
the manner of their mutual knitting, and how that moist vapor was furnished
unto them, so that all things live thereby, how that vapor remains alive,
how long it remains, whence it is supplied, and how its heat perishes not.
All these things he tried, dissecting wild beasts both living and dead: nor
ceased he accuratly to enquire into them, and stretch his thought, until in all
these things he attained unto the degree of the greatest Mysticks of Nature.
And now it became manifest unto him that every particular Animal, although it
had many members, and diverse senses and motions, is yet one in respect of its
spirit, which derived its origin from one Center, whence its division into all
the other members had its rise, and that all the members served unto that, or
were furnished thereby. But that the office of that spirit in using the body,
was like unto one who fights with his enemies with armor of all sorts, or
who hunteth after a prey of all kinds, both in land and sea, and prepares some
instrument to every kind, whereby to catch it. But the armor whereby man
fights, is divided into these, whereby he repelleth any evil offered unto him
from others, and these whereby he offers damage unto others: and in the same
manner the instruments of catching are divided into these which are fit to
catch fishes, and these which are fit to catch other creatures belonging to the
earth. Also the things which he used for cutting, were divided into them that
were fit for cleaving, and them fit for breaking, and them fit for bor boring.
And although the body was one, yet he used it several ways, according to the
use of every instrument, and according to the obtaining the ends he proposed.
After the same manner he judged that the animal spirit was one, the action
whereof was the seeing, when he used the instrument of the eye; and the action
whereof was the hearing, when he used that of the ear; and the action whereof
was the smelling, when he used that of the nose; and the action whereof was the
tasting, when he used that of the tongue; and the action whereof was the touch,
when he used that of the skin and flesh; and the action whereof was motion,
when he used any member; and the action whereof was nutrition and perception of
the aliment, when he used the liver; and unto every one of these actions there
were subservient members: but none of them could do their office but by means
of that which was derived into it, by that spirit by passages, which are called
the arteries: so that how often these passages were either broken off, or
stopped, the action of that member should cease. Now these arteries derive that
spirit from the ventricles of the brain, the brain receives it from the heart:
but there is great abundance of spirit in the brain, because that is the place
wherein many partitions are variously divided: but if any member by any means
be deprived of this spirit, its action cease, and it becomes as an abject
instrument, which none uses, and is altogether unprofitable: but if the spirit
altogether depart from the body, or any way be consumed or dissolved, the whole
body together is deprived of motion, and is reduced to the condition of death.
Thus far had contemplation brought him, when he had reached the third seventh
year from his birth, that is the 21. year of his age. And within, that time
mentioned he found out many inventions, and he clothed himself with the skins
of beasts, which he had dissected, and he made shoes to himself therewith,
making threeds of hairs, and of the bark of the reeds of wild mallows, Rinds.
malve's, hemp, or plants of that kind, whose rinds were fit to be thread: and
he had learned to do these things from the former use of the rushes; and he
made himself awles of strong briers, and Canes sharpened on the stones: But he
learned the Art of building from what he saw done by the swallows: Also he made
himself a bed, and a place where to put the remnants of his meat, also he
defended it with a door made of Canes joined togegether, that no beast should
come thither when he was absent about any business. Also he caught ravenous
fowls, the help of which he used in fowling; also he tamed fowls to himself,
that he might have the profit of their eggs and young ones. He took also from
the horns of wild bulls as it were points of spears, and fastening them to
strong Canes, and rods of the tree Alzani, and others, and so by the help of
the fire, and edges of stones, he fitted them that they were like spears. Also
he made a shield of skins with diverse plyes: all these things he did because
he saw himself destitute of natural armor. And now when he saw that his hand
supplied the defect of all those things, and that none of all the sorts of
beasts resisted him, but that they fled from him, and overcame him by running,
he invented some device whereby to remeed this, unto which thing he thought
nothing more profitable to him, then to tame some of the beasts that were of a
swift course, and to feed them with convenient food, until he could get upon
them easily, and thereby might pursue the other kinds of beasts. Now there were
in that Isle wild horses, and asses, whereof he choosing some as seemed fit
unto him, he tamed them, until by their means he obtained his desire: and when
he had made of ropes and skins which sufficed for bridles, and other
furnishing, he Sadles.
accomplished what he expected of getting hold of those beasts, which otherwise
by no Art he could attain. He discovered all these various inventions, while he
was occupied in dissecting, and in the study of searching out the properties of
all the parts of the animals, and wherein they differed one from another: and
that in that space of time as we have declared, of twenty one years. Then he
began to expatiat further in contemplation, and to view all bodies which are in
this world obnoxious to generation and corruption, as the diverse sorts of
animals, plants, minerals, and diverse kinds of stones, and also the earth, and
the water, the exhalations, the ice, the snow, the hail, the smoke, the
hoar-frost, the fire and heat; in which he observed diverse qualities and
actions, and motions partly agreeing among themselves, partly disagreeing.
While he gave his mind seriously to the contemplation of these things, he saw
them to agree in part of their qualities, and in part to disagree, and that
they were one in the respect of that wherein they agreed, but in the respect of
that wherein they differed, that they were many and various. So when he looked
into the properties of things, as distinguished from one another, he saw them
so various and manifold, that they exceeded number, and that the nature of
things was so largely diffused, that it could not be comprehended. Also his own
essence seemed manifold unto himself, while he considered that he had diverse
members, every one distinct from another by some peculiar action or property.
Also viewing every one of these members, he saw it could be divided into very
many parts, whence he concluded its essence to be manifold, and in the same
manner the essence of every thing. Then preparing himself to another
contemplation, after a second manner, he saw all his members, although many, to
be so connexed, that there was no discord at all amongst them, but were after a
manner one, and that they differed not, but in respect of the diversity of
actions; and that this diversity proceeded from the force of the animal spirit,
the nature of which by speculation he had first discovered: and that this
spirit was one in essence, and that the true reason of the essence was the
same, and that all the other members were but as instruments, and in this
respect he saw his essence to be one. From this he turned himself to all the
sorts of animals, and he saw that every one of them was one in this manner of
contemplation: then particularly considering them as goats, horses, asses, and
all sorts of fowls according to their kinds, he saw the individuals of every
sort to be like one another, both as to their outward parts, and inward
apprehensions, motions, and inclinations, and they differed not among
themselves, but in some few things, in respect of these wherein they agreed:
whence he concluded, that the spirit which was in the whole species, was one
thing, and differed not otherwise, but that it was distributed into diverse
hearts; so that if it were possible that the whole of it, which is now
scattered in those hearts, could be collected and put into one vessel, that the
whole should be one thing: Like on water, or liquor first dispersed into
diverse vessels, and again gathered into one, which in both states, both of
dispersion and collection was one thing; but that multiplicity had befallen it
in some respect.

In this manner of contemplation, he saw the whole species to be one, and he
concluded the multiplicity of individuals to be but like the multiplicity of
members in one person, which are not indeed many. Then he concluded to have all
the species of animals present in his mind, and considering them, he saw them
all agree in this, that they had sense, and were nourished, and did move
themselves of their own accord, whither they would; which actions now he did
know to be the actions most proper to the animal spirit, but that other things,
wherein they differed after this agreement, were not so proper to the animal
spirit. From this consideration, it was manifest to him, that the animal
spirit, in the whole kind of animals, was indeed but one, although there was
some small difference which was proper more to one species then another, as of
one water put into diverse vessels, perhaps one part may be hotter then
another, resembling that which is in one degree of coldness, which is proper to
that animal spirit in one species: and then, as that whole water is one, so
also is the animal spirit one, although in some respect, multiplicity had
befallen it: And so in this manner of consideration, he saw the whole kind of
animals to be one. Then also having observed the various sorts of Plants, he
saw the individuals of every sort to be like one another, as to the Branches,
Leaves, Flowers, Fruits and Actions, and comparing them with the animals, he
knew, that there was some one thing of which all were partakers, which in them
resembled the spirit in animals, and that they were all in respect thereof, one
thing, and so viewing the whole kind of Plants, he concluded them to be all
one, in respect of the agreement which he saw in their actions, to wit, that
they were nourished and did grow. Then with one conception of his mind, he
joined together the whole kind of animals and plants, and he saw them all to
agree in this, that they received nourishment and growth; but that the animals
exceeded the Plants, and excelled in this, that they had sense and perception:
and yet somewhat like thereunto seemed to be in the Plants, as that their
Flowers turned themselves to the Sun, and their Roots moved themselves to that
part which gave them nourishment, and other actions of this nature: whence it
appeared to him, that both Plants and Animals were one thing, in respect of one
thing common to both, which in one of them, was more perfect and complete, but
in the other was restrained by some impediment; like to water divided in two
parts, one parts whereof is congealed, another fluid. Thus far he concluded,
that the Plants and Animals were one thing. Then he did contemplat the bodies
which have neither sense nor nutrition, nor growth, such as the Stones, the
Earth, the Water, the Air and the Fire, all which he saw to be bodies having
dimensions, viz. longitude, latitude and profundity, and that they differed not
otherwise among themselves, then that some were colored others without color;
some hot, others cold, with other such differences; he saw also such as were
hot to become cold, and the cold to become hot: also he saw the water to be
converted into vapors, and again that of the vapors, water came to be
generat; and that whatever was burnt, to be turned into cinders, ashes, flame
and smoke, and that the smoke while it ascended, meeting with any stone-arch,
there it stuck together, and became like to other earthly substances: whence it
appeared to him, that all these things were one, although in some respect,
multiplicity had befallen them, in the same manner as to Animals and Plants.
Then considering with himself, that wherein he perceived the Plants and Animals
to be united, he saw, that necessarily there was some body like unto them,
having longitude, latitude and profundity, and to be either hot or cold, as one
of these other bodies, which neither have sense, nor receive nourishment; but
that they differed from them, in actions flowing therefrom, no otherwise, then
in respect of the organs which belong to the Plants and Animals; and perhaps
that those actions were not essential, but derived thereunto from some other
thing: so that if in the same manner, they were deferred unto those other
bodies, those should be like unto this. Therefore, considering this in its
essence, as denuded of these actions, which at first view, seemed thence to
flow, he faw it was no other thing, but a body of the same kind with them: from
this contemplation it appeared unto him, that all bodies were one thing both
these that had life, and these who had not, and these that moved, as these who
rested; but that it appeared, that actions proceeded from some of them, by
reason of the organs, which actions he knew not whether they were essential, or
otherwise derived unto them. In this state, he considered nothing in his mind
but bodies; and after this manner, he saw the whole fabric of the Creatures to
be one thing, which at the first view he thought to be many, without number or
end. And in this judgment and state he remained for some time: Then he
considered all bodies both living and without life, which once seemed to him
one thing, at other times many and innumerable: but he saw, that every one of
them necessarily had one of these two things in them, viz. that either they
aspired upwards, as smoke, flame and air, when detained under the water, or
that they moved contrariwise, i. e. downwards, as the water, and parts of the
Earth, and of Animals and Plants; but that none of those bodies are free from
one of these motions or rest, but when some impediment hinders which stop
their way, as when a stone descending, finds the surface of the earth so
hard, that it cannot pierce it; which if it could do, it would not desist from
its motion, as is manifest. Therefore, if thou lift it up, thou shall find it
resists thee, from its propension whereby it is carried downwards, seeking to
descend. In the same manner, the smoke in its ascending, is not reflected,
unless it meet with a hard Pend (or Arch) which restrains it, then it will
decline to the right and left hand, but where it has escaped that Pend, it
ascends, breaking through the air, which cannot restrain it. He saw also,
that the air, where a bag of Skins is filled with it and hard stopped, if thou
put it under the water, it will endeavor to ascend, and wrestleth against what
holds it under the water, nor cease it to do so, until it come to the
place of the air; i. e. when it has come out of the water; but then it
rests, that reluctance and propension to move upwards which first it had,
departing from it. Also he enquired, if he could find any body, which at any
time wanted both these motions, or the inclinations unto them; but he found
none among these bodies present with him: but this he sought, being desirous to
find it, that from thence he might perceive the nature of a body, as it is a
body, without any quality adjoined, of these which induce multiplicity: But
when this was difficult unto him, and having considered these bodies, which
among others were less subjected unto these qualities, he saw them no wise to
be destitute of one of these two qualities, which are called weightiness and
lightness: he then considered whether weightiness and lightness agreed unto a
body, as it is a body, or unto a notion superadded unto corporeity.

But it seemed unto him that they agreed unto a notion, superadded unto
corporeity; for if they belonged unto a body, as a body, there should no body
be found, in whom both of them were not: but if we find a heavy thing without
all lightness, and a light thing having no heaviness: and these things without
doubt are two bodies, in every one of which there is some notion, whereby it is
distinguished from the other, that is superadded unto corporeity; and that
notion is the thing whereby the one differs from the other, which if it were
not, they should be one thing in every respect. It was therefore manifest unto
him that the essence of both these, to wit, of a heavy and light thing, is
compounded of two notions, in the one of which they both agree, and that is the
notion of corporeity, the other is that, whereby the essence of the one
differs from the other: and that is weightiness (or gravity) in the one, and
lightness (or levity) in the other: which notions (whereby the one ascends,
the other descends) are joined unto the notion of corporeity.

Also thus he did contemplat the other bodies of things, both having and
wanting life; and he saw the true reason of every ones essence to be compounded
of a notion of corporeity, and of some other thing superadded unto corporeity:
whether that thing was one, or manifold: And so the forms of bodies appeared
unto him, according to their diversity. These were the first things which
became known to him of the spiritual world, seeing these forms are such as are
not perceived by sense; but are perceived some way by intellectual speculation.
And among things of this kind which appeared unto him, it appeared unto him
that the animal spirit (the seat whereof is the heart, and which we have above
explained) necessarily has some notion superadded unto corporeity, whereby it
was fit to do these wonderful works, out of the various manners of sensation,
and diverse ways of apprehending, and the diverse kinds of motions, and that
that notion was its form and difference, whereby it is distinguished from other
bodies, and that is it which the Philosophers call the Animal, i. e. the
sensitive soul: and so that thing which supplieth unto Plants, the vice of the
radical heat in animals, is somewhat proper unto them, which is their form, and
that which the Philosophers call the vegetative soul: And thus* that there is
somewhat proper unto all bodies of animat things (and these are they which are
found, beside Animals and Plants, in the world of generation and corruption) by
the power whereof every one of them performs the action proper thereunto, as
various sorts of motions, and kinds of sensible qualities, and that thing is
the form of every one of them, (and is that which Philosophers signify by the
name of Nature. And when out of this contemplation, it certainly appeared to
him, that the true essence of that Animal Spirit, to which his mind was
continually intent, was composed of a notion, of corporeity, and some other
notion added thereunto, and that the notion of this corporeity was common to it
with other bodies, but that the other notion joined thereunto, was peculiar
unto it. The notion of corporeity became of no esteem unto him, and he rejected
it, and his mind did altogether cleave unto that second notion, which is
expressed under the name of the Soul; the true reason (or manner) of which he
desired to attain, therefore he fixed his thoughts upon it, and made the
beginning of his contemplation, by considering all bodies, not as bodies, but
as having forms whence the properties necessarily flow, whereby they are
distinguished one from another: and instantly prosecuting this notion, and
comprehending it in mind, he saw the whole multitude of bodies to agree in some
form, whence some action, or actions proceeded; but he saw some part of that
multitude, although agreeing with all in that form, yet to have another form
superadded thereunto, from which some actions slowed: also, he saw some class
of that part, although agreeing with that part in the first and second form, to
be distinguished from them in a third superadded form, whence some actions
flowed; (e. g. all earthly bodies, as Earth, Stone Minerals, Plants, Animals,
and all other heavy bodies, they make up one multitude which agree in the same
form, from whence flows their motion downwards, so long as nothing hinders
them to descend, and when by any force they are moved upwards, and then are
permitted to themselves, by the force of their own form they tend downwards)
but some part of this kind, as Plants and Animals, although they agree with the
former multitude in that form, they have yet another form, from whom nutrition
and accretion do flow. But nutrition is, when that which is nourished places
somewhat in the room of that which has been taken from it, by converting some
matter having affinity with it, which it draws unto it self, into a substance
like to its own: But accretion is a motion unto the three dimensions of
longitude, latitude and profundity, according to a just proportion; and these
two actions are common to Plants and Animals, and without doubt arise from a
form common to both, and that is it which is called the vegetative Soul: but
some of this part, and particularly the Animals, although they have the first
and second forms common with that part, yet they have a third superadded form,
from whence come sensation and motion from place to place. Also he saw every
peculiar species of Animals, having some property whereby it is divided from
other species, and is distinguished and different from them; and he knew that
it flowed from some form proper thereunto, which was superadded to the notion
of its form, common to it with other Animals, and so the same to befall all
sorts of Plants. And it was manifest unto him, that as touching these sensible
Bodies which are in the world, of generation and corruption, the essence of
some of them is compounded of more notions superadded to the notion of
corporeity, and that of others is compounded of fewer: and he knew, that the
knowledge of the fewer, was more easy unto him then that of the more: and
first he enquired to find the knowledge of the true reason of the form of some
thing, whose essence consisted of fewer things. But he saw that the essences of
Animals and Plants consisted of many notions, because of the diverse kinds of
actions in them. So also as to the parts of the Earth, he saw some more simple
then others, and he proposed unto himself to contemplat the most simple forms
of all things, as much as possible; and so he observed, that the water was a
thing not of a manifold composition, because of the fewness of the actions
which proceeded from its form. The same he also observed of the Fire and Air:
and now formerly it had come into his mind, that of these four, some were
converted into one another, and therefore, that there was some one thing which
all did participate, and that was the notion of corporeity; but it behoved that
thing to be denuded of those notions, whereby these four were mutually
distinguished one from another, and that it neither moved upwards not
downwards, nor was hot, nor cold, nor moist, nor dry, because none of these
qualities is common to all bodies, and therefore it belonged not unto a body,
as a body; and if a body could be found, wherein were no other form superadded
to corporeity, none of these qualities should be in it, and it were impossible
that any quality should be in it, but that which agreed to all bodies, informed
with forms of whatsoever kind. Therefore, he considered with himself, if any
one adjunct could be found which was common to all bodies, both animat, and
inanimat; but he found nothing that agreed unto all bodies, but the notion of
extension unto the three dimensions which is found in all bodies, and that is
it which they call longitude, latitude and profundity; therefore he knew this
notion belonged to a body, as a body. But the existence of a body did not offer
it self to his sense, which had only this adjunct, so that it had not some
other notion superadded to the former extension, so as to be void of all other
forms. Then as concerning this extension unto three dimensions, he considered
whether that was so the notion of a body, as that no other was in it, or if the
matter was otherwise. But he saw beyond this extension, another notion, which
was that wherein this extension did exist, and that this extension could not
alone subsist by it self, nor could that which was extended subsist by it self
without extension. And the same he considered further with himself, in some of
these sensible bodies endued with forms; as (e. g.) the clay, and he saw, that
when any figure was made of it, as spherical, that it had longitude, latitude
and profundity, according unto some proportion; then if that same Sphere were
taken, and were converted into a Quadrat or oval Figure, that the longitude,
latitude and profundity came to be changed, and to have another proportion then
formerly they had, but that the clay is the same and is not changed, but that
of necessity it has longitude, latitude and profundity, of whatsoever
proportion it be, and that it cannot wholly want them: but that out of their
successive mutation therein, it was manifest to him, that they had a notion
different from the clay; but because it could not be altogether destitute of
them, it was clear to him that they were of its essence. So it appeared to him
out of this contemplation, that a body, as a body, is really composed of two
notions, the one whereof supplyeth the room of the clay in this example, as to
its spherical shape; the other sustaineth the place of the longitude, latitude
and profundity in the spherical square, or any other figure; and that no body
can be understood, but what is made up of these two notions, and that the one
of them cannot subsist without the other; but that the form which could be
changed, and successively put on various figures (and that was extension) did
resemble the form in all bodies endued with forms: but that which remained in
the same state (and that was it, which in the former example supplied the room
of the clay) did resemble the notion of corporeity, which was in all bodies,
endued with forms; but this which is in the place of the clay in this example,
is that which the Philosophers call the matter, and the hyle, which is
altogether naked of forms.

And when his contemplation had reached thus far, and had somewhat departed
from sensible things, and that he had now approached to the borders of the
intellectual World, he was somewhat astonished, and he inclined unto that of
the sensible world, to which he was accustomed: Therefore he retired a little,
and left the body in kind, because it was a thing which his sense could not
conceive, nor could he comprehend it; and he did take unto his consideration
the most simple of the sensible bodies which he saw, and these were the four
which his speculation had been formerly occupied about. And first, he
considered the Water and he saw, when it was permitted to be in that state
which its form required, that a sensible cold appeared therein, and a
propension to move downward, but when it was warmed with the fire or heat of
the Sun, that first the cold went from it, but the propension to move downwards
remained; but when it was vehemently heated, that then also its propension to
move downward departed therefrom, and that it inclined upwards, and so both
these qualities wholly departed from it, which always flowed from it and its
form. Nor was there any thing further known to him of its form, but that from
thence proceeded these two actions, and when these two actions had forsaken it,
the reason of the form was altogether taken away, and the wotery form departed
from that body, when actions flowed therefrom which were proper to arise from
another form, and that another form did arise which was not in it before, and
actions flowed therefrom, the nature of which was not to proceed therefrom,
while it was endued with the former.

But he knew that it was necessary, that every thing which is newly produced,
needs a producer, and from this contemplation, some universal and distinst
impression was made in his mind, of the effector of that form. Then he directed
his speculation further unto these forms, the knowledge of which he had first
attained, presenting them one after another. And he saw that they all existed
of the new, and necessarily stood in need of an effector. Then he considered
the essences of the forms, and he saw them to be nothing else, then such a
disposition of the body from which these actions flow; e. g. in water, which
when it is vehemently heated, it is disposed to move upwards, and is made fit
thereunto, and that disposition is its form: for there is nothing here but a
body, and somethings flowing therefrom, which are perceived by the sense, which
formerly did not exist, as the qualities and motion, and the effector which
produced them, after they did not exist. But the aptitude of the body to other
motions more then to others, is its disposition and form: and the same appeared
unto him of all other forms. Also it was manifest to him, that the actions
which flowed from them, did not really belong to them, but to the effector, who
by those actions produced those attributes which are ascribed unto them: (and
that notion which appeared unto him, is that which is spoken by the messenger
of God, I am his hearing, by which he hears, and his seeing, by which be
sees; and in the text of the Alcoran, [Cap. Al. Anphal.] You have not killed
them, but God has killed them; and thou have not cast them down, but God has
cast them down.) But when he came to the knowledge of this Effector (or
Efficient Cause) which appeard to him generally and indistinctly, a vehement
desire siezed on him to know the same distinctly. But because he had not
withdrawn himself as yet from the sensible world, he began to seek after this
voluntary Agent among the sensible things: nor yet did he know whether it was
one or many: therefore he considered all bodies present, to wit, these to which
formerly his thoughts were fixed continually: and he saw that all of them were
sometime generated, and sometime corrupted, and if he saw any of them not
wholly corrupted, he saw parts of them corrupted, e. g. as to water and earth,
he saw the parts of both corrupted by the fire, and also he saw the air so
corrupted with the greatness of the cold, that from thence snow came to be
generated, and that again from that came water: and also as to other bodies
present, he saw none of them which did not exist of the new, and needed not a
voluntary Agent: therefore he rejected all these things, and turned his
thoughts unto the heavenly bodies.

Thus far by his contemplation he had advanced, about the end of the fourth
septenary of his age, that is, in the space of 28. years. Now he knew that the
Heavens and all the Stars therein, were bodies extended according to the three
dimensions of longitude, latitude, and profundity; and that none of them wanted
this property, and whatever wanted not this property was a body; therefore that
they were all bodies. Then he considered with himself if they were infinitely
extended, and did proceed unto a perpetual longitude, latitude, and profundity,
without end, or if they had periods, and were confined with limits, where they
ended, so that there could be no further extension: but here he was a little
astonished: then by the force of his apprehension, and sagacity of
understanding, he saw that an infinite body was an absurd thing, and
impossible, and a notion which could not be understood; and this sentence was
confirmed unto him by many arguments which occurred; and that he so reasoned
with himself, Surely this heavenly body is finite, from that part which is
nearest unto me, and obvious to my sense. This is without all doubt, because I
perceive it with the sight; but also from that other part which is opposed to
this part, of which this doubt in me has arisen, I know that it is impossible
to be infinitely extended. For I conceive two lines beginning from this part
which has an end, which in the profundity of the body, according to its
extension, should go forth infinitely, then if I should suppone, that from the
one of these two lines a great part is cut off, on that side whose extremity is
finite, and then take that of it which rmaineth, and let the extremity of it,
wherein the off-cutting is made, be applied unto the extremity of that line,
which has nothing cut off from it; and let that line which has somewhat cut
off it, be made parallel to that line from which nothing is cut off, the
understanding going alone with them unto that part which is said to be
infinite: and thou shall either find two lines infinitely extended, so that none
of them is shorter then another, and so that line from which somewhat is cut
off, shall be equal to the other from which nothing is cut off, which is
absurd. Or if it do not go forth continually with it, but be broke off of its
progress on this side, and cease to be co-extended with it, then it shall be
finite, and when that part shall be returned unto it, which was formerly cut
off, which was finite, the whole shall be finite: then it shall not be shorter
then that other line from which nothing is cut off, nor shall exceed it,
therefore it shall be equal unto it: but this is flnite, therefore that also
shall be finite: and therefore the body in which such lines are designed is
finite; for every body in which these lines can be designed, is finite; but in
every body these lines can be designed: therefore if we determine an infinite
body, we determine that which is absurd and impossible.

And when by his excellent ingine, which he had stirred up to excogitate such
an argument, he was certain that the body of the Heavens was finite, he would
know of what form it was, and how it was bounded with the ambient surfaces: and
first having contemplated the Sun, and the Moon, and the other Stars, he saw
that they all had their rising from the East, and their setting in the West,
and that these which passed through by the Vertical Point described the greater
Circle, but these which declined from the Vertical Point, Northward, or
Southward, he saw that they described a lesser Circle in it: and that the
Circle of every one, as it was more remote from the Vertical Point, toward any
of the parts, was less then the Circle that was more near to the Vertical
Point, so that the smallest Circles, in which the stars moved, were two
Circles, the one of which is about the South-pole, to wit, the Circle of the
star Sohail (i. e. Canopi) the other about the North Pole, to wit, the Circle
Alphazkadain. And whereas he dwelt under the Aequinoctial Circle (as we first
showed) as these Circles were right (or perpendicular) to his Horizon, and
after the same manner both South-wards and North-wards, and both the Poles
together appeared unto him; also he observed, when any star arose in a greater
Circle, and another in a lesser, so that they arose together, that their going
down was also at the same time, and this so did fall out in all the stars, and
at all times, whence it appeared unto him that the Heavens were of a round
figure; which was further confirmed unto him from what he saw of the return of
the Sun, Moon, and other Stars unto the East, after their setting in the West,
and also that they all appeared unto him in the same proportion of magnitude
both at their rising, and when they came to the midst of the Heavens, and at
their setting: for if their motion were any other then Circular, of necessity
at some times they should be nearer to his sight then at other times, and if it
were so, their dimensions and magnitudes should appear unto him different, and
he should see that when they were nearer, they should appear bigger then when
further off: but when it was nothing so, it was thence manifest to him, of the
roundness of its figure: nor ceased he to observe the motion of the Moon, and
he saw her to be moved from the east to the west, and that the motions of the
Planets were the like; until at last a great part of the Science of Astronomy
was manifest unto him: it appeared also unto him that their motions were in
many Spheres, all contained in one, which is the supreme, and which moves all
the rest from the East to the West in the space of a day and of a night: but
the way of his progress in this Science were long to explain, and it is
divulged in many Books: nor is any thing more required to our purpose, then
what we have brought.

And when he had advanced thus far in knowledge, he found that the whole
Celestial Orb, and whatever is contained, is as one thing, compounded of parts
joined together, and that all the bodies he had formerly considered, as the
earth, the water, the air, the plants, the animals, and all the rest of such
things were contained there in, and passed not its limits; and that the whole
of it, as near as could be, did resemble some individual animal, and the stars
shining therein did answer unto the senses of the animal, and the various
Spheres in contiguous to one another, did resemble the members of an animal (or
living creature) and what was in it, of the world of generation, and
corruption, to resemble the things in the belly of the animal, as the diverse
excrements and humors, of which also frequently animals are generat, as they
are generat in the greater world. But when it appeared unto him, that all
theseethings were indeed as some one subsistent, which needed a voluntary
Agent, and many parts of it seemed unto him one thing, in the same kind of
contemplation, as the bodies in the generable and corruptible world seemed one:
He proposed unto himself to contemplate the world generally, if it was any
thing, which was generate of the new, after it had not been, and had come forth
from privation into existence, or if it was a thing, which did ever exist, and
which privation had no ways preceded: and he doubted greatly of this matter,
and none of these opinions prevailed with him: and that because when he
proposed to himself to believe an eternity, many objections came before him of
the impossibility of an infinite existent, because the existence of an infinite
body seemed impossible unto him; and after the same manner he saw, that that
which wanted not accidents produced of the new, is also produced of the new,
for it cannot be said to be before them, but what cannot be said to be before
the accidents newly produced, is also it self newly produced: Also when he
proposed to himself to believe a new production thereof, other objections came
before him; and that because he saw that the notion of a new production of a
thing, after it did not exist, could not be understood, except he supposed a
time that was before it, but that time is of the number of the things which are
of the world, and inseparable therefrom, therefore the world cannot be
understood posterior unto time: and so he also reasoned with himself, if the
world be produced of the new, it could not be without a producer, but this
producer who has produced it, why did he now produce it, but not before? was
it for any thing that hindered him? but there was nothing besides him: or was it
because of some change that had happened to his essence? if so, what has
produced this change? nor ceased he to consider these things with himself for
some years, and many arguments offered themselves unto him, so that none of
those opinions did preponderate with him. But when this was difficult unto him,
he began to think with himself what necessarily followed both these opinions:
for perhaps the consequence of both opinions should be the same; and he saw,
that if he supposed the world to be produced of the new, and to have had an
existence after privation, necessarily it would follow, that the world by its
own power could not come forth into existence, but of necessity required an
Effector, to produce it into act, but that Effector could be perceived by none
of the senses; for if it could be perceived by any of the senses, it should be
some body, but if it were some body, it should belong to the things of the
world, and so it should have existence of the new, and should need somewhat to
produce it of the new, and if this second producement were also a body, it
should need a third to produce it, and that third a fourth, and so it should
proceed infinitely, which is absurd; and therefore the world must of necessity
have an Effector, which is not a body, and it not being a body, there is no way
to perceive it by any of the senses (for the five senses apprehend nothing but
bodies, or what adhere unto bodies) but when it cannot be perceived by sense,
neither can it be comprehended by imagination (for imagination is nothing else
but a representation of the forms of things perceived by sense, after the
things themselves are absent) and seeing it is not a body, nor can any bodily
properties be attributed unto it; but the first property of a body is that
extension into longitude, latitude, and profundity, but this is far from that,
and from all the adjuncts of bodies following this property; and seeing it is
the efficient cause of the world; no doubt it has power over the world, and
knows it. Shall not he know who has created? for he is most high in
knowledge, and knows all things.

He saw also, that if he believed the eternity of the World and that it ever
was, as now it is, and that no privation went before, that necessarily it
should follow, that motion was from eternity, without any period, as to its
beginning, seeing no rest went before whence to take its beginning: but every
motion necessarily requires some mover, and that mover shall either be some
power diffused in some body, to wit, in the body of the thing moved, or in some
other body without it; or some power that is not diffused in any body, nor
spread forth therein. But now every power diffused in any body, and dispersed
through the same, is also divided by the division thereof, and is doubled by
its doubling; e. g. as heaviness in a stone which moves it downwards, if the
stone be divided into two parts, also the heaviness shall be divided, and if
another part equal thereunto be added, also another part of heaviness shall be
added unto it; and if it could be that the stone could grow infinite, also this
heaviness should grow infinite; and if the stone should come to a certain
measure of greatness, and should there remain, also the heaviness should come
to a certain period, and should there remain. But now it is demonstrated, that
every body is necessarily finite, and therefore every power inherent (or
insisted) in a body, is also finite. But if we can find some power, which
produces some infinite effect, that shall be a power which is not in a body:
but we find, that the Heavens are moved with a perpetual motion, which has no
period nor cessation; if we affirm that it is eternal, without beginning,
therefore it necessarily follows, that the power which moves it is neither
in that body, nor in any other body without it, and therefore that it is
something abstract from bodies, and which can be described by no bodily
adjuncts. But it was manifest to him, from his former contemplation of the
generable and corruptible World, that the true reason of the existence of every
body, is in respect of its form, which is its disposition to various motions,
but that its existence which it has, in respect of the matter, is very small,
and which can hardly be conceived; and therefore, the existence of the whole
World is in respect of its disposition to the motion of this Mover, which is
free from all matter, and all bodily adjuncts, abstracted from every thing
which the sense can apprehend, or unto which, imagination can find out any way:
And seeing he is the Effector of the motions of the Heavens, (although differing
in kind) so that they are free from all difference, innovation (as of
themselves) and cessation; without doubt, he has power over them, and has the
knowledge of them. And in this manner, his speculation reached unto the same
Butt, which it reached unto in the first manner: not in this respect was it
hurtful unto him, that he doubted whether the World was anciently or newly,
when on both parts, the existence of an incorporeal Effector was manifest to
him, and which was joined to no body, nor separate from any, and which was
neither within any body, nor without it: for conjunction and separation to be
within or without, are all the adjuncts of bodies, whereof he is free.

And seeing the matter of every body needs some form, whereas it cannot
subsist but there by, nor really exist without it; but that the form has no
existence really, but from this voluntary Agent, it was clear unto him, that
all things existent did need this Agent for their existence, and that none of
them had existence but by his help, and therefore, that that was the cause of
them, and they were the effect (or work) thereof, whether they be new, by a
privation going before their existence, or whether they have no beginning, in
respect of time, nor that any privation went before them: for in both states,
they were the effect, and needed an efficient from which they depend, as to
their essence; so that they can neither remain, if it remain not; nor exist, if
it exist not; nor could be from eternity, if it were not from eternity, but
that it needs not them, but is free from them. And how should it be
otherwise? for it is demonstrated, that his power and virtue is infinite, but
that all bodies and whatever adhereth unto them, or any way depends from
them, are finite and terminated; and therefore the whole world, and whatever is
in it, whether it be the Heavens or the Earth, or the Stars, and whatever is
among them, either above or below, is his work and creation, and are posterior
thereunto in nature, although they were not in time; as if thou take any body
in thy hand, and then movest thy hand, that body necessarily shall move,
consequentially at the motion of thy hand, with a motion which is posterior in
nature unto the motion of the hand, although not in time, but that both begin
together; So this whole world is effected and created by this Efficient without
time, whose commandment is, when he would have a thing done, that he say to it,
Be thou, and it is.

And when he saw all things existent to be his work, he considered them again
having a respect unto the power of the Efficient, and with an admiration of so
rare a workmanship, so exact wisdom and profound knowledge, and of a few things
of them which did exist, much more of many; these prints of wisdom and marvels
of workmanship were conspicuous to him, by which he was affected with great
admiration, and he was sure, that all these things flowed not, but from a
voluntary agent, which was of highest perfection, yea, above all perfection, to
whom the weight of an Atome could not be unknown, whether in the Heavens or in
the Earth, nor any thing lesser or greater then it.

Then he considered all the kinds of living creatures, how he had given to
every one of them the sabrick of the body, and then taught it to use the same.
For if he had not taught the living creature to use these members he had given
it, to find out the advantages unto which it was appointed, it should perceive
no benefit thereby, but be burdened therewith: Hence therefore he knew, that he
was the most bountiful and most merciful of all. Then when among the things
that did exist, he observed any thing which had ought of form, or beauty, or
perfection, or power, or whatever excellency it had, in the kind of excellency
he considered it with himself, and he knew it proceeded from the influence of
that voluntary agent of excellent glory, and from his existence, and by his
operation; therefore he knew that to be the greater, because it was therein by
nature, and that it was more perfect, more absolute, more beautiful, more
excellent, and more lasting, and that there was no proportion betwixt these
things which are in him, and the things which are in others: Neither ceased he
to observe all the attributes of perfection, and he saw that they all belonged
to him, and proceeded from him, and that we was worthy of them, above any other
to whom they should be ascribed. Also, he searched out all the attributes of
defects, and he saw him to be free of them, and separate from them; and how
could he not be free of them? For what other motion is there of defect, but
mere privation, or what depends therefrom? And how can he have any fellowship
or mixture with privation, who is a simple being, of a necessary existence in
himself, which gives existence to every existent thing, and besides whom there
is no existence? For he is the Existence, he is the Absolution, he is the
Perfection, he is the Beauty, he is the Splendour, he is the Power, he is the
Knowledge, and he, he, and all things perish beside him. Thus far his knowledge
had brought him, about the end of the fifth septenary from his birth, that is,
in the space of five and thirty years: and the consideration of this Agent was
so fixed in his mind, that it hindered him to think upon other things beside
him, and he did forget that contemplation of the natural existence of things
wherein he was, and he ceased to enquire into them, until he came to that,
that his sight could not fall upon any thing, but presently he beheld in it
some prints of the operation of this Agent, so that presently he turned his
thoughts to the worker, passing by the work, so that his study was exceedingly
fixed upon him, and his heart was wholly abstracted from the inferior sensible
world, being wholly addicted to the superior intellectual world. And when he
had attained the knowledge of this supreme Being, and permanent Existence, of
whose existence there is no cause, but that is the cause of the existence of
all things; he would know by what means this knowledge came unto him, and by
what faculty he did apprehend this existent: therefore he searched into all his
senses, which are the hearing, the seeing, the smelling, the tasting and
toutching, and he saw, that all these apprehended nothing but the body, or what
is in the body: (for the hearing apprehends sounds, and these arise from the
agitation of the air, by the collision of bodies; the sight apprehends
colors, the smell odors, the taste savours, and the toutch apprehends
temperatures, and hardness, and softness, roughness and smoothness; so also the
fantasy apprehends nothing, but as it has length, breadth, and depth, but
these things which are apprehended are all the adjuncts of a body, and these
senses apprehend no other thing, because they are faculties diffused through
bodies, and divisible according to their divisions; so they apprehend nothing,
but the body subject to division: for this faculty, seeing it is diffused
through a divisible body, it is necessary, that when it apprehends any thing,
it be divided according to its divisions; therefore every faculty belonging to
the body (or incite in the body) can apprehend nothing but a body, or what is
in a body.) But now it was clear, that this Being of necessar existence, is
free from all bodily adjuncts in any respect, and therefore, that there is no
way of apprehending the same, but by something which is not a body, not a
faculty inherent in the body, nor any way depending from bodies, neither in a
body, nor without a body, nor joined to a body, nor separate from a body. And
now it was manifest to him, that he had apprehended it by its essence, and that
he had a firm knowledge thereof: and thence it was manifest to him, that his
own essence, by which he did apprehend that, was somewhat incorporeal, to which
no bodily adjuncts agreed, and whatever corporeity he apprehended from his
outward (or exterior) part, was not the true reason of his own essence, but the
true reason of his own essence was that, by which he did apprehend that
absolute necessary existent Being.

Therefore, when he knew that his essence was not this bodily thing which he
apprehended with his senses, and which the skin encompassed, his body seemed
somewhat altogether contemptible unto him, and he addicted himself wholly to
the contemplating that noble essence, by which he did apprehend that noble and
necessary existent Being, and by his essence he did consider that noble
Being, whether it could perish, or be corrupted and evanish, or were of
perpetual duration: but he saw corruption and dissolution to be of the adjuncts
of bodies, and to come to pass by putting off one form, and putting on
another; as when Water becomes Air, and when Air becomes Water, and when
Herbs become Earth or Ashes, and when the Earth is turned into Plants, (for
this is the notion of corruption.) But that there can be no corruption supposed
of that which is not a body, nor has need of a body to its subsistence, but is
wholly separated from bodily things.

And when he was sure that his essence could not be corrupted, he would know
what the condition of it was to be, when it should cast off the body, and be
separated therefrom; but now he knew that it did nto cast it off, until it was
no longer an instrument fit for it: therefore, considering all his apprehensive
faculties, he saw that every one of them sometime was in power, sometime in
act; as (e. g.) when the eye winks, or turns it self from a visible object,
it is in power apprehensive; (but that is apprehensive in power, which does not
now apprehend, but can afterward apprehend) but when it opens it self, and
turns it self to a visible object, it becomes apprehensive in act, (but by
that which is called apprehending in act, is signified that which now
apprehends) and every one of these faculties may be one time in power,
another time in act; and if any of these faculties never apprehend in act, as
long as it is only apprehensive in power, it does not desire to apprehend any
particular thing because as yet it has no knowledge of it; as in him who is
born blind; but if it once apprehend in act, and be afterward apprehensive in
power, so long as it remains in power, it desires to apprehend in act,
because it knows that apprehensible object, and is intent on it, and leans
toward it; as when one has at any time enjoyed his sight, and then becomes
blind, for he does not cease to desire visible objects; and how much the more
perfect, splendid and fair that is which is apprehended, its desire shall be
still the greater, and the grief shall be the greater for the want of it:
therefore, his grief who is deprived of the sight which he had, after he has
seen, is greater then his grief who is deprived of the smelling, because these
things which the sight apprehends, are more perfect and beautiful, then the
things which the smelling apprehends: therefore, if there be any thing which
has no end of perfection, of beauty, of comeliness, of glory, nor no period,
but is above all glory, and beauty, so that there is no perfection, glory,
beauty or comeliness which does not proceed and flow from it, who is deprived of
the apprehension of that thing after he has had the knowledge of it, no doubt,
so long as he is deprived thereof, he shall be affected with an infinite grief,
even as he who perpetually apprehends it, shall thence perceive a continual
pleasure, a perpetual happiness, an infinite joy and gladness.

But now it was manifest to him, that unto that necessary existent Being, all
the attributes of perfection ought to be ascribed, and that he is separate and
free from all attributes of defect: he was also certain in himself, that that
thing by which man comes unto the apprehension of him, is a thing which is not
like unto bodies, nor is corrupted with their corruption: and hence it
appeared, that he who is endued with that essence which is not fit for such an
apprehension, when he puts off the body by death, or he who while he used
the body, never knew this necessary existent Being, nor was joined unto him,
nor heard any thing of him; when he goes out of the body, he is not joined
unto that Being, nor is not grieved for want of him (for as concerning all the
bodily faculties, the body perishing, they cease, nor desire they these things,
unto which these faculties are carried, nor incline they to them, nor are they
affected with grief for want of them; and this is the state of all the beasts
whether they have the figure of a man, or not) Or he, who in the time while he
used the body, did know this being, and had knowledge of how great perfection,
greatness, dominion and power it was, but that he has turned himself away
therefrom, and has followed the affections of his mind until death took hold
of him, while in that state, so that he be deprived of that vision, and yet
labors with the desire of it; and therefore, he remains affected with a
continual torment and infinite grief, whether after a long weariness he is to be
delivered from that grief, and to come unto that vision which he formerly
desired, or is to remain for ever in these torments, as in his lifetime he has
been disposed to either of them, while he was in the state of the body: Or he,
who has known that necessary existent Being before he put off the body, and
has addicted himself wholly thereunto, and who has his thoughts continually
fixed upon the glory, beauty and splendour thereof, and has not turned himself
therefrom until death seized on him, while he was in the state of beholding
him, and in the act of perceiving him, and that he, when he shall go out of the
body, shall remain in perpetual pleasure and continual felicity, and joy, and
gladness, for the continued vision of that necessary existent Being, and the
integrity of that vision from all impurity and mixture, and that all sensible
things shall depart from him, unto which these bodily faculties were intent,
which in respect unto that state are torments, and evils, and impediments.

And when the perfection of his own essence became known unto him, and that the
pleasure thereof consisted in the vision of that necessary existent Being, to
wit, in the actual vision continued for ever, so as not to turn himself from it
for one moment, and so death should take hold of him in that state of actual
vision, whereby his joy should be continued, no grief making an interruption of
it (which is that which Aljonaid, that Doctor and Priest of the Supphii, being
near unto death signified, when he said to his neighbors, This is the time
when men should begin to say, God is the greatest, and that he admonished them
to be exceedingly given to prayer, and know this. Then he began to think with
himself, how this actual vision might be continued, so that no turning from it
might befall him; and for some time he fixed his thoughts on that Being, but
he could not continue, but that some sensible object presented it self unto his
sight, or the voice of some living creature pierced his ears, or some phantasm
did occur unto him* or some grief in some member seized on him, or hunger or
thirst came upon him, or cold or heat, or he needed to rise to disburden his
nature, so that his meditation was hindered, and he departed from the state
wherein he was; so that he could not but hardly, and after great difficulty,
return unto that state of vision wherein he first was, and he feared, lest he
should be prevented by sudden death, whilst he was in this state of aversion,
and should fall into the eternal misery and grief of separation: And when this
state troubled him, nor could he find a remedy, he began to consider all the
kinds of living creatures, and to behold their actions, and to what things they
gave pains, if perhaps he could observe, that any of them perceived this
Being, and moved toward it, that by them he might learn somewhat that might
be for his safety: but he saw them all taken up in seeking their food, and
fulfilling their desires of meat, drink and lust, and how they covered
themselves with a shadow, or warmed themselves: and that they diligently gave
themselves to these things both night and day, even to the time of their death,
and going out of this life; nor saw he any of them to decline from this design,
or to be careful about any other thing at any time. And hence it was manifest
unto him, that they knew not that Being, or had any desire of it, nor sought
any knowledge of it by any means, but that they did all tend unto privation, or
some state like unto privation; and when he concluded this of animals, he saw
it was more fit that he should conclude the same of Plants, who had not these
apprehensions but in part, which the animals had; for when that which is of a
more perfect apprehension cannot attain this knowledge, much less can that
attain it which is of a less perfection; also when he saw, that all the
actions of Plants were nothing beyond nutrition and generation.

Then he considered the Stars and Spheres, and he saw that they had all motions
that were orderly, and that they were all carried about with a course fitly
disposed; he saw also that they were bright and shining, and were far from
undergoing any alteration, or corruption; and he did exceedingly suspect, that
beside their bodies they had essences, which might know that necessary existent
being; and that these intelligent essences were like to his own intelligent
essence, and were neither bodies, nor insite in bodies: And how could they not
have essences free from corporeity, when he also had an essence, who was so
weak, and who had such need of sensible things? for he was of the number of
corruptible bodies; but though defects of that sort were in him, yet this
hindered not but that he had an essence free from bodies, and incorruptible;
and hence also it appeared unto him that the heavenly bodies were much more so,
and he knew that they understood that necessary existent being, and did behold
it in a perpetual act; because nothing like unto these impediments (which
hindered him from continual vision, by sensible things falling in,) was to be
found in heavenly bodies.

Then he began to consider with himself, for what cause he of all the sorts of
animals was endued with this essence by which he resembled the Celestial
Bodies: but now it was formerly manifest to him how the Elements were, and how
they were changed into one another, that whatever was not above the surface of
the earth, remained not in the same form, whereas generation and corruption
continually succeeded one another, and that most of these bodies were mixed and
compounded of contrary things, and therefore tended to corruption, but that
nothing was found among them which was pure; but what was nearest among them to
purity and simplicity, without any mixture, that was furthest off from
corruption; as the body of Gold, and of the Iacynth; and the heavenly bodies
are simple, pure, and therefore furthest off from corruption: nor does any
succession of forms besal in them. Here also it was manifest to him, that as
touching bodies in the generable and corruptible world, some had the reason of
their essence consisting of some one form super added unto the notion of
corporeity, as the four Elements, others whose essential reason consisted of
more forms, as the animals, and the plants; and that whose essential reason
consisted of the fewest forms, had the fewest actions, and the greatest
distance from life: but if a thing were altogether destitute of form, that
there was no way in it to life, but it was in a state like unto privation: but
that whose subsistence of the essential reason consisted of more forms, had the
more actions, and a more ready entrance into the state of life, but if that
form were so disposed, that there were no way of separating it from the matter
to which it belonged, then its life should be very manifest, stable, and
lively: but that which is destitute of all form is the hyle and matter, nor is
any life in it, but it is like unto privation. And that which subsisteth by one
form, is the four Elements, which are in the first degree of existence in the
generable and corruptible world, and other things are compounded of them,
having more forms; but these Elements are of a weak life, seeing they move but
one way, also they are of a weak life, because every one of them has a
contrary, in manifest opposition to them, which resists them in that
whereunto their nature incline, and labors to spoil them of their form, and
therefore their essence is infirm and weak: but that the plants are of a
stronger life; and the animals are yet of a more manifest life then they; and
that because if there be any thing among these compounds, wherein the nature of
one Element has dominion, that, because of the power it has therein, does
overcome the nature of the other Elements, and does abolish their strength, so
that the compound is in the power of that Element which has dominion, and
therefore it is disposed but unto a small portion of life, as the Element it
self is: but when among these compounds there is that, wherein the nature of
any one Element has not dominion, then all are of an equal temperament
therein, and of equal virtue, so that the one does not weaken the virtue of
another, more then that other does of that one; but they work upon one another
in an equal operation, nor is the operation of one Element observable more then
the operation of another, and it is far from being like unto any one of the
Elements, but that it is, as if nothing were contrary to its form, that in this
manner becomes fit for life, and the greater that this equality be, and the
more perfect, and the further from inclining unto the other part, it is so far
the further from having a contrary, and its life is the more perfect. And
whereas the animal spirit, the seat whereof is in the heart, is of a most equal
temperature, (for it is more subtle then earth and water, and more gross then
fire and air) it has the manner of a midst (or medium) contrary unto none of
the Elements, in any observable manner of contrariety, and so it is disposed
unto the form which does constitute an animal: and that which follows he saw
to be this, to wit, that the most equal in temperature among these animal
spirits, was disposed to the most perfect life, in the generable and
corruptible world, and that it may near be said, concerning that spirit, that
there is no contrary unto its form, and therefore that it is like unto these
heavenly bodies, which have nothing contrary unto their form, and that
therefore they are the spirit of that animal which has the most perfect life,
because it is indeed in the midst of the elements, neither simply moving it
self upwards nor downwards: and if it could be placed in the midst of that
space which lies betwixt the center, and that supreme place whither the fire
reaches, and that no corruption should befall it, there it should fix it self,
nor should it desire to move either upwards or downwards, but if it were
locally moved, it should be moved about the middle, as the heavenly bodies are
moved, and if it were moved in one place, it should be moved about it self, and
should be of a Spherical Figure, seeing it could not be otherwise: and therefore
that it was very like unto the heavenly bodies. And when he considered the
properties of the animals, and saw not one among them, of which he could
suspect that it had the knowledge of this necessary existent being, but that
he knew that as to his own essence he did know it, thence he concluded that he
was an animal that had a spirit of an equal temperature, like unto all the
heavenly bodies, and it was manifest unto him, that he differed in kind from
all the sorts of animals, and that he was made for another end, and appointed
unto some great thing, unto which no other animal was fitted, and it was enough
to signify his Nobility, that the vilest part of himself, to wit, his bodily
part, was likest of all others unto the heavenly substances, which are without
the generable and corruptible world, free from the accidents of defect, and
change, and alteration. But that his best part was that thing by which he did
know that necessary existent being; and this intelligent thing behoved to be
some heroic and divine thing, which changed not, and was not obnoxious to
corruption, and to which is not to be attributed any of these things which are
attributed unto the body, and that it cannot be apprehended by any of the
senses, nor by imagination, and whose knowledge is not acquired by any other
instrument, then by it self, but that it comes unto it by its own help, and
that it is the knowing, the knowable, and the knowledge, and the scient, the
science, and the scibile, nor that in any of these was there any thing
different, seeing diversity and separation belong to the attributes of bodies,
and are the adjuncts of them, but this was neither a body, nor any attribute of
a body, nor any thing adherent unto a body.

And when the way was manifest unto him, whereby it was proper to him to be
like unto the heavenly bodies, he saw it did necessarily belong to him to
resemble them, and to imitate their actions, and that with all his strength he
should endeavor to be like unto them. And also he saw by his more noble part,
by which he knew that necessary existent being, that there was in himself some
similitude thereof, as he was separated from the attributes of the body, as
that necessary existent being was separated from them. He saw also that it was
his duty to labor to acquire the properties thereof, by what way soever he
could, and to put on his qualities, and to imitate his actions, and to be
diligent in doing his will, and committing his affairs to him, and to acquiesce
in his heart in all his appointments, both as to the outward and inward, so as
he might rejoice in him, although his body should be afflicted with grief, and
should hurt him, yea, although altogether he should lose his bodily part.

He saw moreover, that he resembled other sorts of animals, in his vilest part,
which was of the generable and corruptible world, to wit, in the obscure and
gross body, which required diverse sorts of sensible things from him, as meat,
drink, and marriage. Also he saw that his body was not created in vain, nor
joined to him for no end, and that it belonged to him to provide for it, and
fitly to keep it: but that he could not perform this care but by some action
answering unto the actions of other animals. But the actions which seemed
necessary unto him, had a threefold respect; for they were either an action by
which he did resemble the unreasonable animals, or some action whereby he did
resemble the heavenly bodies or some action whereby he did resemble that
necessary existent being: for the first assimilation was necessary to him, as
he had an obscure and gross body, consisting of distinct members, and various
faculties, and motions of diverse sorts; The second assimilation was necessary
unto him, as he had an animal spirit, the seat whereof was in the heart, and
which was the beginning of the whole body, and of the faculties contained
therein: Then the third assimilation was necessary to him, as he was himself,
i. e. as he was that essence by which he could know that necessary existent
being. And this was first of all certain unto him, that his happiness and
freedom from misery was placed in the perpetual vision of that necessary
existent being, so as to be in that state, as not to be turned away (or
averted) therefrom for one moment.

Then he considered the ways whereby this continuation might be acquired, and
his contemplation thence gathered, that he was to exercise himself in these
three sorts of similitude. And as to the first similitude, that from the same
he attained nothing of this vision, but that it rather drew him forth to
another thing, and it was an hinderance to him, when he exercised himself in
sensible things: for all sensible things are as a vail interposed unto this
vision, yet this assimilation is needful to preserve the animal spirit, whereby
the second assimilation is acquired, which is with heavenly bodies, and after
this manner it is necessarily required, although it be not free from that hurt:
but as to the second conformity, that thereby is acquired a great part of the
continued vision, but yet such a vision as wherein there is a mixture, whereas
every one who by that manner of vision continually sees, sees also together
his own essence, and looks into that, as shall be afterward declared: but as
to the third conformity, that thereby the perfect vision is attained, and the
sincere attention, having no respect in any manner, but unto that necessary
existent being, whereas his essence is absent from him who sees this vision,
and evanisheth, and becomes as nothing; as also all the other essences,
whether many or few, except the essence of that one, true, necessary, existent,
great, high, and powerful being.

And when it was manifest to him, that the sum of his desires consisted in this
third conformity, but that this is not acquired but after exercise, and pains
given for a long time, to the second conformity, and this space could not be
continued, but by the first conformity, which although it was necessary, yet he
knew, of it self it was an impediment, though it was an help by accident: he
restrained his mind, that he permitted unto himself no part of the first
conformity, but as much as necessity required, and that was in that largeness,
as less sufficed not to the preservation of the animal spirit; and he saw two
things which necessity required to the preservation of this spirit; one that
whatever nourishment he took, it preserved the same inwardly, and refreshed it;
another that it preserved that which is external, and repelled from it diverse
sorts of hurts, as of cold, and heat, and rain, and the warmth of the Sun, and
of hurtful animals, and the like: and he saw, if he did rashly and hastily take
any of these things which were necessary, it might come to pass that he should
be obnoxious to excess, and should take above what were fit, and work against
himself, whence he did not consider; therefore he saw he would do most
advisedly, if he should appoint limits to himself that he should not at all
transgress, and measures which he should not exceed, and it was plain to him
that he should put this rule to himself, about the kind of the things which he
should eat, and the quality of them, and about their quantity, and the time
when to make use of them.

And first he considered the kinds of these things which he did eat, and he saw
them to be three, viz. either to be Plants not fully ripe, nor attained to full
perfection, such as the sorts of green herbs, which a man could eat: or the
fruits of Plants that were perfect, and which were ripe, and yielded their
seed, that from thence others could be brought forth, (and these kinds of
fruits were both green and dry) or to be some animal either belonging to the
earth, or the sea, which used to be eaten: now it was certain unto him, that
all these things were made by that necessary existent being, in the approach
unto which he saw his happiness was placed, and to which he desired to be
assimilate; and that it could not be, but to eat of them would be an impediment
unto him, from attaining his perfection, and should come betwixt him and the
end proposed unto him; which were to oppose himself to the operation of the
Agent, and that this opposition should be contrary to that propinquity and
conformity unto that which he was seeking; and so that he would do best (if it
could be) to abstain from all food: but when this could not be, and that he saw
an universal abstinence from food, should tend to the destruction of his body,
which should be a greater repugnancy to his Creator, then the former; whereas
he himself was nobler then those things, the destruction whereof was the cause
of his duration: he judged it best, of two evils to choose the least, and he
permitted to himself that which was least repugnant: therefore it seemed good
unto him to take any of these kinds, which were at hand, (if others were
wanting) in that measure, which afterward should appear agreeable unto him:
but if all were present, then he behoved to deliberate with himself, and of
them to choose that, the taking of which should not occasion a great opposition
to arise against the operation of the Creator, such as the pulp (or kirnel) in
fruits, which had greatest sweetness, and whose seeds were in them fit to the
producing the like, so that he should keep the seeds, and neither eat them, nor
destroy them, nor cast them into places that were unfruitful, as smooth Rocks,
Salt, Earth and such like; but if he could not get such fruits which had a pulp
fit for nourishment, as Apples, Pears, Prunes, and such things, that then he
was to take of fruits which had nothing fit to be eaten, but the seed it self,
as Wall-nuts, Chestnuts and Herbs, which had not come to full ripeness; after
this manner, that of both kinds, he might take them of which there was most
abundance, and power to produce their like, but that he should neither pull
them up by the root, nor destroy their seeds; but if these were wanting, that
then he should take of the Animals, or their Eggs: after this manner, to take
such of the Animals, whereof there is greatest abundance, so that he might not
altogether destroy the sort of them: and these were the things which he judged
fit to be observed, as to the kinds of his food. And as to the quantity he saw,
he was to observe that which sufficed to satisfy hunger, so that he did not
exceed it; and as to the time that should come betwixt his males, he judged it
best, that when he had taken as much meat as sufficed, he should remain content
therewith, and should seek no other, until some weakness should befall him,
that might hinder him from performing any of these actions belonging unto the
second conformity, which are these I am now to mention. But as to the things
which necessity required to the preserving the animal-spirit, which might
preserve him from without, it was a matter of no great difficulty unto him,
seeing he was covered with skins, and had a lodging that protected him from
things that outwardly assaulted him, and these sufficed unto him and he thought
it superfluous to take further care of them: But in eating he observed those
rules which he had prescribed unto himself to wit, these as we have above
declared.

Then he applied himself to the second operation, which was a conformity unto
the heavenly bodies, and an imitation of them, and that he might resemble their
properties in himself: but when he had considered their attributes in his mind,
they seemed unto him to be comprehended under a threefold kind; the first was
with a respect unto inferior things in the generable and corruptible world,
which was the heat which they imparted unto them by themselves; and the cold,
which was by accident, and light, and rarefaction, and condensation, together
with other things which they produce in them, by which they are disposed to
receive the influxes of the spiritual forms into them, from that necessary
existing Agent. The second sort of attributes which agreed unto them in
themselves, was that they were bright, shining, and pure from dreggs, and free
from all sorts of impurity, that they moved round-wise, some about their own
center, others about the centers of others. The third sort of attributes was,
which they had with a respect to that necessary existent Being; e. g. that
they did behold the same in a perpetual vision, nor turned themselves away
therefrom, but continually did contemplat it, and were occupied in what he did
appoint, and were always obedient in doing his will; neither did they move,
but of his will, and by his power. Therefore, in every one of these three
kinds, he endeavored with his greatest pains to be like unto them: as to the
first kind, the conformity thereof was placed in this, that he should so behave
himself, as to see no Animal or Plant to want thing, or to have any hurt or
damage, or impediment which he could remove from them, but to remove it: and
when he did cast his eyes upon any Plant, which somewhat intervement did hinder
from the Sun, or to which some other Herb did cleave that hurt it, or if it had
too much dryness that did endanger it; he would remove whatever was interposed,
if it was such as could be removed, and take away from it that which hurted, in
that manner as it did not hurt that which hurted another; and often he would
water it, so far as he could: and when he would look upon an Animal which some
ravenous beast was pursuing, or which stuck fast in any lake, or had any thorn
in it, or into whose eyes or ears any hurtful thing had fallen, or that hunger
and thirst had seized on, all these things he did undertake to remove with all
his power, and gave it meat and drink: and when he saw any water that flowed to
water any Plant or Animal, if any impediment stopped its running, whether any
stone that had fallen into it, or any thing carried into it by the flood, all
these things he removed: neither ceased he to go on in this kind of conformity,
until he attained great perfection therein.

As to the second kind, his assimilation thereunto was placed in this, that he
did keep himself in a continual cleanliness, by removing all impurity and
filthiness from his body, and often washing himself with water, and purging his
nails and his teeth, and also the secret parts of his body, and smelling them
with well-smelling herbs, as much as he could, and with diverse kinds of
perfumes, and often washing his garments and smelling them, until with splendour,
beauty and cleanness, he wholly shined: also, he used diverse kinds of circular
motions, sometimes going round about the Isle and the Shore of it, and its
utmost parts, and sometimes compassing his house, or some rock with various
circuits, either walking or running, and sometimes whirling himself round
about, until a vertigo (or giddiness) took hold of him.

As to the third kind, his assimilation thereunto was placed herein, that he
might fix his cogitations upon that necessary existent Being, and then that he
might remove from himself all impediments of sensible things, and shut his
eyes, and stop his ears, and by all his strength he might restrain himself from
following his imagination, and that he should endeavor as much as he could,
that he should mind nothing but him, nor should admit any other thing with him;
and in this thing he labored to promove himself, by wheeling himself about,
and stirring up himself thereunto: and it came to pass, as he did vehemently
wheel himself about, all sensible things did presently evanish, and This
exercise of wheeling himself about, seems altogether unprofitable and
hurtful, and he afterward did forsake it.
his fancy, with the other faculties that needed bodily instruments, did
languish, and the action of his essence, which was free from the body, became
strong, so that at some time his cogitation would be pure from mixture, and
thereby he would perceive that necessary existent Being: But afterward, the
bodily faculties again returning, did incerrupt this his state, and reduced him
to the lowest condition, so that he returned to the first state. But if any
weakness of body seized on him, which hindered him from his purpose, he would
take some meat, according to the laws aforesaid, and then he would betake
himself to the state wherein he was to assimilate himself to the heavenly
bodies, in the three kinds abovementioned, and he would continue intent in
them for some good time, and would resist his bodily faculties, they also
resisting him; and in these times where in he overcame them, and had his
thoughts pure from mixture, something appeared to him of the state of these,
who have reached unto the third assimilation. Then he began to seek after the
third assimilation, and endeavored to attain it, and he considered the
attributes of that necessary existent Being: But it was manifest to him, in
the time of the theoretical speculation, before he set about the practice, that
they were of two sorts, either affirmative, as knowledge, power and wisdom; or
negative, as freedom from bodily things, and from them which follow thereupon,
and depend from them, though afar off: and that in the affirmative attributes,
this freedom is required, that nothing be in them of bodily attributes, of the
number of which is multiplicity, and therefore his essence is not multiplied by
these affirmative attributes but that they all return to one notion, which is
the truth of the essence. Therefore, he prepared himself to consider, how he
might be like unto him in both of these kinds: as to the affirmative
attributes, when he knew that all things returned to the verity of his essence,
and that there was no multiplicity in them in any manner, seeing multiplicity is
of the attributes of the body: and he knew, that the knowledge of his essence
was not a notion superadded unto his essence, but that his essence was the
knowledge of his essence, and the knowledge of his essence was his essence: It
appeared unto him, that if he could know his essence, that knowledge by which
he should know it, should not be a notion superadded unto it, but should be the
very same. Moreover, his assimilation unto him, in some affirmative attribute,
seemed to be placed in this, that he might know him alone, admitting nothing
with him of bodily attributes. Therefore he gave his mind very earnestly to
this thing; but as to the negative attributes, that they all had this tendency,
to denote a separation from bodily things: therefore he began to cast off all
bodily attributes from his essence, and now he had removed many of them by his
former discipline, where by he endeavored to affimilate himself to the
heavenly bodies, but that yet many relicts of them remained, as the circular
motion (which is one of the most proper attributes of bodies) and the care of
Animals and Plants, and the commiserating them, and the endeavor to remove the
impediments from them, (since these things also belong to the attributes of
bodies, because he first saw them not but by the bodily faculty, and then he
took pains to do these things concerning them by the same) Therefore he
attempted to remove all these things from himself, seeing they were all of these
things which conduced not unto that state which now he sought; nor ceased he so
far to restrain himself, that in the lowest part of a cave, he sat quiet, his
head bowed downwards, his eyes low, and averting (or turning) away himself from
all sensible things and bodily faculties, he bended his mind and thoughts upon
this one necessary existent, and did not admit any other thing: and when any
other thing would offer it self occasionally unto his fancy, by his whole
strength he would drive it back from his imagination, and reject it, and herein
he exercised himself, and persisted long to do this, so that at sometimes, many
days would pass over wherein he would take no food, nor would move himself.
And Note. That he had now forsaken that unprofitable exercise of wheeling
himself about.
while this vehement endeavor lay upon him, many times all essences but his
own passed away out of his memory and thoughts; but his own essence was not
removed from him in that time, wherein he was deeply plunged in the vision of
that first being, the true necessary existent, and this troubled him when he
knew that this was a mixture in that simple vision, and an admission of another
in that sight; nor ceased he to endeavor that he might evanish from himself,
and might be altogether in the vision of that true Being, until he attained
it; and that the Heavens and Earth, and all things among them, and all
spiritual forms, and bodily faculties, and all faculties separate from matter
(which are those essences having knowledge of that Being) might be removed out
of his memory and thoughts, and that among those essences, also his own essence
be removed, and all being reduced to nothing, may evanish and become as
scattered Atoms, and that nothing remained with him, but him who is the true
Being, of perpetual existence, and so he spoke in this saying, (which is not a
notion superadded unto his essence) To whom is now the Kingdom? to the one
omnipotent God: which words he understood, and heard their voice; nor did his
ignorance of speech, nor that he knew not to speak, hinder him from
understanding the same: therefore he deeply plunged himself into this state,
and he saw that which neither the eye has seen, nor the ear heard, nor came
into the heart of man to conceive it.

But now, do not thou bend thy cogitations to the description of that thing,
which is not conceived by the heart of man: for many of these things which are
conceived by the hearts of men, are expressed with difficulty, how much more
that thing, to which there is no way for conceiving it in the heart, and which
is neither of the world, nor within its limits? But by the heart, I do not
understand the body of the heart, nor the spirit which is in the cavity
thereof; but by the same I understand the form of that spirit, which diffuseth
it self by its faculties in the bodies of men: for every one of these three is
called the heart. but there is no way whereby that thing can be conceived by
any of these three, nor can any explication be had, but of that which is
conceived in the heart; so that whoever desires to express that state,
seeks that which is impossible, and he is like unto him who would taste dyed
colors, as they are colors, and desire that a black were either sweet or
bitter. Yet, we shall not dismiss thee without some tokens, by which we may
hint at what he saw of the wonderful things of that station, by way of
similitude; not so, as that we may knock at the gates of truth, seeing there is
no way unto the certain knowledge of what is in that place, but by coming
thither. And now hear with the ears of thy heart, and see with the eyes of thy
understanding, that which I am to declare; thence perhaps thou shall find a
direction which may lead thee unto the right way; but I make this condition
with thee, that thou require not from me at present, a further explication in
conference, beside what I deliver in these Papers: for the field is narrow, and
it is dangerous to determine in words, of a thing which is of that nature, that
it cannot be expressed in words.

I say therefore, when he was abstracted from his own essence, and all other
essences, and did behold nothing else in the nature of things, but that one
living, permanent [Beeing] and had seen what he saw, and then had returned to
behold other things different therefrom, when he returned unto himself from
that state, which was like unto a drunkenness, it came into his mind that he
had not an essence, by which he differed from the essence of that true
excellent Being, and that the true reason of his own essence, was the essence
of that Note, that afterward he came to see this opinion to be a gross error
and mistake, and that his own particular essence was distinct from the essence
of God.
true being, and that first he thought to be his own essence distinct from the
essence of that true being, to be nothing indeed, nor to be any other thing
but the essence of that true being; and that it is as the light of the Sun,
which falls into thick bodies, and what thou see to appear in them: for
that, although it be attributed unto that body, wherein it appears, it is no
other thing but the light of the Sun, and the body being removed, the light
thereof is removed and only the light of the Sun remains, which is not
diminished by the presence of that body, nor is it increased while it is
absent; and when a body happens, that is fit to receive such a light, it
receives it, and the body being removed, also that receiving is removed and
signifies nothing. And this sentence prevailed with him from this, that it
appeared manifest to him that the essence of that true, powerful, and glorious
being, was no wise multiplied, but that his knowledge of the essence was the
essence it self; and hence it seemed unto him necessarily to follow, that with
whom was the knowledge of that essence, that also the essence of the same was
with him, but that the knowledge was present with him, and therefore that the
essence was present: but that this essence was not present but with it self,
and its presence was its essence, and therefore that it was the very essence;
and in the same manner, all essences separated from matter, which had the
knowledge of that true essence which formerly he beheld as many, according to
this sentence, they were one with him. And this doubt had altogether fastened
it self deep into his mind, unless God had assisted him with his mercy, and had
prevented him with his direction; whence he knew that this doubt which Note.
he had, did arise out of the relicts of the obscurity of bodies, and the
filthiness of sensible things. For that many and few, and unity and
multiplicity, and collection and separation, were all belonging to the
attributes of bodies, but as to these separated essences, which have knowledge
of that true, powerful, and glorious essence, when they are wholly separate
from matter, that they cannot be called many, or one, because multiplicity is
of the distinction of other essences from others, and unity cannot be but by a
conjunction, and nothing of these can be understood, but in composed notions,
which are mixed with matter; beside that the explication of things in this
place is narrow and difficult: for if thou expressest what belongs to these
separate essences by way of multitude, according to the use of our speech, it
should seem to denote in them a notion of multiplicity, but they are free from
multiplicity; and if thou expressest what belongs unto them, by way of
separation, that should seem to denote a notion of unity, which cannot befall
them.

And now I seem to behold some one standing in this place, (who is of these
Batts, whose eyes the Sun blinds) moving himself in the chain (fetters or
bands) of his foolishness, saying, Thou have exceeded measure in thy subtilty,
so that thou have removed thy self from the state of understanding men, and
have cast off the reason of intelligible things: for of these things which are
determined by the intellect, 2 thing is either one, or many: But let him hasten
slowly, and remit somewhat of the sharpness of his speech, and let him consider
himself, and the things which are in this sensible world wherein he is
contained, in that manner, as Hai Ebn Yokdan considered them, when viewing
things in a certain manner of contemplation, he saw that they were many, in a
multiplicity, which could not be comprehended, nor contained within any limite:
then again viewing them in another manner of contemplation, he saw them to be
one, and he remained doubtful in that thing, nor could he determine concerning
it, unto one part, more then unto another: so it was, although this sensible
world be the genuine place of multiplicity, and singularity, and their true
nature is there understood, and therein is a separation, and union, and
division into parts, and distinction and agreement, and disagreement: therefore
what shall he think concerning the divine world? wherein it is not lawful to
say, all things, nor some, nor can any of the things belonging unto it be
expressed in words, wherewith our ears are accustostomed, but that thou will
have some conjecture, otherwise This is conform to the doctrine of Dionysius
Areopagita, de Divinis nominibus.
then the thing is, and which none can know but he who has seen, and whose
true manner is not perceived but by him who has attained it. But as to what he
says, Thou have passed beyond the nature of intelligent men, and have thrown
away the manner (or reason) of what is intelligible: Thus we grant unto him,
and we dismiss him with his intelligent men; for that intellect which he and
such men does mean, is the rational faculty, which contemplateth the
individuals of the sensible things, and thence searches out an universal
notion, and the intelligent men whom he means, are these who use a
speculation of that kind: but this sort of which we speak, is above all these
things. Wherefore let him stop his ears against it, whoever understands
nothing beyond sensible things, and their universals, and let him return to his
company, to wit, them who knew the sensible things of this world, taking no
care about the other: but if thou art of them unto whom this sort of tokens and
signs does suffice, as to the divine world, nor do thou fix another
interpretation upon our words, beside that which usually is put on them; then
we shall declare unto thee somewhat further of that which Hai Ebn Yokdan saw in
that place of them who enjoy the truth, which we have abovementioned: and that
was this.

After he was really plunged (or sunk) into these things, and was abstracted
from all other things, and did truly comprehend those things; he saw that there
was an essence of a supreme Sphere, (beyond which there is no body) free from
matter, which was not the essence of that one true being, nor yet the Sphere
it self, nor somewhat different from them, but it was as the Image of the Sun
which appears in some polite (or smooth) Looking-glass, for that is neither the
Sun, nor the Glass, nor yet any thing distinct from them; and he saw that such
was the perfection of that separate Sphere, and such was the splendour and
beauty of it, which is greater then can be expressed with the tongue, and more
subtle then that it can be clothed with letters, or the voice; and he saw that
it was in the highest degree of pleasure, and joy, and exultation, and
gladness, because of the vision of that true and glorious essence: also he saw
the essence of the Sphere next unto that which is the Sphere of the fixed
Stars, to be free from matter, which was neither the essence of that one true
being, nor the essence of the supreme separated Sphere, nor the same, nor yet
any thing different from them, but it was, as the Image of the Sun, which is
seen in a Looking-glass, upon which the Image of the Sun is reflected from
another Looking-glass opposite to the Sun; and he saw that this essence had a
splendour, and beauty, and pleasure, like unto that which belonged unto the
supreme Sphere. Also in the same manner he saw the essence of the Sphere next
unto that, to be separate from matter, and this was the Sphere of Saturn, which
was none of the essences which he saw formerly, nor yet any thing diverse from
them, which was as the Image of the Sun appearing in another Glass, which is
reflected from the Image of the Sun appearing in a Glass opposite to the Sun;
and he saw the splendour and pleasure of this essence to be like unto that which
was in the former; nor ceased he to behold every Sphere, having its essence
separate, free from matter, which was not any of the former essences, nor
diverse from them, which was as the Image of the Sun reflected from one Glass
unto another, in the order digested, according to the disposition of the
Spheres: and he saw that every one of these essences had that beauty, splendour,
joy, and pleasure, which the eye has not-seen, nor the ear heard, and has not
come into the mind of man, until he came at length unto the generable and
corruptible world, which is all that which is contained within the Sphere of
the Moon; and he saw also that the same had an essence separate from the
matter, which was not any of the essences that he formerly saw, nor any thing
diverse from them, and that this essence had seventy thousand faces, and every
face had seventy thousand mouths, and every mouth had seventy thousand tongues,
whereby it did praise and celebrate continually and did sanctify the essence
of that one true Being: and he saw that this essence which he suspected to
have multiplicity, although it was not manifold, had a perfection, and a
pleasure, like unto that which he first saw, and that this essence was as the
Image of the Sun appearing in water that trembles, which has that image
reflected upon it, from the last of those Glasses unto which that reflection
did come, according unto the order aforesaid, from the first Glass opposite
unto the Sun. Then he saw that he himself had a separate essence, which if that
essence of seventy thousand faces could be divided into parts we would say were
a part of the same, and unless this essence had been produced of the new, after
it was not existent, we would say it were the same thing, and if it had not
been made proper unto its body, when it did first exist, we would say it had
not been produced of the new. And in this order he saw also other essences like
unto his, which were necessary, then they were dissolved, whatever things
necessarily existed with him, and that they were as many as could not be
numbered, if it were lawful to call them many, or that they were all one, if it
were lawful to call them one: And he saw that his own essence, and those with
him in the same degree had an infinite beauty, splendour, and pleasure, which
neither the eye has seen, nor the ear heard, nor has entered the heart of man,
and which they cannot describe, who describe other things, and which no man can
understand, but he who has attained it. And he saw many essences separate from
matter, which were as rusted Glasses, and defiled with uncleanness, which had
their backs turned upon these po^ished Glasses wherein the Image of the Sun was
impressed, and he saw that such filthiness and defectiveness was in these
Glasses, which never came into his mind, and he saw them to be affected with
infinite griefs and fighings, which could not be removed, encompassed, [or
inclosed] Or, Curtains.
within Fatts [or boiling Cauldrons] of pains, and burned with the fire of the
vail of separation, and to be cut into pieces, betwixt the drawing unto them
and beating off from them; also he saw here other essences, besides those which
were tormented, which appeared, and then evanished, and were connexed, and then
dissolved. And here he restrained himself, and considered these things well,
and he saw great terrors and huge matters, and a bufied company, and an
effectual operation, and complanation, and inflation, and production, and
destruction: and after some small time interveening, his senses again returned
unto him, and he was awakened out of that state, which was as an ecstasy, and
his feet did slide out of this place, and the sensible world appeared unto him,
and the divine world departed from him: for these two cannot meet together in
the same state: for this world, and the other, are as the two Wives of one
Husband, the one whereof if thou do please, thou shall provoke the other unto
wrath.

But if thou do say, that it seems from what thou have said of this vision,
that the separate essences, if they were in a body of perpetual duration, which
is incorruptible, as the Heavens, that they also would be of a perpetual
existence; but if they be in a body that tends unto corruption, as are the
reasonable animals, that they also shall be obnoxious to corruption, and shall
evanish and be reduced unto nothing, according unto the similitude which thou
did propose of the reflecting glasses; for that image has no duration, but
for the duration of the glass, and when the glass is corrupted, also the
image is certainly corrupted, and evanisheth. But I say unto thee, how soon
have thou forgotten thy covenant thou did make with me, and have transgressed
the fixed limits? Has it not been first told thee, that here the way of
interpretation is narrow, and that the words upon one of the parts, make that
men think otherwise, then the things are? and what thou did think has made
thee fall into this, to conclude, that that to which any thing is compared, and
that with which it is compared, is of the same manner in every part: but that
must not be in any kind of usual speech, how much less in this place, where the
Sun and his light, and his image, and his representation, and the glasses, and
his conspicuous similitude, are all things which are not separate from bodies,
nor have any subsistence but by them, and in them, and therefore need them as
to their existence, and those being taken, away, they are removed? But the
divine essences and heroic spirits are all free from bodies, and from the
things that follow them, and are very far distant from them; nor is there any
connection among them, nor any dependence from them, that it is all one in their
respect, whether the bodies be removed or remain, whether they exist or not:
but their connection and dependence is from the essence of that one true Being,
that does necessarily exist, which is the first of them, and their beginning
and cause, which makes that they do exist, and gives them duration,
continuation, and perpetuity; neither do they need the bodies, but the bodies
need them, and if it could be that they were removed the bodies should also be
removed, for they are their Principles; even as if it could be supposed, that
the essence of that one true, high and most holy Being, and removed from any
such thing (there is not a God beside him) could be taken away, also all these
essences should be taken away, and the bodies should also be removed, and this
whole sensible world should evanish; nor should any thing remain, seeing all
these things have a mutual connection: But although the sensible world follow
the divine world, as its shadow, and the divine world needs not it, and is
free from it; yet, to suppose its removing is absurd, because it follows the
divine world; but in this consists its corruption, that it be changed, not
that it altogether go into privation (and of this did that excellent Book
speak, where this notion falls in, of moving the mountains, that they may
become as wool, and that men shall become as candle-flies, and concerning the
obscuration of the Sun and Moon, and the breaking forth of the Seas, in that
day wherein the Earth shall be changed into another Earth, and the Heavens
also.) And this is the sum of what I can declare unto thee at present,
concerning the thing which Hai Ebn Yokdhan saw in that excellent state; neither
ask thou, that any thing further of it be committed to words, for that is as
impossible. But as concerning the finishing the history of him, that God
willing, I shall afterward declare. Whereas he returned unto the sensible
world, that is after he had digressed, whither he had digressed, he loathed the
troubles of the outward life, and traveled with the highest desire of a
further life; and he sought a re-entrance into that place of speculation, in
the same manner wherein he first sought it, until he attained it, with less
travel then formerly, and he remained in it the second time, longer then in the
first time: then he returned unto the sensible world, then again he fitted
himself to attain unto his place of speculation, the access unto which was
easier unto him, then at the first or second time, and his abiding therein was
of longer continuance: Nor ceased the way of attaining unto that noble state,
to become more easy unto him, and his remaining therein to be the longer from
time to time, until he arrived at this, that he could attain it when he
desired, and removed not from it, but as he desired, [or willed.] Therefore he
cleaved unto this his place, neither departed he from it, but when the
necessity of the body required, which he had reduced unto that scarcity, that a
lesser could hardly be found: and among all these things he wished, that the
powerful and glorious God would altogether remove him from his body, which
called him away from that place; and that he might wholly and perpetually
attend unto his pleasure, and might be free from that grief wherewith he was
affected, how ost he was turned away therefrom, because of the necessity of his
body: and in this state remained, until he passed the seventh septenary from
his beginning, that is fifty years; and then the fellowship of Asal happened
unto him: but the narration of his meeting with him is such, as God willing,
shall afterward follow.

They report, that there is an Isle near unto that Isle wherein Hai Ebn Yokdhan
was born, according to the one of these two differing opinions of the manner of
his birth, unto which a certain Sect of these good Sects of men did betake it
self, which had for their Author some of the old Prophets of pious memory, viz.
A Sect which declared all things by composed Parables, which might represent
the images of these things to the fancy, and might fasten their impressions in
the minds of men, as uses to be in Discourses fitted for the Vulgar. Nor
ceased that Sect to spread it self, and to prevail in that Isle, and to be made
known; so that the King thereof embraced it, and forced others to adhere unto
him.

Now there were born in the same Island two excellent men, and descious of that
which is good (the name of the one was Asal, the name of the other Salaman) who
meeting with that Sect, embraced it in the best manner, and prepared themselves
to observe all its precepts, and were continually exercised in the works
thereof, and for that end, they did enter into a fellowship. But at sometimes
they enquired into that which was delivered into the words of the Law, of the
description of the high and glorious God, and of his Angels, and of the
descriptions of the resurrection, and reward, and punishment to come. Now as to
Asal, the one of the two, he searched more into the most inwards of things, and
sought out more the mystical senses, and he was studious to interpret them: but
Salaman his neighbor did mostly observe the outward things, restraining
himself more from interpretations, and abstaining from a curious search and
speculation of things: In the mean time, both of them was diligent in outward
works, and calling themselves to an account, and resisting their affections.
But there were in that Law, some sayings which seemed to exhort men unto a
solitude and a solitary life, and to signify, that felicity and happiness is
placed therein; but there were more sayings, which seemed to exhort men unto
company, and to embrace the society of men: Therefore Asal addicted his mind to
seek after solitude, and he preferred those sayings which tended thereunto,
when by nature he was given to perpetual contemplation, and to seek out the
explications of things, and search after their significations; for, a great
hope of attaining this thing offered it self unto him, out of a solitary life:
But Salaman was addicted unto company, and mostly regarded the sayings tending
thereunto; because of a fear which was in his nature of contemplation, and of a
more subtle enquiry, and keeping of company seemed unto him, to be that which
drived away evil thoughts, and removed opinions which did bear themselves in
into his mind, and which did lead away from the instigations of devils.
Therefore, their disagreement, as to this opinion, was the cause that they
departed one from another.

And now Asal had heard of that Island, wherein it is reported that Hai Ebn
Yokdhan had his Original, and he knew the fruitfulness and advantages of it,
and the temper of the air, and that his departing into it, would accomplish
what he desired: Therefore, he determined to go thither, and there to withdraw
himself from the fellowship of men, as to the remnant of his time. Therefore,
gathering all his goods together which he had, with a part of them he hired a
Ship, to carry him into that Island, the rest he did distribute unto the poor,
and taking his farewell of Salaman, he committed himself unto the Sea: and the
Mariners having transported him into the Island, when they had landed him on
the shore, they departed from him. And so Asal remained in that Island, serving
the powerful and glorious God, magnifying him, and meditating upon his glorious
Names, and high Attributes, nor was his mind hindered, nor thoughts troubled.
And when he needed food, he took of the fruits of the Isle, or of the things he
catched in hunting, as much as sufficed unto his hunger: and in this state he
remained for some time, and enjoyed great pleasure, and much tranquillity, from
the conference he had with his Lord, and he saw daily, that from his benefits
and most precious gifts, and from what he brought ready to his hand what he
sought, and was necessary for his food, that the certainty of his faith was
confirmed, and it gave him comfort. In the mean time, Hai Ebn Yokdhan was taken
up in sublime speculations, nor did he come out of his cave, but once in the
week, to take unto him such food, as was most readily presented; and therefore,
Asal at the first time did not fall upon him, but walking along the utmost
parts of the Island, and compassing its bounds, he neither saw any man, nor
perceived the footsteps of any, whence he had gladness, and his mind being
delighted in respect of what he had proposed unto himself, to wit, that chiefly
he might seek after solitude and retirement, until it came to pass at a
certain time, that Hai Ebn Yokdhan coming forth to seek his food, at which time
Asal had betaken himself unto that place, the one did cast his eyes upon the
other, and Asal doubted not, but that he was one of the religious men given to
solitude, who had betaken himself unto that Island, to be retired from the
company of men, even as he had come thither. And he feared, left if he should
meet him, and make himself known, he should be an occasion to trouble his
state, and should be an impediment set betwixt him and his hope: But Hai Ebn
Yokdhan knew not what the matter was, because he saw him to resmble none of
these animals that he had formerly seen; and he being clothed with a black
coat of hair and wool, which he thought had been some natural cover, he stood
long astonished: but Asal turning himself from him, fled away, fearing lest he
should detain him, from what he was occupied about; but Hai Ebn Yokdhan
followed him, from an innate desire to search out the truth of the matter, and
when he saw, that he fled from him with all his might, he withdrew and hid
himself, so that Asal thought he had departed from him, and gone further off
from that part: therefore Asal began to take himself unto prayers, and reading,
and to invocation, and weeping, and supplication, and complaints, until these
things had turned him away from every other matter.

In the mean time Hai Ebn Yokdan drew near unto him by little and little, while
Asal did not observe, until he was so near unto him, that he heard his reading,
and praises, and saw his humble gesture and weeping, whence he heard a pleasant
voice, and letters digested into order, the like whereof he had never perceived
by any sort of the Animals; also beholding his form and lineaments, he saw him
to be of the same form with himself, and it appeared unto him, that the Coat
wherewith he was clothed, was not a natural skin, but an habit taken from some
other thing, like unto his own clothing, and when he saw the comeliness of his
humble gesture, and of his supplication, and weeping, he doubted not but he was
one of the essences, which had the knowledge of that true Being, and therefore
he was carried with desire toward him, desiring to see what the matter was
with him, and what was the cause of that weeping and supplication. Therefore he
came nearer unto him, until Asal observing it, he did hasten to run. But Hai
Ebn Yokdan with a great strength did follow after him, until he reached him, in
respect of the strength and power which God had given him, both of knowledge,
and body, and he took hold of him, and kept him, that he could not flee away.
Therefore when Asal beheld him covered with the hairy skins of Animals, and his
hair so long that it covered a great part of his body, and saw that he was so
swist in his course, and so excelling in strength, he was greatly afraid of
him, and he began gently to entreat him, and to ask him in words which Hai Ebn
Yokdan understood not, nor knew what it was, but that he observed in him the
tokens of fear; he did therefore appease him with the voices which he had
learned from some of the Animals, and gently stroaking with his hand, his head,
and the sides of his neck, he showed kindly unto him, and gave a signification
of his joy and gladness, until the fear of Asal was settled, and that he knew
he willed him no evil. Now Asal of old had learned most of Languages, and was
skilful of them, through his desire after the knowledge of the interpretation
of things; he began therefore to speak unto Hai Ebn Yokdan, and to ask him of
his condition, in every Tongue that he did know, and he endeavored to make him
understand: but this he could not do. Also Hai Ebn Yokdan, in all these things
wondered at what he heard, nor knew he what it was, but that he observed the
fairness of his countenance, and his good will. So every one of them admired
the condition of the other. But Asal had by him some relicts of food which he
had brought with him from the inhabited Island, which he offered unto Hai Ebn
Yokdan, but he knew not what it was, for he had never seen any thing of that
sort before; therefore Asal eating somewhat of it himself, did signify unto
him that he might eat; But Hai Ebn Yokdan did mind those Laws wherewith he had
bound himself in the receiving of meat, and when he knew not the nature of that
thing which was set before him, what it was, and whether it was lawful for him
to take of it, or not, he restrained himself from eating; but Asal ceased not
to desire him, and kindly to invite him; when therefore Hai Ebn Yokdan was held
with the desire of him, he feared lest if he should continue to refuse, he
should alienate him from him. Therefore taking that food, he did eat of it, but
when he had tasted it, and liked it, it appeared unto him, that he had done
evil, in violating the Covenant about the conditions which he had proposed to
himself in taking meat; and it repented him of his deed, and he willed to
withdraw himself from Asal, and to betake himself unto his state, seeking to
return unto his sublime speculation: but that vision did not presently return
unto him; therefore he thought it best to remain with Asal in the sensible
world, until he was more certified of his condition, that no further
inclination should remain in his mind toward him, that so afterward he might
return to his place, being distracted with no other thing. So he joined himself
to the fellowship of Asal; and when Asal saw that he could not speak, he was
certain that no hurt should besal his Religion from him, and he hoped it should
come to pass that he should teach him Language, and Knowledge, and Religion,
whence he should have a great reward, and a nearness unto God. So Asal began to
teach him to speak, first by pointing unto him at particular things, and then
by pronouncing their names; and repeating them unto him, he willed him to
pronounce them again, which he presently did, until he had taught him all
names, and so by little and little gradually carried him on, that in a short
space he could speak. Then Asal began to ask him of his condition, and whence
he had come into that Island; but Hai Ebn Yokdan told him that he knew not what
beginning he had, nor father, nor mother, but the Goat [or Roe] which brought
him up, and he described unto him his whole state, and what progress he had
made in knowledge, until he had come unto that degree of conjunction with God.
Therefore when Asal had heard of him, of those truths, and those essences,
which are separate from the sensible world, and have knowledge of the essence
of that one, true, powerful, and glorious Being, and had described unto him
the essence of that supreme, powerful, true, and glorious Being, in his
glorious attributes, and had unfolded unto him how much he could, of that which
he saw, when he had reached unto that conjunction of the joys of them who are
joined unto God, and the griefs of them who are separate from him, he doubted
not but that all the things which in their Law were delivered of the
Commandment of the powerful and glorious God, and his Angels, and Books, and
his Messengers, and the last Day, and of his Paradise, and the Fire, are the
similitudes of these things which Hai Ebn Yokdan saw, and the eyes of his heart
were opened, and his mind was enlightened, and that which he perceived by
reason, and received by tradition, did well agree with him, and the manners of
interpretation, were easy with him, nor was there any thing hard unto him in
these precepts, which was not now manifest, nor any thing shut, which was not
open, nor any thing which was not discovered unto him, and he became mighty in
understanding; and then he so admired Hai Ebn Yokdan, that he had a great
account of him, and he did reverence him, and it was certain unto him that he
was one of the Saints of God, to whom is no fear, and who shall not have grief.
Therefore he made himself ready to serve him, to imitate him, and to follow his
admonitions, in the works which did occurr unto him, in those legal things
which formerly he had learned in his Religion. But Hai Ebn Yokdan began to ask
him of his matters, and of his condition, that he would unfold them unto him,
and Asal began to describe unto him the state of his Island, and what kind of
men was therein, what was their conversation before that religious Sect came
thither; and how it was now after its coming unto them: also he declared unto
him all things which were delivered in the Law, of the description of the
divine World, and of Paradise, and the fire of Hell, and the being raised up,
and the Resurrection, and the gathering unto Judgment, and the account which
was then to be given, and the Scales wherein the actions of men should be
weighed, and the way through which they were to pass. And Hai Ebn Yokdan
understood all these things, nor did he perceive that any of them was
unsuitable unto what he saw in his sublime place, and he knew that he who had
described those things, and delivered them unto men, was true in describing of
them, and in his sayings, was a true Messenger sent of God, and he believed
him, and acknowledged the truth thereof, and gave a testimony unto his mission.
Then he began to ask him of the precepts which he had brought, and of the Rites
of the Worship which he had ordained, therefore he described unto him Prayer,
and Almsgiving, and Fasting, and Traveling, and such kind of outward works;
and he received these things, and embraced them, and took upon him the
performance of them, in obedience to that command, being persuaded of the truth
of him who delivered the same; but there were two things remained fixed in his
mind, which he admired, nor did he perceive any manner of wisdom in them,
wherefore that Messenger in his describing most things belonging unto the
divine World, did use Parables unto men, and abstained from a clear unfolding
of them, so that men, in a great part, sell into that, that they affirmed it to
be corporeity, and believed that to be something of the essence of that true
Being, from which it is far distant, and is free, and in the same manner, in
the things belonging unto the way of reward and punishment. The other was, that
he did not proceed beyond those Precepts and Rites of Worship, and that he
permitted that men should endeavor to seek after riches, and that as to their
feeding, they might enjoy their liberty, so that they vainly gave themselves
unto vain things, and turned themselves away from the truth, seeing it was his
own opinion, that nothing ought to be taken from any, but to sustain the
relics of the life: but as to riches, they were of no value with him: also he
saw what was decreed in the Law, concerning the things belonging unto riches,
as to Almsgiving, and distributing of them, and Trading, and Usury, and Fines,
and Punishments, and all these things seemed strange unto him, and he judged
them superfluous, and he said, If men judged the matter according unto truth,
surely they would turn away themselves from these empty things, and follow the
truth, and so all this would be superfluous, nor would any have that propriety
in riches, that these dues should be exacted from him, or that his hands should
be cut off, for these things secretly taken by stealth, or that lives should be
destroyed for taking them away openly. But that which put this opinion in his
mind, was, that he thought all men were of an ingenuous inclination, and a
sharp understanding, and of minds constant unto themselves; nor knew he what
dullness of mind they had, what scarcity of spirit, what evil counsel, and what
inconstancy of mind, and that they were altogether like beasts, yea further
erring from the way. Therefore, when he had an exceeding great compassion upon
men, and desired that salvation might come unto them by his help, a purpose of
going unto them entered into his mind, that he might unfold and declare the
truth unto them. Therefore he made this known unto his neighbor Asal, and
asked of him, if he could think upon any way whereby he could come unto them:
but Asal declared unto him, the defect of their ingenuity, and how averse they
were from the commandment of God; but he could not understand this, and his
mind was intent upon that which he hoped: Asal also greatly desired, that God
by his means, would direct some of his neighbors, who were easy to be guided,
and were not so far from sincerity, and he promoved his endeavor. It seemed
good therefore unto them, to betake themselves unto the Seashore, and not to
depart therefrom day nor night, if perhaps God should give them an occasion to
pass over the Sea; and being intent upon this thing, they did supplicat with
prayers the most high God, that he would direct them in their business. And it
came to pass, by the commandment of the powerful and glorious God, that the
motion of the wind and floods did carry a ship, which had gone out of her way
at Sea, toward the shore of that Island; the which coming near unto the Land,
they who were in the Ship seeing two men upon the shore, they came unto them.
Then Asal bespeaking them, desired that they would carry them with them; and
when they consented, and had received them into the Ship, God gave unto them an
easy wind, which carried the Ship in a short space unto the desired Island;
where having gone forth upon the shore, they entered the Town, and there the
friends of Asal did meet him, to whom he made known the condition of Hai Ebn
Yokdhan: therefore they gathered about him earnestly, thinking great matters of
him, and coming together unto him, they esteemed him much, and honored him,
and Asal told him, that that Sect of men did exceed all others in knowledge and
sagacity, so that if he could not instruct them, much less could he instruct
the vulgar sort of men. Now the Prince and chief man of that Island was
Salaman, the friend of Asal, who thought it best to join himself to the
fellowship of men, and thought it unlawful to give up himself unto solitude. So
Hai Ebn-Yokdhan begun to instruct them, and to declare unto them the mysteries
of wisdom; but when he had proceeded a little beyond that which was plain, and
began to explicat that, the contrary whereof had taken place in their minds,
they began to withdraw themselves from him, and their minds abhorred from that
which he spoke, and they were angry with him in their hearts, although before
him, they carried a show of kindness, and honored him so far, as he was a
stranger among them, and out of their observance due unto their friend Asal.
But Hai Ebn Yokdhan ceased not night and day to deal gently with them, and to
manifest the truth unto them, both privately and publicly; but that had no
other effect, but to increase their enmity against him, and their flying from
him, although they were lovers of that which is good, and desirous of the
truth, but that from the defect of their nature, they sought not the truth in
the due manner, nor did they apprehend it as it ought indeed to be; nor did
they search through what way the entry was open thereunto, but they sought the
knowledge of it, after the manner of the vulgar sort of men, so that he
despaired of reforming them, and lost all hope of bringing them unto a better
condition, which was less acceptable unto them. And afterward, observing
diverse orders of men, he saw that every company rejoiced in that which was
present with them, while they made their lusts their God, and had the same for
the object of their Worship, and destroyed themselves by gathering together the
trifles of the world, the desire of gaining holding them deceived, until they
went to the grave: but that no counsel prevailed with them, nor did good words
move them, nor had reproof any effect upon them, but that they proceeded more
obstinately. But as to wisdom, that they had no way open thereunto, nor did any
part thereof belong unto them; Foolishness had overwhelmed them, and what they
sought after, had occupied their Alc. cap. 3. altatfif. and cap. 2.
hearts as rust; God has sealed their hearts and ears, and a mist is before
their eyes, and a great punishment abides them. Therefore, when he saw them
encompassed within the Fatts (or Cauldrons) of punishment, and covered with or,
Curtains.
the darkness of a vail, and that all of them, except a few, kept their
Religion, no otherwise but with a respect unto the world, and did cast behind
their backs their own works, although they were light and easy, and that they
esteemed slightly of them, and that merchandising and trading had occupied
them, and detained them from the remembrance of the most high God, and that
they never were afraid, their hearts and eyes being taken up about these
things; it was manifest unto him, and certain, that it was impossible to speak
unto them, in the manner of an open declaration, nor that it was expedient that
works should be enjoined unto them beyond this measure, and that part of the
profit which came from the Law, unto the vulgar sort of men, was placed herein,
that it respects their life in this world, to wit, that the manner of their
life therein be in good order, and that no man be injurious to another, in the
things which he may call his own, but that they do not attain unto the felicity
of another world, but some very few of them, to wit, these who prepare
themselves for that world, and give right diligence thereunto, such as he who
believes the truth, but to him who erreth, and does prefer the life of this
world, Hell shall be his place. And what greater labor is there, or what more
grievous miseries then his, whose works if thou do consider, from the time he
rises from his sleep, until again he return unto sleep, there is none among
them that shall be found, by which he does not study to get the end of some of
these sensible things, which are of no worth, to wit, either riches to heap up,
or pleasure to take, or wrath, whereby to satisfy his mind, or power whereby
to defend himself, or in the Law of some work commanded, whereby he may show
himself or may have a care of his neck: and all these things are darkness,
others upon others in the deep sea; nor is Alc. c. Alnur etc. Miriam.
there any of you who does not go in thither, for so the decree of the Lord
stands firm. And so considering the state of men, and seeing the most of them
to be in the degree of unreasonable animals, he knew that all wisdom, and
direction, and amendment, were placed in that which the messengers of God had
spoken, and the Law had delivered unto them, and that there was no other
possible, nor could any thing be added, and that there were men appointed unto
every work, and every one was mostly capable of that thing unto which he was
ordained by nature, and that the Law of God was the same unto them who had gone
away before, neither was there any change in the Law of God.

And so having returned unto Salaman and his Companions, he asked leave for the
things which he had spoken among them, and desired them to have him excused,
and he told, that he thought the same things with them, and did walk in the
same way with them: and he exhorted them that they would adhere unto their
institution concerning the ends of the Law, and the observing the outward
works, and that they should not meddle with things not belonging unto them, and
that they should have faith in doubtful things, and give a ready assent unto
them, and should be averse from new opinions, and bad affections, and that they
should imitate their pious Forbears, and leave novelties; and he commanded that
they would shun that which is seen among the vulgar sort of men, in the neglect
of the Laws, and the love of the world, and that he required them most of all
to beware of. For both he and his friend Asal did know, that there was no
salvation unto this obsequious and defective sort of men, but after this
manner, and if from that they should be carried away unto a curious search of
sublime things, that things would be worse with them, and that it was not
possible that they could attain unto the degree of those who were happy; but
that they should hang in suspense, and be tossed upwards, and downwards, and
their end should be evil; but if they remained in the state wherein they are,
until death should take hold of them, that they should obtain salvation, and
should be among them who are placed upon the right hand, but as to them who had
gone before, that they had gone before, and that those came near unto them. So
bidding them farewell, they departed from them and took occasion to return unto
their own Island, until at length the powerful and glorious God gave them a
commodious passage. But Hai Ebn Yokdan sought after his sublime state of
speculation, in the same manner as formerly, until he recovered it; and Asal
did imitate him, until he reached near unto it, or was not far from it. So they
worshipped God in that Island, until death siezed on them. And this is that
(God help thee and us with his spirit) which we have received of the History of
Hai Ebn Yokdan, and Asal, and Salaman, making choice of such words as is found
in no other Book, nor use to be heard in vulgar speech, and is a part of that
hidden knowledge, which no man receives but who has the knowledge of God, nor
is any man ignorant of it, but who has not the right knowledge of God. But we
have gone away differing from our pious forbears, as to the keeping secret
these matters, and the sparingness of declaring them. But that which readily
persuaded us to divulge this secret, and to break through this vail, was, these
evil opinions which are risen up in this our time, which the vain Philosophers
of this world have commented, and sent forth unto the vulgar, so that they are
dispersed into various Regions, and an evil proceeding thence was common, that
we might be careful of the weak (who have cast off what they received by
tradition from the Prophets of pious memory, and have chosen what was delivered
by foolish men) lest they should think that these opinions are a secret to be
kept up from them who are not capable thereof. and this should increase their
desire after them, and for that cause should the more greedily affect them.
Therefore it seemed good unto us to give some light discovery unto them, of
this secret of secrets, whereby we may lead them unto the parts of truth, and
divert them from that path; yet neither have we left those secrets committed
unto these few Leaves without a thin vail, which shall be easily unvailed unto
them who are fit, but shall be thick unto him who is unworthy to go further on,
so that he cannot pass through. And I desire of my brethren, as many as shall
read this Treatise, that they have me excused in these things which I have so
easily declared, and so freely described; for I had not done this, but that I
was carried unto those hights whereunto the sight cannot reach, and I
endeavored to make my speech easy to be understood, fitly placing the same,
that I might stir up in men a desire of entering into the right way. But I ask
of the Lord pardon and remission, and that he would bring us to the certain
knowledge of himself, for he is bounteous and liberal. Peace be unto thee my
Brother, whose promotion is decreed, and the mercy of God, and his blessing
come upon thee.

Praise unto God alone.

The end.

