AN ABSTRACT, OR ABBREVIATION Of some Few of the Many (Later and Former)
TESTIMONYS FROM THE Inhabitants OF NEW JERSEY, And Other Eminent Persons. Who
have Wrote particularly concerning That PLACE.

London, Printed by Thomas Milbourn, in the Year, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
Ingenuous Reader,
It Is not intended, by Publishing the Truth contained in these following
Sheets, thereby to disparage any other Colony already Settled, or to be Settled
in those Parts of America; but to contradict the Disingenuous, and False
Reports of some Men, who have made it their Business to speak unjustly of
New Jersey, and Our Proceedings therein: As though the Methods of Settlement
were Confused and Uncertain, no Man knowing his Own Land, and several such idle
Lying Stories. Therefore, to satisfye the Reasonable and Vnprejudiced, who
desire to be rightly informed, the Manner or Method of Our Settlements are
thus: The Country from the Mouth (that is, from the Sea) to the Head of
Delaware-River, is about Two Hundred and Fifty Miles in Length, and is divided
into One Hundred Shares, or Proprieties; as may be seen by the Deeds made to
every Purchaser thereof; every Proprietor naturally having a Considerable
Quantity of his Land lying by the Riverside: I say, every Proprietor having a
great Part of his Propriety contigious to that Noble and Navigable River of
Delaware, is an Accommodation of no small Value.

Then, as to the Government; one out of each of these Hundred Proprieties, is
to be freely chosen by the Inhabitants thereof, to meet and sit as a
General-Assembly, to make and alter Laws, to hear and redress all manner of
Grievances whatsoever: And not any, the least Tax, either in Money or Goods, or
any other Services, upon any Pretense whatsoever, to be imposed on the People,
but by the Consent of these their Representatives in the General-Assembly: And
this Assembly is to meet Annually upon a Day certain, as is Irrevocably
ordained in one of the Chapters of Our General Concessions, as a Fundamen^^^,
never to Alter or Change.

The Number of Aeres in one of these Proprieties, is about Twenty Thousand;
though some (and those no ordinary Surveyors neither) have judged it to be
almost as much more: But whether the Number be more or less, I shall not
exactly affirm; But this I may assert, (and it ought to be considered by every
Considering Purchaser) That a large Share of their Land being certain to lie
upon so Brave and Navigable a River as Delaware is known to be, is in it self
very Considerable, and may be vastly Advantageous to such Purchasers, who at
present, do, or hereafter shall Incline to Trade. And upon which River are
several Good Towns and Settlements already, (viz.) Burlington, Northampton,
Monmouth, Wellingbrough, Mansfield, Springton, Nottingham, Salem, and Others:
In some whereof, are Considerable Manufacturies and Trade Established and
Establishing: So that, New Jersey in Reality is another thing, than what it was
within these Seven Years, before it was Peopled and Settled in that Order and
Freedom as now it is; as some of these following LETTERS (according to Reason)
do testify, That those that go to New Jersey now, need not undergo any of the
Difficulties that They did, who went over at first, when they had neither House
nor Corn of their Own: But now they have Good of Both, and not only sufficient
for Themselves, but considerably to spare, for the Accommodating of such that
shall come to Inhabit among them, until they can provide of Their Own.

AN Abstract or Abbreviation OF Some Few of the Many (Later and Former)
Testimonies, etc.
A Letter to a Merchant in London.
SIR,
HAving from the Discourse we had formerly, about the South-West-Part of
New Jersey, lying upon the Bay and River of Delaware, perceived a great Desire
in you, to be particularly informed thereof, from the Observations I had either
made My Self, in my several Voyages into those Parts, or from the Collections I
took from the English, Swedes, or Hollanders; and perceiving several of your
Ingenious, Publick-spirited Friends were engaged therein with Your Self, and
that it was to be looked upon no longer for your own particular Curiosity, but
as a National Concern, from the Thriving Genius of such Worthy Undertakers:
Which, together with the Kindness I bear to Your Self, and the Person that made
our Acquaintance, obliged Me, as soon as I could, to comply with your Commands.

Then be pleased to know, that the Lord Delaware, Governor of Virginia, Anno
1611. during his Stay in those Parts, spent one whole Summer in making a
particular Search of all that Part of America; lying, and being Situate betwixt
Cape-Augustine on the South-West, to Cape-Porpus on the North-East, which is
from 28. to 44. Degrees of North-Latitude, and 430. Leagues by that Shore; and
having visited and viewed all the Remarkable Bays and Rivers, as also,
particularly Inspected the Clime and Soil of all those Parts, pitched upon this
Place, which is now called New Jersey; which River the Lord Delaware called
after his own Name, and by which the English have known it ever since. And it
is not to be questioned, had not Death prevented his Purposes, but that he had
prevailed with the then Lords-Commissioners, (called the Virginia-Company) to
have removed that Colony to this Place: Which, without doubt, had prevented the
Death of very many Thousands of the English Nation; who have, since that time,
found their Graves in Virginia, by reason of the many Boggs, Swamps, and
Standing-Waters, which corrupt the Air of the Country. And to show you, that
the Lord Delaware was not singular in this Point, see the Character given of it
by Jeronama Beeckman of Stetin, in a Tract of his Printed Anno 1636. This
Beeckman was sent thither with a Great Cargoe from Amsterdam by John Lussingen,
and Peter Coyman, Eminent Merchants of that City; who trusted him with all
their Concern, Laden on Two Ships, the Orania, and the Ickeabome; who Returned
in about Fourteen Months, bringing them Back in all sorts of Furs, Skins, and
Poltry, clear Profit One Hundred and Thirty Pounds, per Cent.

Sir, Thus much in General; but to come to Particulars:

First, This Province (I mean the South-West-Part of it, bordering upon the
River of Delaware) is Situate parallel to the most Happy of the East and
Western Parts of the World; and is naturally stored with all Sorts of Timber,
and other Materials for the Building and Equipping of Ships, Structure of
Houses, making of Cabinets, and all other Curious Joyner's Work.

Secondly, There is Sumach, and several other Drugs for the Use of Dyers;
besides, some Trees there are, that produce both Gums, and Medicinal Oils, as
is observed by Doctor Adrian Vander-dunke, who searched that Country at his own
proper Charge.

Thirdly, That there is all Sorts of English-Corn, and may be Two Harvests of
several Sorts of Grain, in one Year: As also, that a Poor Man by his Reasonable
Labor, can in the same Space of Time make Fifteen Thousand Pipe-Staves, which
are worth on the Place Sixty Pounds; but at the Canaries, Three Hundred Pounds;
which, according to an ordinary Calculation, is but Three Weeks Sail, and the
Transportation is accounted but half at most.

Fourthly, That in this Province there is not only as good Iron-Mines as are in
any Parts of the World; but also, great Convenience from the Multitude of
Brooks for Iron-Mills; which in the making thereof, would also clear the Ground
of Wood, and fit it for Planting.

Fifthly, That Vines grow naturally all over this Province; of which, Wild as
they are, Wines, and very Good Brandy have been made: And, I am well assured,
if those Vines were Transplanted and Cultivated accordingly, there might be
Rich and Generous Wines made in the West-Part of New Jersey: But if Vine-Stocks
of the Greek, Calabrian, and Cyprian, with the Candian-Grapes, were
Transplanted into this Province, (those Countries where these Grapes are in
Perfection, lying parallel to This) there would certainly be a Staple, which
may enrich both England, and all those Countries, to the Envy of France and
Spain.

Sixthly, That the Art, Use, and Excellency of the Silkworm might be had in
this Province, with great Convenience; the Mulberry-Trees growing there Wild,
very numerous, and the Leaves to be had for gathering; whereas the French
Nobility and Gentry make a Great Revenue of Mulberry-Trees; besides their
Fruits, the Leaves of every Tree being Farmed in Languedoc and Provence, as in
Goodness, from Five Shillings to Twenty Shillings, and upwards, per Annum. The
Duke of Tuscany raised Anno 1671. Sixty Thousand Ducats on the Leaves of
Mulberry-Trees alone, as he does Yearly about the same Sum.

Monsieur Le Telliere, Great Uncle to the Marquess of Lovoy, Secretary of State
to the present French King, writ Observations on this Subject, Anno 1636.
affirming, That Silkworms were Transported out of Asia into Italy, in the Year
1540. and that they had not been in Languedoc and Provence in France above
Sixty Years; and yet the Revenue of Silk in those Provinces, was more worth
both to the King and Nobility, than the Product of Wine, Oil, Woad, and all
other Fruits whatsoever.

Monsieur Agume, in his Observations on that Subject Printed at Lions, Anno
1654. says, That in Forty Years, the making of Silk in the South of France,
had brought into the Exchecquer or Financy of that Crown, Fifty Seven Millions
of Livers, which is about One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds, per Annum,
Custom for the Raw Silk only. It is admirable to behold, how these Silkworms
store up the Disposing-Matter, from whence the Silk comes; the which, by an
Incomprehensible Mystery of Nature, they Vomit forth (...) their Mouths, and
spin out of their Bowels: And whatever is done of this kind in France, may much
more, and to greater Advantage be accomplished in the South-West-Part of
New Jersey, whose Position of Latitude is nearer the Sun, than any Part of
France. The Air of this Province is very Serene, Sweet, and Wholesome, which
renders the Clime much more agreeable to European Bodies, than the severe Colds
of New England, or the sulphurous Heat in Virginia; where, I say, the Bogs,
Marshes, and corrupt Standing-Waters, have ever been very Noxious to the
Planter.

The Soil of this Province is very Rich and Fruitful; and, for the most part,
upon a Rising Level; and where it is interlaced with Hills, they are rather
Gradual Prospects, than troublesome Ascents for above an Hundred Miles from the
Sea. And where it is any whit Mountainous or Rocky, there are also Valleys
extreme Rich and Fertile: Besides, those Mountains have store of Black-Lead,
Allom, Sulphur, Copper, etc. the which is confirmed by the Writings of
Tararapha, and Monsieur Gallane, Son to the present President of Nants, a
Person of great Quality, who spent the Years 1668, 69, and 70. in the Discovery
of most of the Lakes, Mountains, and Countries, West, from Quebeck to the Bay
of Florida, which is beyond Carolina.

This Gentleman gave me leave to read his Journal; wherein he affirms, That
betwixt the Head of Delaware, and the Lake Ontaria, there are Mines of Sulphur,
Allom, Lead, Copper, etc.

Sir, I mention This as well for your own Curiosity, as that such a Trade may
be worth looking after, when it shall please God, to put those that settle your
Colony, in a condition to manage it; which, I do assure you, in due time may be
done, to Immense Advantage.

And now, Sir, I shall come to some other Observations of my own, having
formerly drawn a particular Map of your Colony with my own Hand, by the Sea,
from Sandy-point, and up the River, to the Isle of Matinicocks; and, for my own
Satisfaction, did (as of other Parts of America) ever make it my Business to
discover not only the Situation of Places; but also, the Original Discoverers,
the several Governors, and their respective Fortunes; the most Remarkable
Distempers, or Diseases; the Commodities, both Natural and Accidental; what
Advantage might be made by Trade; what Places were more or less Tenable by
Nature, and what made Strong by Fortification; in what Manner, and to what
Degree. Moreover, how those Colonies have Prospered or Declined in Trade,
Increased or Decreased in Number of Inhabitants from Europe, and the proper
Causes thereof; together, with the Governments, Customs, and Commodities of the
several Indian-Natives; and what Advantage might be made of those Innocent,
Good-natured Creatures, in point of Trade, etc.

And this South-West-Part of New-West-Jersey, came not only under this my
General Survey; but having had a Concern in those Parts with the Dutch, it fell
more particularly under my Consideration. The Longitude of this Place is
Calculated to be from Three Hundred and Eleven, to Three Hundred and Eight
Degrees; and bounded betwixt Thirty-Nine and Forty-Three Degrees of Latitude
North, from the Equator.

Sir, Having before spoken of the Agreeableness of the Air; I shall only say in
general, that the West-Part of New Jersey, is by Nature sliced into a bundance
of Rivers and Riv'leis, which every way glide in Deep and Navigable Channels,
either for Shipping or Boats, betwixt the Breast of this Your plentiful
Country; which highly contributes to its Convenience, Beauty, and Fertility.
These Rivers are also abundantly stored with all the species of the Fish of
Europe, and both larger and better tasted; being great Quantities of Sturgeon
in the River of Delaware, with diverse other Fish peculiar only to that Clime;
as Quictars, Dramps, Porgies or Sheep-Heads, Cony-Fish-Misyqua's, and many
others not seen in any Part of Europe, whose names (at present) I remember not;
but these in particular are delicate Fish.

As also, Land and Sea-Foul in abundance of all the sorts in Europe, and some
peculiar to that Country (as of Fish) not any where in the Europaean World that
ever I saw. The Fruits of your Province are all sorts of Delicate Melons,
Apples, Pears, Damsons; and all other sorts of Plumbs, Apricocks, Peaches, and
Malagotoons, Cherries of several kinds, Quinces, Marucas, Grapes of Six sorts I
have seen, Puchamines, Walnuts, Chestnuts, Strawberries, Rasberries, Currants Red
and White, Gooseberries, and a great many other Wild-Fruits: As also, vast
plenty of Mulberries, all sorts of Roots of England, and Potato's very good,
with all sorts of Herbs both for Physic, and the Kitchen, in great Perfection,
and no less Plenty. There is also Saxafras, Sarsaparilla, and several other
Plants of great virtue, grow Naturally in this Province.

Sir, The Western-Part of New Jersey, situate upon the River of Delaware, (to
the Head whereof I understand Mr. Billing's Grant reaches) so far as I know, is
not Second to any Part of America; and, in due time, by such Industrious
Undertakers as Your Self, and Friends are, may not be Inferior to many Parts of
the World: And this I further know, that with Common and Reasonable Care, there
may not (in a few Years) only be to spare Horses, Beef, Pork, Flower, Biscuit,
Pease, etc. but this Country will also produce Honey, Wax, Silk, Hemp, Flax,
Hops, Woad, and Rape-seed, Madder, Potashes, Anniseed, and Salt; Hides Raw or
Tanned, and there is a vast large Creature called a Moose, of whose Skins are
made Excellent Buff. and other Deer-Skins, and all sorts of Peltry in great
Plenty; besides the Natural Product of Pitch, Tarr, Rosin, Turpentine, etc.

And, as for Furrs; there is Beaver, Black Fox, Otter, and diverse other sorts:
As also, the Tobacco is very Good upon the River of Delaware. Besides what I
have mentioned, there may be good Fishing for Cod and Cusk, which are to be
found on a Fishing-ground, from the South-Part of the Shoald, that lies of
Barnagate, beginning at Seven Fathom Water, and trending South and by West,
Nine Leagues in Length; there being great Plenty of well grown Fish, as I my
self, and several others have found by Experience.

Upon the whole Matter, this Province affords all that is either for Necessity,
Convenience, Profit, or for the Pleasure of Humane Life.

Sir, I have herewith sent you a Prophecy of Pious Mr. Herbert's, a Man as
Learned as Great in his Quality, being the Earl of Cherbury's Brother, and
Orator to the University of Cambridge, written many Years since.

Religion stands on Tip-toe in Our Land,
Ready to pass to the American-Strand.
When height of Malice, and prodigious Lusts,
Impudent Sinning, Witchcrafts, and Distrusts,
(The Mark of Future Bane) shall fill our Cup
Unto the Brim, and make our Measure up:
When Sin shall swallow Tyber, and the Thames
By Letting in them Both, Pollutes her Streams:
When Italy of Us shall have her Will,
And all her Calendar of Sins fulfill;
Whereby one may foretell, what Sins next Year
Shall both in France and England Domineer:
Then shall Religion into America flee;
They have their Times of Gospel, even as We.
I am, Sir, with all Sincerity your Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, I.
Scott.

From Burlington in Delaware-River, the 26th. of 8. Mon. 1667. An Abstract of a
Letter wrote to Henry Stacy.
Dear Friend!
THrough the Mercy of God, we are safely Arrived at New Jersey. My Wife, and
all Mine are very well; and we have our Healths rather better Here, than we had
in England: Indeed, the Country is so likely, that I do not see, how it can
reasonably be found fault with. As far as I perceive, all of the Things we
heard of it in England, are very true; and I wish, that many People (that are
in Straits) in England, were Here: Here is Good Land enough lies void, would
serve many Thousands of Families; and we think, if they cannot Live Here, they
can hardly Live in any Place in the World. But we do not desire to persuade any
to come, but such as are well satisfied in their own Minds. A Town-Lot is laid
out for us in Burlington, which is a Convenient Place for a Trade: It is about
One Hundred and Fifty Miles up the River of Delaware. The Country, and Air,
seems ^o be very agreeable to our Bodies; and we have very Good Stomachs to our
Victuals: And Here is plenty of Provision in the Country, plenty of Fish and
Fowl, and Good Venison very plentiful, and much better than Ours in England;
for it eats not so dry, but is full of Gravy, like Fat Young Beef. You that
come after us, need not fear the Trouble that We have had: For now here is Land
ready divided against You come. The Indians are very Loving to Us, except here
and there one, when they have gotten Strong Liquors in their Heads, which they
now greatly love. But for the Country, in short, I like it very well: And I do
believe, that this River of Delaware, is as good a River as most is in the
World; it exceeds the River of Thames by many Degrees.

Here is a Town laid out for Twenty Proprieties, and a strait Line drawn from
the Riverside up the Land; which is to be the main Street, and a Marketplace
about the Middle; and the Yorkshire Ten Proprietors are to build one Side, and
the London Ten the other Side: And they have ordered one Street to be made
along the Riverside, which is not divided with the Rest, but in small Lots by
it self; and every one that has any Part in a Propriety, is to have his Share
in it. The Town-Lots for every Propriety, will be about Ten or Eleven Acres,
which is only for a House, Orchard, and Gardens; and the Corn and
Pasture-Ground is to be laid out in great Quantities

I am thy Loving Friend, John Crips.
Directed for Henry Stacy, in Grace Church Street.
Thomas Hooton to his wife, 29th. 8th. Month, 1677.
My Dear!
I Am, at this present, at the Town called Burlington, where our Land is; and
it is ordered to be a Town for the Ten Yorkshire, and Ten London Proprietors.
I like the Place well; our Lot is the Second next the Waterside: It Is like to
be a Healthful Place, and very pleasant to Live in. I came hither Yester-day,
being the Twenty-Seventh of October, with some Friends that were going to
New York. I am to be at Thomas Olive's House, till such time I can provide
better for my Self. I do intend to build a House, and get some Corn into the
Ground. And now, my Dear, I know not how to write to thee, concerning thy
Coming, or not coming Hither. The Place I like very well; and I do believe,
that we may live Here very well. But if the Place be not made Free, (I mean, as
as to the Customs, and Since when the Customs are taken off, and the Government
settled.
Government) then it will not be so well, and may hinder many that have Desires
to come. But if thou understand that those Two Things be cleared, then thou may
take thy Opportunity of coming this Summer. I rest

Thy truly Loving Husband, Thomas Hooton.

Boston, August the 14th. 1677. [Verbatim.]
Dear Father and Mother!
I Can now give you a farther Account concerning this Country; for I have
Traveled Three or Four Hundred Miles an End, the best Part of it by Land. I
have been in New Jersey, and like that Place very well; and I am sure, it is
the Fruitfullest Place in these Parts, and the Pleasantest to dwell in: For
there is all sorts of Provision as plentiful as it is in England; There wants
nothing but good Honest People to Inhabit it. The Ship that was bound for
New Jersey, arrived about the Second or Third Day of this Month; I was in
New Jersey, when She came in; I was the First, that saw Her: So the next Day, I
went Aboard of Her; and the People told me, They were Eight Weeks at Sea; and
the first Land they made, was Cape-Codd in New England, which was an Hundred
Leagues out of their way: And they were at a great Loss for want of a Pilot to
carry them along the Shore; but while they were at Sea, they wanted for
nothing. Now I have seen most of these Parts hereabout; and, to my thinking,
New Jersey exceeds them All for good Land, good Timber, good Meadow, and other
good Conveniences that are Here: For One Acre in this Place, is worth half a
dozen in other Places that lie Hereabouts; and I could be very glad, that You
and Your Family were safe arrived Here. But, I hope, I shall see you all in
London within these Three Months; and then I shall give you a better Account
concerning our Affairs. So, having no more at present to trouble you with, I
rest, and remain

Your Dutiful Son, Ephraim Warren.
These for Mr. Henry Warren, in Fenchurch-Street, this deliver with Care, I
pray.
New Jersey, 20th. 2d. Month, 1678. [This is Extractim.]
Dear Friends!
I Doubt not, but it will be great Satisfaction to You, to hear of Mine, and
the rest of Friends Passage to, and safe Arrival in New Jersey. We took Ship
the Sixteenth of November, and made the Land of New Jersey in Thirty-Four
Days. [ And many other Things he writes of, needless here to be mentioned: But
of the Country thus.]

Now Friends, as to this Country, there has been much said by several Persons
in Commendation thereof, both as to the Increase of all sorts of Grains and
Fruits; as also, to the Plenty of Fish, Fowl, Deer, Swine, etc. that I shall
not need to add any thing to it: But, in short, this I have to say; That I do
not know any one thing to fall short of what has been Reported of this
Province; but that more might truly have been said of its pleasant Situation,
wholesome Air, and general and great Increase of all things planted; and
especially, of Indian-Corn, which is a very good and serviceable Grain many
ways. The English Wheat and Barley primely Good; but Rye and Pease, much
better than any I ever saw in England or Ireland. I doubt not, but you have had
an Account of all other Matters, before this (by those who came to Jersey
before Me) comes to your Hands: And I have no other end in this, than keeping
you from the rash Censures of People that know it not; as also, for the Good
and Prosperity of this Good Country, etc.

Subscribed, Your Friend, William Clark.
Directed for William Penn, Gawen Lawry, and Edward Billinge.
Weymouth, 28th. 6th. Month, 1678. [Verbatim.] A Letter from Thomas Budd, who
had then been at New Jersey, and is gone thither again with his Wife and Family.
Dear Friend, Gawen Lawry!
I Am safely come from New Jersey, where I left Friends in Health, who like the
Country very well. We have set down both Trades and Husbandmen together in the
Island called Chygoe's- Island; where we have built, and are building many
Houses; but it is too strait, to contain so many People, as are already upon it.
I suppose, I have Traveled, more in New Jersey, than any other Person that
came lately; which I did at my own proper Charge, that I might be able to
satisfy my Self, and Acquaintance, concerning the Country. I intend to be
shortly in London, and then may give a fuller Account of all Proceedings. And I
doubt not, but New Jersey will be as thriving a Place, as any is in America. I
desire Information what Ships are going, or to go thither this Year; which is
the Needful, at present, from

Thy Dear Friend, Thomas Budd.
Superscrib'd for Gawen Lawry, in George-Yard, in Lombard Street, Merchant.
Burlington in New Jersey, upon the River Delaware, the 19th. of the 4th.
Month called June, 1678. An Extract of a Letter written by John Crips, to his
Brother and Sister.
Dear and Loving Brother and Sister!
I Have received both your Letters, wherein I understand your Faith concerning
this Country is much shaken through several false Reports given thereof; which
may be proved false under the hands of several good Friends, I hope as worthy
to be believed as that Reporter; and such as have had more Experience of this
Place, than he had or could have in so short a time. Besides, he came amongst
us shortly after our coming hither, when things were not settled in that Order
amongst us as now they are. Neither indeed did he find such Entertainment from
some, as he expected; which I suppose makes him speak the worst he can devise
of this Place. But I question not, but his Reports will in a short time be
wiped away: Some of which, in my Knowledge, are gross Lies, as well as
Contradictions to his own Words. For I remember, when I Traveled with him
through Part of New Jersey, he confessed, That much of this Land was as good or
better, than the Land in Road-Island.

And it is really my judgment that those people that cannot be contented with
such a Country, and such Land as this is, they are not worthy to come here. And
this I can truly tell you if I were now in England with you my Friends, (and
which I should be very glad to see) yet if all I had in the World would but
bring me hither, I should freely leave You, and my Native-Country, and come to
New Jersey again; which I have said many a time heretofore; but now I write it
under my Hand; and it is really the Truth, whether you will believe it or not.
And farther, I can truly tell you, That I desire not, nor dare not to write the
least Untruth to draw you, or any others to this Place: But an resolved, if I
never see your Face more, to leave you to your own Freedom in the Lord. But I
hope, you are not insensible of my Love, and Desires for You; though I am ( I
say) constrained to Forbear persuading. You, or any one else, against their own
Freedoms: yet I think it my Duty to let You, and all Men know the Truth of
things as near as I can.

Your Letter says, it is reported, the water is not so good as in England. I do
not remember, that ever I tasted better water in any part of England, than the
springs of this Place do yield; of which is made very good bear, and Ale; And
here is also Wine and Sider. And whereas your Letter to me says, several have
come back from this Country to England; Two or Three, I suppose, there are Lazy
idle persons, that have done so. But on the other hand here are several
persons, Men of Estates, that have been here, and have gone back to England,
and sold their Estates, and returned with their whole families hither again;
which methinks, should take many of these Scruples out of the way, if nothing
else were said or done in praise of this Country. But, I suppose, there are
many in England, that desire to hear ill of this Place, because they would keep
their Friends there with them, and they think, we never write enough of the bad
Properties of the Country and Vermin in it. Now, this I may say in short, That
here are Bears, Wolves, Foxes Rattle-snakes, and several other Creatures, (I do
believe) because I see the Indians have such Skins to sell. But I have
Traveled several hundreds of Miles to and fro, and I never (to my knowledge)
saw one of those Creatures, except two Rattle-snakes, and I killed them both. I
suppose, the Fear of those Creatures in England, is far worse to some there,
than the Hurt of them is here. And as for the Musketto-Fly, we are not troubled
with them in this Place; our Land for the most part Lying high and healthy, and
they for the most part are in Law Boggy ground. Thomas Budd, and his Family are
arrived, the ship Lies before this Town that brought them: I wish, you have
not cause to repent, that you came not along with them. They had a very good
Passage, and so had the London Ship; they are both in the River at this time. I
understand by Thomas Budd, that he did satisfy you as near as he could, of the
Truth of things here; and you had as much reason to believe him, as that other
person, and more too; for Thomas had far more Experience of this Place, than he
(I say) could have in the short time he was among us. So of these things, I
shall forbear to write any farther at present; and with my true love to you
all, my Friends, with my hearts Desire for your Welfare every way, etc. I rest

Your True and Loving Brother, John Crips.
To the Truth of the Contents of these Things, we subscribe, our Names, Daniel
Wills, Thomas Olive, Thomas Harding, Thomas Budd, William Peachey.


An Abstract of a Letter from Daniel Wills to William Biddle; (Then Living in
Bishops-gate-Street in London; who with his Wife and Family, is this present
5th. Month, 1681. with several Servants, gone for New Jersey.
Dear Friend!
I Received thine by Henry Salter, but it came too late to my hand; so that I
could not write any thing in answer until this time. I understand thou
would know something from me concerning New Jersey, which indeed I had given
thee a large account of, without thy desiring only Joseph Hempsley satisfied
me, that he had done it. Let every Man write according to his Judgment; and
this is Mine, concerning this Country: I do really believe it to be as good a
Country, as any Man need to dwell in; and it is much better than I expected
every way. For Land I will assure thee, here is as good by the Judgment of Men,
as any is in England. And for my part, I like the Country so well, and it is so
Pleasant to me, that if I had a good Estate in Land in England, I should not
come to live upon it: For through Industry, here will be all Things produced,
that are necessary for a Family, as is in England; and far more easier, I am
satisfied. When I am walking alone, and the Lord is with me, and the Sense of
His good Dealings is brought before me, I cannot but admire Him for His
Mercies; and often in secret bless His Name, that ever He turned my Face
hitherward; and gave me Confidence in Himself, and Boldness by Faith to oppose
all Gainsayers, though never ^o strong. Al^hough then I could not say, I had a
Call or Command to leave the Land of my Nativity: Yet now of a Truth I can say,
the Lord removed me therefrom; and in what I did, I had Peace in Him. And in
all my Exercises by Sea and Land, I never felt the least Matter in me, as to
desire I had not come forward; but rather rejoiced in the Lord, in the midst of
all. Though my Removal was not ordinary, because of the Largeness of my Family;
yet, blessed be the Name of the Lord, all is well to our Content. So if thou
heedest every ones Sayings, thou will have work enough: I heeded none, but the
Lord. My Resolution was, and my Sayings to several O^posers, That I would come;
if God hindered me not, no Man should* I have writ about the 26 th. of the 9
th. Month, to John Mulliner, and Edward Cooper, largely, concerning the
Country; thou may write to them to have a Copy of it, if it comes to hand
before This, which I something question.

And now, my Dear Friends, and Ancient Acquaintance ( William, and Sarah
Biddle) My Love you may feel beyond Expression. And if you have Clearness to
come to New Jersey, let nothing hinder; but if you have a Stop upon your
Spirits, let not any thing farther you, until the Lord clears your Way. In this
my Writing, I do assure you, I deny my self; for, if I might, I should write to
forward you; but I dare not. Though you may understand by my Letters, how it is
with Me and Mine, and many Others; I know, if a Man cannot Live here, I do
believe he can hardly live in any Place in the World. This being the Place set
before Me of the Lord, and if He gives Length of Days, I will see what He will
afford me in it. The last Ship that came to New York, brought several
Passengers; some of which came to see this Country, and liked it well. So, Dear
Friends, you may stand against all Opposers concerning the Land; for it is Good.

Subscribed, Daniel Wills.
Burlington, the 16 th. of the 11 th. Month, 1679.
An Extract of a Letter written by William, and Ruth Embly, to Samuel Racles of
Nottingham, from Burlington, in New Jersey.
Loving Friend,
AFter dear Love to thy Self, and Wife, and rest of Friends: This may acquaint
you, we all crossed the Seas very shortly and pleasantly. My Wife was pretty
well Aboard, in respect of her Condition, and was Delivered of a Girl in
Delaware-River, did very well, and is very well content and satisfied with the
Country, etc. We are now going to settle a Town at the Falls, a Place reported
(and credited) to be without Compare to any other yet known: None equal for
pleasant Healthful Air, Lovely Situation; second to none for Fertility. The
Next, I hope, shall inform you more: Our Love to Friends, etc.

Subscribed, William, and Ruth Embly.

From the Falls of Delaware in New Jersey, the 12th. of the 6th. Month, 1680.
Mahlon Stacy's Letter to George Hutcheson.
Dearly Beloved Friend, and Brother!
IN the Blessed Truth of Jesus do I dearly Salute Thee, thy dear Wife, and all
tender Friends, with whom I have been Conversant, and amongst whom my Spirit
has been Refreshed; my dear Love in the Lord salutes them all, desiring as one
traveling for the Good and Prosperity of all that love the Lord Jesus; that
Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God the Father; and our Lord Jesus Christ, may be
multiplied amongst them abundantly, that they all may be completely furnished,
wanting nothing, being made able to stand in the Stormy Day, which is hasting
on to try the Foundation of all Professions: In which it shall be said, Woe to
the Wicked; for it shall go all with them in that Day, when they shall come to
receive the Reward of their Doings. But to the Righteous, it may be well said;
It shall go well with you, even all of you, that have born the Name of Jesus;
for the Reward of my Love is given you, says the Lord; and great shall be your
Peace and Portion for ever. Amen.

Dear Friend, Thine of the 23 d. 11 th. Month, 1679. I h^ve Received with
great Gladness and Acceptance, as a Token of thy endeared Love and Care, with
thy tender Desires for us, and grave Counsel to us: all which I dearly accept
of, knowing it was the Flowings-forth of a Soul fi^l'd with Love to the
Heritage of God in these Parts. For the watering of whom, God has fil^'d the
Hearts of His Servants with His pure Love, precious Life, and Streams of Living
Refreshment, for the Comforting of Jacob in his Travels and Trials, and for the
gladding of Israel in the Day of Exercise. So, although we are separated as to
the Outward, (a little Scattering as I may say) yet the God of Life abounds in
His Love to His little Flock, daily extending His Peace (as a River) to His
Remnant; And is determined of a small Number, to make a Great and Strong
Nation: And this I plainly saw before I left my Native Country; and the Lord is
mightily bringing it to pass, in His Removing the Heathen that know Him not,
and making Room for a better People, that fears His Name. It Is hardly credible
to believe, how the Indians are wasted in Two Years Time; and especial the
last Summer: and how the English are increased both in Cattle and Corn, in a
little time. Things go exceeding well with Friends, since they were settled,
and our Meetings are duly Kept. The Lord our God is with us, and the Shout of
a King is amongst us, Glory, Glory to the Lord our God for ever! I perceive you
have strange Reports concerning Us, and our Country; yet our Condition is far
otherwise than is represented unto you: for our Land yields its Strength to us
in a plentiful manner, and we enjoy Fullness of Good Things: The greatest Want
is that of our Friends; yet the Lord is adding to our Number greatly; and in a
short Time, this Place will be Populated. Friends are generally Healthful and
Well. Mine, and my Wifes dear and tender Love salutes Thee and Thine, with all
the Faithful in the Lord; and that the Fountain of the Love of God, may be your
daily Refreshment and Consolation, prays

Thy Endeared, and Loving assured Friend, Mahlon Stacy.

An Abstract of a Letter from Thomas Harrison to his Brother; wherein he writes
of many Private Things: But of the Country, in short, thus.
Dear Brother!
THis is a Pleasant Country, the Woods are like a Garden; for all sorts of
Flowers and Herbs grow in them, and Strawberries, and other Fruits in
abundance; and our Land far exceeds England for one Thing; For Three Pecks of
Wheat will sow an Acre of this Land, which in England, Two Bushels will hardly
do it. I cannot express all Things, that we have in this Country.

Dear Brother, Pray send me a Brass-Compass, with a Dyal for this Latitude;
whereby the more easy to find the marked Trees of my own Land, from other
Men's. Few in this Country have done more than I have. I shall have senc'd and
cleared a Quarter of a Mile this Summer. I have set Four Acres of Indian-Corn;
and in the Fall, I shall Plow Twelve Acres of Wheat, and Six of Pease. I, and
my Family are very well; and, for my own part, never better in all my Life; for
I never Who was greatly troubled with a Cough heretofore.
Coughed since I came into this Country.

Subscribed, Thomas Harrison.
Burlington, 27 th. of March, 1681. [ Who has not been There above a Year, and
an half; and being a poor Man, had not any Servants.]
An Abstract of Mahlon Stacy's Letter to his Brother Revill, and some Others;
Dated the 26th. of the 4th. Month, 1680.
BUt now a word, or two of those strange Reports you have of Us, and our
Country; I affirm, they are Lies in the very Ground of them, and spoken from a
Spirit of Envy: It is a Country, that produces all things for the Support, and
Sustenance of Man, in a plentiful manner. If it were not so, I should be
ashamed of what I have before written: But I can stand, having Truth on my
Side, against and before the Face of all Gainsayers, and evil Spies. I have
Traveled through most of the Places that are settled, and some that are not;
and in every Place, I find the Country very apt to answer the Expectation of
the Diligent. I have seen Orchards so laden with Fruit, I have wondered to see
it, their very Limbs torn in pieces with the weight of their Fruit; and most
Delicious to the Taste, and Lovely to behold. I have seen an Apple Tree from a
Pippin-Kernel, yield a Barrel of curious Syder; and Peaches in such plenty,
that some People took their Carts a Peach-gathering: I could not but smile at
the Conceit of it. They are a very delicate Fruit, and hang almost like our
Onions that are tied on Ropes. I have seen and known this Summer Forty Bushels
of good Bold-Wheat, of One Bushel sown: And many more such Instances I could
bring, which would be too tedious here to mention. We have from the Times
called May until Michaelmals, great store of very good Wild-Fruit; as
Strawberries, Cramberries, and Huckle-berries, which are like our Bilberries in
England; but far sweeter: They are very wholesome Fruits; the Cramberries much
like Cherries for Color and Bigness, which may be kept till Fruit come in
again; an Excellent Sauce is made of them for Venison, Turkies, and other great
Fowls; and they are better to make Tarts, than either Gooseberries, or
Cherries: We have them brought to our Houses, by the Indians, in great plenty.
My Brother Robert had as many Cherries this Year, as would have loaded several
Carts. It is my Judgment, by what I have observed, That Fruit Trees in this
Country destroy themselves, by the very Weight of their Fruit. As for Venison,
and Fowls, here are great plenty: We have brought Home to our Houses by the
Indians, Seven or Eight Fat Bucks of a day; and sometimes put by as many,
having no Occasion for them. And Fish in their Season very plenteous: My Cousin
Revill, and I, with some of my Men, went last Third Month called May, into the
River to catch Herrings; for at that time they come in great Shoals into the
Shallow's; we had neither Rod, nor Net; but after the Indian Fashion, made a
round Pinfold about Two Yards over, and a Foot high; but left a Gap for the
Fish to go in at, and made a Bush to lay in the Gap to keep the Fish in* and
when that was done, we took Two long Birches and tied their Tops together; and
went about a Stones-cast above our said Pinfold: Then hauling these Birche's
Boughs down the Stream, where we drove Thousands before us: But so many got
into our Trap as it would hold; and then we began to haul them to Shore, as
fast as Three or Four of us could, by Two or Three at a time: And after this
manner, in half an Hour, we could have filled a Three-Bushel Sack of as good
and large Herrings, as over I saw. And as to Beef and Pork, here is great
plenty of it, and good cheap; and also, good Sheep: The common Grass of this
Country feeds Beef very Fat; I have Killed Two this Year; and therefore, I have
reason to know: Besides, I have seen this Fall, in Burlington, Killed Eight or
Nine Fat Oxen and Cowes on a Market Day, and all very fat. And though I speak
of Herrings only, and lest any should think we have little other sorts, we have
great plenty of most sorts of Fish, that ever I saw in England; besides several
other sorts that are not known There; as Rocks, Cat-Fish, Shoads, Sheep-Heads,
Sturgeons: And Fowls plenty; as Ducks, Geese, Turkies, Swans, Pheasants,
Partridges; and many other sorts that I cannot remember, and would be too
tedious to mention* Indeed the Country, take it as a Wilderness, is a brave
Country; Though no Place will please all; but some will be ready to say, He
writes of Conveniences, but not of Inconveniences: In answer to those, I
honestly declare, Here is also some Barren Land; as ( I suppose) there is in
most Places of the World; and more Wood, than some would have upon their Lands.
Neither will the Country produce Corn without Labor, nor Cattle be got without
something to buy them, nor Bread with Idleness; else it would be a brave
Country indeed: And I question not, but that all then would give it a good
Word. For my part, I like it so well, that I never had the least Thought of
returning to England, except on the Account of Trade.

Subscribed, Mahlon Stacy.

In another Letter to William Cook of Sheffield, and some Others, he writes
thus.
THis is a most brave Place, what ever Envy or Evil Spies may speak of it. I
could wish you all here. Burlington will be a Place of Trade quickly; for here
is way for Trade. I, with Eight more, last Winter, bought a good Ketch of Fifty
Tun, freight her out at our own Charge, and sent Her to Barbados, and so to
sail to Saltitudo, to take in part of Her Loading in Salt, and the Rest in
Barbados Goods as She came back: Which said Voyage She has accomplished very
well; and now Rides before Burlington, discharging Her Loading; and so to go to
the West Indies again: And we intend to Freight Her out with our own Corn. We
have wanted nothing since we came hither, but the Company of our Good Friends
and Acquaintance. All our People are very well, and in a Hopeful way to Live
much better, than ever they did; and not only so, but to provide well for their
Posterities. They improve their Land, and have Good Crops: And if our Friends
and Countrymen come, they will find better Reception, than We had by far at
first, before the Country was settled as now it is. I know not one amongst the
People, that desires to be in England again; I mean, since settled. I wonder at
our Yorkshire People, that they had rather Live in Servitude, and work hard
all the Year, and not be Three Pence the better at the Years End, than stir out
of the Chimney Corner, and transport themselves to a Place; where, with the
like pains in Two or Three Years, they might know better things.

Well, my Friend, I never repented my Coming hither, nor yet remembered thy
Arguments, and Outcry against New Jersey with regret. I live as well to my
Content, and in as great Plenty, as ever I did, and in a far more likely way to
get an Estate; though I hear, some have thought I was too large in my Former; I
affirm it to be true; having seen more with mine Eyes in this time since, than
ever yet I wrote of.

To George Hutcheson he writes,] That he has Built a Water-Mill, that is
judged to be the Best in America; and that, though most of his Servant's Time
had been spent in Building; yet last Spring he had got a great quantity of Land
cleared, and Fallowed, which he intended to Sow this Fall with Wheat and Rye:
That his Brother Robert had this Year as good a Crop of Corn, as ever he had in
his Life.

From the Falls of Delaware, in West-New-Jersey, the 26 th. of the 4 th.
Month, 1680. Mahlon Stacy.

The Extract of a Letter from Samuel Jennings, One of the Commissioners in
New Jersey, since the Customs were taken off, and Government Settled: Directed
to William Pen, Edward Billinge, or Gawen Lawry.
Dear Friends!
THis may give you an Account of Mine, and my Families safe Arrival in
New Jersey, with all the Rest that came forth with us: I might say something
concerning our Passage at Sea; but I wave it for want of Time: and, in fine,
can say all was well; for which, I bless God, and the Lord keep us all sensible
of it, with the rest of His Mercies for ever.

Dear Friends!

About Six Weeks since, we arrived in Delaware-River; where I expected to have
met with a Combat in the Denial of Customs. In our Passage at Sea, I had
communicated to all, that had any considerable Cargoe on Board, the Opinion of
Council concerning the illegal Demand thereof, with what else I thought might
be for their Information; which thus far prevailed, that most, if not all
concerned, seemed resolved to deny the Paying of Custom here, having paid all
the King's Duties in England. In good time we came to Anchor in Delaware; where
one Peter Alrick came Aboard to us, and brought a Handsome Present to our
Commander, and sent for me into the Round-House, where They both were; and
Peter told me, He had nothing to say to Us, relating to This Peter Alrick was
the Person that formerly used to Collect the Customs.
Customs; he had no Commission for it, nor did he know of any Body that had. So
we had all our Goods safely Landed, after this unexpected easy manner.

[But a Letter was writ by Sir John Werden; declaring, That the Customs were
taken off, and the Port for ever made Free, and the Government settled.]

Friends, In pursuance of the Trust committed to me, after my Arrival, I
acquainted those nominated in the Commission with me of it: But, in a short
time after, I received Your Letters, giving an Account of a New Grant obtained,
wherein the Customs are taken off, a Free Port confirmed, and the Government
settled on Edward Billinge; the which, I doubt not, will be very acceptable to
every Honest Man. But, as yet, I have not had time to let the People, in
general, know it. And now, seeing the Ports are made legally Free, and the
Govornment settled, I would not have any thing to remain, as a Discouragement
to Planters. Here are several good and convenient Settlements already; and here
is Land enough, and Good enough, for many more. I shall give a farther Account
of all Things as Opportunity presents; I cannot do it now, the Messenger being
in such haste, which forces me to a Conclusion.

Subscribed, Samuel Iennings.
New Jersey, the 17 th. of October. 1680.
A Letter wrote to Mr. Edward Billinge, Governor of West-New-Jersey.
Sir,
NOw, that illegal Imposition of Customs is taken off, the Port and Country
made free, and the Government thereof settled on Your Self; I may honestly
affirm. That the South and South Western-Parts of New-^ersey, lying on the Sea
and Delaware-River, maybe made one of the Best Colonies in America, for the
Situation, Air, and Soil, Ports and Creeks, for good Harbors and Havens, are
not inferior to any; but as Good and Better, than most in these Parts of the
World; having not sewer than Thirty Navigable Creeks, ranging themselves at
convenient Distance upon the Sea, and that most stately River of Delaware; some
flowing Five, some Eight, some Ten, some Fifteen or Twenty Miles up into the
Country: And not one of these Creeks, but is a good Situation for a Town both
for Trade and Delight. Neither wants the Inland-Country great Plenty of
Delightful Fresh Rivers, and most delicate Springs in abundance. And yet it is
not these Springs and Rivers, Creeks and Ports alone, that makes New Jersey
exceed most of her Neighbors for Situation, and Healthyness of Air; but the
general Boldness of her Shoars, with the Natural Ascent, or Gradual Rising of
the Land from the South Sea to the utmost, or extreme Points of its most
Northerly Extent; which from South to North, (that is to say, from the Mouth to
the Head of that never-too-often to be mentioned goodly River of Delaware) is
about Two Hundred and Fifty Miles; at whose large expanded Mouth, begins the
Separation betwixt New Jersey, and Maryland; and about Eighty Miles farther
up, in a more contracted manner gently divide betwixt You, and a very good
Tract of Land; the which, if settled with good Neighbors, and under a right
Authority, would be vastly Advantageous to Yours both in Commerce and Defense:
For that there being already a pretty considerable quantity of Swedes,
Finlanders, and Dutch, seated on that Tract of Land along by the Riverside;
and who, through a good Government over them, in time may become very good
Neighbors; at least, much better than at present they are.

But, Sir, I think it was highly your Advantage, that you found few or no
Inhabitants settled in New Jersey; so that you had none to new-mold, displace,
or remove, contend or quarrel with: None being seated, or to settle there, but
by mutual Concessions, and a Grant for their Land, first had and obtained under
Hand and Seal. And likewise, before you sat down in any Part of the Country,
your giving Order to buy the Lands of the Natives, and give them real
Satisfaction for the same, was a most Christian and Prudent Act; and by which
means you are assured of their Love, and Friendship for ever: And the Poor
Creatures are never the Worse, but much the Better, as Themselves do confess;
being now supplied by the English, in the way of Truck and Trade, with
whatsoever they want or stand need of. And they Hunt and Fish, as here-to-fore,
except in Enclosed or Planted Ground.

But it may be demanded, Why these Dutch and Swedes, especially some of the
English that came lately, should seat on the Other Side of the River, rather
than in New Jersey? The only Reason, as a Reason, that I can give, was because
of the Custom imposed at New Jersey heretofore, and the Government not being
settled, as now it is.

And moreover, the Land on the other side next the River (upon which these
People are set down) for the most part is a deeper Soil, and less Wood upon it,
than upon some of the Land on your side over against it; for that much of the
richest Soil and best Land in New Jersey, lies not upon the very Brink of the
River, but somewhat backward into the Country; which is a convenience of no
small value to such Planters, who truly understand the erecting, and settling
of Colony's next the Waterside in these Parts. For it is the height of the
Land and Shoar's, and not the miry depth of the Soil, that makes Burlington,
and the many Miles above and below it (where are many good Settlements besides)
so wholesome an Air, and free from the Musuetto's, Agnes, Feavors, etc. And
although I say the Soil be not so deep on Jersey side next the River, yet I am
sure there are as good Corns, and Fruits of all sorts, as ever I saw, or heard
of in any of these parts of America. Likewise, Sir, I suppose you want not to
know, by information, that the Rivers and Riv'lets I mentioned are abundantly
plenish't with all the Kinds of the Fish and Fowl of England, and several that
you have not, and much better. Also the Land breeds good Horses, good Sheep,
and good Deer, and Swine in abundance, and as large Oxen, and Cowes as in any
parts of England, and the Flesh eats much better, especially the Pork and
Venison. Sir, I make no question, but you have heard as much as all this, and a
great deal more concerning the Situation, growth, and product of New Jersey
(and which may truly be said.) But it is possible I may inform you of one
particular, that you may not have minded, which is that this Country, being
bounded on the West with Delaware, on the South with the main Ocean, and on the
East with Hudson's River; some of whose North-West Branches do almost shake
hands with the most North-Easterly branches of Delaware, and in a manner clasp
the whole Province about, until they reduce it somewhat into the form of a
blunt wedge, so that with a small charge (considering the advantage,) New
Jersey from a Peninsula may be made an entire Island. But however as it is,
with the Methods you have taken for the setting thereof: for instance; that
incomparable way of dividing the whole Country into a hundred propriety's
(whereby every individual Purchaser has a share of the good, and the bad) is
away so just and equal, that not any plantation in these parts at present does,
or for the future in that point, can ever come near it, because of their
promiscuous or confused settling at their first fitting down. And then as to
Your Government (a free holder being Annually to be chosen out of each of these
hundred proprieties, and as the Representatives thereof to fit, and freely Act
in the Parliament, or general Assembly, where all grievances are to be heard
and redressed, and where all Laws (agreeable to those immutable fundamentals
agreed on in your general concessions) for the inviolable preservation of
liberty and property are to be made. All which, are such pristine and certain
methods for maintaining the just right and equal utility of the whole
Community, that I do not see the most Capricious can assign, wherein it is
either faulty in exceeding, or deficient in falling short of the most Ancient
true English, and best Christian Government in the World. Wherefore I am
satisfied it will not now be long before New Jersey be peopled.

And, Sir, since the Government thereof is settled in so Generous and Worthy a
Hand as your own, at which I can assure you, very many Honest and Sober People
in these Parts, as well as those more direct of your Own Way, greatly rejoice,
and fervently desire to see you in America; but for ought I know, none more
than does,

SIR, Your Faithful Friend to Serve You, Robert Smythe.
20 th. Arill, 1681.
AN EXSTRACT Out of a Small Treatise, Wrote By BEAVCHAMP PLANTAGENET,
Concerning The Province of New-Albion, in the Year, 1648. Since Granted by the
King to the Duke of York; Of which New Jersey is a Part.
IN his Epistle, (page 4.) he advises to follow Old Cato's Rule, To seat in a
pure Healthy Air; else, after all Charges of Settling and Building, the People
Dye, and their Posterity Extinguish. Secondly, To sit down upon a
Navigable-River for Trade and Supply. For this Reason, I (on my View) disliked
Virginia; most of it being seated scatteringly, and among Salt-Marshes and
Creeks, worse than Essex-Thanet and Kent, for Agues and Diseases;
Brackish-Waters to Drink and Use, and a Flat Standing-Water in Woods breed a
double Corrupt Air; so the Elements are Corrupted.

Chapter the 2d. Page the 18th. and 19th.
WHereas that Part of America lying about Thirty-Nine Degrees, at Delaware-Bay,
is Situate in the best and same Temper; and as Italy, between too Cold Germany,
and too Hot Barbary; so This lying midway between New England Two Hundred
Miles North, and Virginia a Hundred and Fifty Miles South, is freed from the
Extreme Cold and Barrenn^ss of the One, and Heat and Anguish-Marshes of the
Other; and is like Lombardy, a Rich Fat Soil and Plain; and having Thirty-Four
Rivers on the main Land, and partaketh of the Healthiest Air, and most
Excellent Commodities of Europe; and replenished with the Goodliest Woods of
Oaks, and all Timber for Ships and Masts. Mulberries for Silk, sweet Cypres,
Cedars, Pines, and Furs; Four sorts of Grapes for Wine and Raisings: and great
variety of choice Fruits, Fis^* and Fowl; stored with all sorts of Corn;
yielding Five, Seven, and Ten Quarters on an Acre; Silk-Grass, Salt, Good
Mines, and Dyers-Ware; Five sorts of Deer, Buffs, and Huge Elkes to Plow and
Work, bringing Three Young at once. The Vplands covered many Months with
Berries, Roots, Ches-nuts, Wall-nuts, Beech, and Oak Mast for them. Hogs, and
Turkies, Five hundred in a Flock. Many Thousands of Acres of plain Mead-Land,
fit for Corn, Rice, Flax, Hemp, etc. And that this is the True State of the
Country lying on the Bay and River of Delaware, he affirms, is testified under
the several Hands of those who had been, and Traded there: And is farther
witnessed by Capt. Smith, New-England's Prospect, Capt. Powell's Map, and other
Descriptions of New England and Virginia.

Subscribed by Capt. Brown. Capt. Clayborne. Robert Evelin. Stafford.
Constantine. Stratton. Thomas White. Richard Buckham. Christopher Thomas.
Edward Monmouth. Tenis, Paley. Edward Rhodes.


Page the 20, 21. of the same Treatise. An Extract of Robert Evelin's
Description of the Land lying between the Rivers of Delaware, and Hudsons
River; The which is Now called New Jersey.
THat Ocean Sea I take to be about one hundred and sixty miles, and I find some
broken Land, Isles and In-ters, and many small Isles, at Eg-Harbor, but going
to Delaware-bay by Cape May (which I understand is very well set out in Captain
( Powels Map) on that North-side, about five miles up within, is a Port or Road
for any Ships called the Nook. And Twelve Leagues higher a little above the Bay
and Bar, is the River of Manteses, which has Twenty miles on Charles River,
and Thirty Miles running up a fair Navigable deep River; all a flat level of
rich, fat, black Mold, which I think to be about 300000 Acres.

Next above, about Six Leagues, is a Fair deep River, Twelve Miles Navigable,
where is Free stone. The next Asomoeches River. The next is Eriwomick a King of
Forty men. And five miles above the King of Ramock; and four miles higher the
King of Axion, And next to him Ten Leagues over Land and Inland King of
Calcefar. And Six Leagues higher is a Creek called Mosilian; and then we come
to the Falls, made by a Rock of Limestone; and I suppose it is about Sixty
five Leagues from the Sea, near to which is an Isle fit for a City, all
Materials there on to Upon which Isle, Burlington is now built.
build. And above the Falls the River-Fair and Navigable; as the Indians
informed me, for I went but Ten Miles higher. I do account all the Indians to
be about eight hundred. I saw there an infinite Quantity of Bustands, Swans,
Geese and Fowl, covering the shoars. As within Land, the like multitude of
Pigeons, and store of Turkeys; of which I tried one to weigh Forty Six pounds.
There is much variety and plenty of delicate Fresh and Sea Fish, And Elks, and
Dear that bring three young ones at a time And the woods are strewed many
Months with Chestnuts, Wall-Nuts, and Mast of several sorts to feed them. The
Barren grounds have four kinds of Grapes, and Mulberrys, with Ash, Elm, and
the Talest and greatest Pines, and Pich-Trees that I have seen. There are
several Wild Fruits; as the pine Aple, the dainty Parsemenas, etc. I shall
entreat you to believe me as a Gentleman and a Christian, I write nothing but
the truth.

Subscribed, Robert Evelin.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere might have been Published at least a Hundred Letters or Testimonies more
very lately written from the Inhabitants of New Jersey, in Praise of that
Country, AND NOW Settlement thereof; Which are forborne to be emitted, lest
thereby any should be induced or persuaded without due Consideration, to incline
for New Jersey in their own Wills. Therefore, before any determine a Removal to
New Jersey, let them weigh and consider the Matter well. And that all may see
their Way clear before they stir therein; Is the Unfeigned Desire of the
Publisher hereof.


