AN ABSTRACT OF The several Letters, and choice Occurrences, brought by the
last Post from Denmark, France, Sweden, and Holland, concerning the Affairs
and Designs of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

Comprising these ensuing Particulars, viz.

I The new Orders and Instructions of the States of Holland, sent to Admiral
Vantrump; With his Letter to their Lordships; The advancing of the Fleet from
the Isle of Rhee; the randezvouzing of their forces at Saint Martins; their
Message to the East-Indy Company, Merchants, and Hans-Towns; And their Decree
and Declaration for the supplying of Vantrump with Men, Moneys, and a new Fleet
of shipping.

II The advancing of the King of Scots from France; and a bloody Fight between
the French and Dutch at the City of Bourdeaux; with the full particulars, and
the event and success thereof.

III The rising of the Hollanders against Mr. Bradshaw, the Parliaments Agent
in Denmark; their falling upon him with sword and pistol; his Letter to the
King; and his Majesty's answer.

IIII The taking of a Coach laden with Gold, going for Holland; and the manner
thereof; with the Resolution of the Officers and Seamen at Chattam.

Licensed according to the late Act for Printing.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1653.

The Orders of the States of Holland touching Vantrump; and the Instructions
sent by Sea and Land to his Randezvouz at St. Martins.
SIR,
THe States have dispatched new Orders to Van-Trump; and their Instructions are
gone both by Sea and Land to his Randezvouz at St. Martins. Not withstanding,
frequent allarmes arrive daily about the greatness of your English
preparations; yet their Lordships seem resolved to cast all upon the chance of
War. And to heighten the people in Zealand, they are fed with abundance of
Rumors touching England. At Middleburgh and other places it is given out, that
Genesis Blake is laid aside, at put in prison. At London they say the people are
in a great upror^, and that they came in mighty Tumults to the Parliament,
requiring an immediate peace to be made with the United Provinces; so that the
Zealanders say, The Parliament was forced to make them believe that Ambassadors
were coming hence to Treat of a peace, before they could pacisie and reconcile
the people. Such phantsies are very frequent in these parts.

But how they will salve their own sores, I know not; for Trump has lost his
main mast, and a great hole has bin made in the sides of his fleet. Certain it
is, that no l^ss then 19 are cast away and spoiled since he came on your
Channel, and diverse others since that time missing. Others are so foul, that
they must be sent home for Trimming and Tallowing. And therefore the States
here have ordered 60 fresh Sail, as a Recruit, to be ready against the 2^ of
February; 30 whereof are to be speeded away with all possible expedition. And
for the better dispatch they have sent Dewit to quicken all the Admiralties; he
and the Directors have already been at Amsterdam and Saerdam to give Order.

Messengers have been likewise sent to the East-Indy Company to borrow what
ships they can spare for the public service, but they have returned no answer
as yet. Nevertheless, here is talk of nothing but the having a hundred ships
ready against Spring; and yet there are but few visible, unless the new ones
now a building, to the number of 30 or 40. And for seamen you may guess they
are not over-stockt, seeing they resolve no Fleet shall go now for Greenland,
having use for the men against you in England. Wherefore the Drums have been
thundering again at Amsterdam, to awaken the people, and new Orders are issued
out to quicken the Work of new Frigots. The great East Indy ship is making
ready for Tromp at Ancusen; and of this new supply resolved on, they intend
about 30 for the Sound.

Great brags are made here of their alliance with Denmark, giving our, That
they expect great supplies thence for their assistance. But the Danish Resident
here in the Hague has made an unexpected motion to their Lordships for laying
aside the Treaty of Redemption, formerly made betwixt them and his Master, and
resume another way, which fills their heads with jealousy.

They have likewise an eye still upon the intercourse betwixt England and
France, suspecting the worst of this French application.

They have news also, That the Swede will insist resolutely upon the
maintaining of a free Trade betwixt the Hans-Towns and Sweden; wherein they
resolve here to cross the Swede, and give a stop to that Trade, by placing 3 or
4 men of War to lie in the Emes to block up the Trade of Emden, and will
fortify Delf Seilar, that they may prevent you by hook or by crook of all
necessaries for shipping out of those parts. Vantrump has sent a short Letter
to his mighty Masters, declaring, That he was forced to pass from Gravelin to
the Isle of Rhee, by reason he could not get convenient supply of provisions;
insomuch that many of his men are visited with sicness, and made disserviceable
for want of food; his ships and rigging much shattered and torn, by distress of
weather and storm, and therefore desires that some Vessels may be speeded to
him with supplies, both of Vessels, Men, and Provisions; without which he must
be forced to return, and leave the Merchants ships behind him. Whereupon the
States immediately ordered that a considerable sum should be forthwith sent unto
him.

Here is a great decay of Trade, and a mighty increase of Taxes; instead of
comfort, our sorrows increase, and the Lord knows when we shall have an end;
for now there is Excize laid upon Butter, Eggs, Cheese, and the smallest Fowl;
and no man dare say, Why must we not be free? But this is our comfort, Extremes
seldom but break their own Necks.

And that which does most startle them at present, is, That those English ships
which were blockt up by ours at Portolongone, are gotten out to sea, and, in
defiance of the Dutch, gave them all the go-by. And we likewise hear that the
rest of your ships in Leghorn, are resolved to fight their passage through Van
Galens Fleet.

From the Hague Jan. 24. stilo novo

SIR,
THe Merchants are now in great hopes, that fom good will be done with the
King, in reference to our ships detained; because our Resident Mr. Bradshaw
has now had audience in a very honorable manner, though his Majesty was not
there, which so netled the Dutch spectators, that within two hours after the
Residents return to his lodging, a desperate Crew of Varlets set upon his
Coachman as he was coming home; and all that they did then, was only to
affront the man without blows. But within a short space after, the same pack
of Beagles scenting two of the Residents servants as they were going to
complain of the first affront, fell upon them, and immediately wounded one of
them in the hand, pursuing them even home to the door of the Residents house,
and endeavored to force their passage by sword and pistol; but it pleased God
to prevent them, though notwithstanding the assault and tumult continued for
half an hour. Immediately hereupon the Resident sent to acquaint the King with
this violence, which both himself and his Council seemed to resent very highly,
returning answer, That care should be taken to find out the chief Actors, and
punish them severely; and thereupon the Guard was sent abroad to discover them;
but as yet I hear not of a man taken. The Resident has been abroad since to
visit some of the principal men of the Kingdom, who promise fair, assuring him
of the Kings and their own deep sense of the violation, and willing him to rest
confident of the same security here as their Ambassadors lately found in
England.

The Dutch here has been very studious to magnify their own cause and
affairs, in hope to draw on this King to imbark with them, and become Englands
declared enemy. His Fleet is fitting as fast as may be; and large sums are
promised by the Lord Keysar, Burgomaster of Dort, who has likewise given out,
That their Admiral Tromp has taken seventy of your ships laden with Coals,
and nine of your men of war, which were their Convoy. But there are few of
belief to credit this high-bounc'd story. From Hamburgh news is come hither,
that the Senate there is resolved to send their Syndic or Recorder to the
Parliament of England, which invites the Danish Court to have a more watchful
eye toward the design of Sweden.

From Copenhagen in Denmark, Jan. 1. stilo novo.

From France they write, That there has been a very dangerous Conflict between
the Dutch Captains, and the Citizens of Bourdeaux, the manner thus: Diverse of
the Flemins being walking upon the wharf and in the streets, were commanded by
the Elmers to cry, Vive le Roy, and les Princes de Conde and Conti, that is,
God save the King, and the Princes of Conde and Conti; but they refused,
saying, That they acknowledged no other Powers but the King of France and the
Prince of Orange. Upon which answer, the stout Elmers went from words to
blows, and for a short time exceeding hot was the dispute; but, at last, the
Hollander being weary of action, and pretty hansomly banged, retired on
shipboard, from whence they l^tstly many pieces of Ordnance; but immediately
after weighed anchor, and with their whole Fleet sailed toward Lermont, a Road
on the other side of the River. In this conflict many was killed and wounded on
both sides; what the event will be, few days will manifest; in the interim you
may behold it as a singular piece of great consequence.

The great talk is now of Charles Stuarts leaving of France; but first he
stays to see what hopes the Lord Wilmot will be able to send him out of
Germany, whither it is supposed he intends, if any thing can be effected there
to gain him an honorable and favorable Reception, and allowance to live on.
The Royal party presume much of the German Princes, who have fish of their own
to fry good store, notwithstanding the solemn Courtship and Complement of those
Princes to each other.

From Chattam it is advertised, That the Fleet will be suddenly ready to put
forth to sea; and that great is the resolution both Officers and Seamen, not
withstanding the late private differences amongst them. We hear of a Coach
carrying gold is stopped going for Yarmouth, and it is supposed it was designed
for Holland; but it is now secured for the States of England; no less then two
Firkins, the one covered over with Butter; the other with Soap: But where the
Buttonmakers are, I cannot (as yet) resolve you.

Finis.

