

THE ACADEMY OF PLEASURE. Furnished with all kinds of Complementall Letters,
Discourses, and Dialogues; with variety of new Songs, Sonets, and witty
Inventions. Teaching all sorts of Men, Maids, Widows, etc. to Speak and Write
wittily, and to bear themselves gracefully for the attaining of their desired
ends: how to discourse and demean themselves at Feasts and merry-Meetings at
home and abroad, in the company of friends or strangers. How to Retort,
Quibble, Jest or Joke, and to return an ingenious Answer upon any occasion
whatsoever. Also, A Dictionary of all the hard English words expounded. With a
Poetical Dictionary. With other Conceits very pleasant and delightful, never
before extant.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford at Fleet-bridge, and Will. Gilbertson in
Giltspur-street. 1656.

The Academy of Pleasure.
The first Book.
A Letter of Courtship to (...) Maid.
Beauteous Virgin,
THose that believe Cupid to be blind, are (undoubtedly) blind of all their
senses; he could never aim his Darts so right, nor his so sure if he were not
clear-sighted as an Eagle. The last time I saw you he took his stand in your
fair eyes, and thence directed an Arrow to my hear, which is now because but
one flaming lamp of Love: a Love (bright Virgin) as unstained as thy virtues,
and as immaculate as the soul of expiring Martyrs; what plea, then, could you
find should you be summoned to Venu; Bar; if your cruelty bereave him of
life, who has no longer to live than your goodness shall grant him a Being;
since, then, your smiles are my heaven, and your frowns my hell, and that you
are my Fats, and (...) or destroy (...)
and can damn or save me, let me know my Doom, that I may prepare my self
either Bliss or Torture; better to fall once, than be ever falling; send me my
Sentence (dear Mistress) as sperdily as may be, since the worst that can
happen will be the highest happiness,

Which is to die, Your Martyr.

SONG I. The languishing Lover. [Tune is, When Love with unconfined wings.]
1.
WHen first my eyes perused thy parts,
(Thou best of woman-kinde)
Love drew his bow and thril'd his darts,
Into my wounded mind.
The cruel Archer emptied all
His Quiver in my breast,
And now does triumph in my fall,
While I lie slain jest.
2.
I burn in immateriall fire
Such as the Ghosts below
Do bathe in, yet do never expire;
Come Thames, or silver Poe,
And quench these never-sading gleams
That scorch my panting heart,
Or else receive me to your streams,
That Life and Love may part.
A complemental Discourse between a young Man and a Maid the first time of
their meeting.
He. SWeet Lady, I was never happy till this minute, nor ever had cause to
think my self one of Fortunes Favorites till now; when I have the felicity
to behold a beauty so matchless as yours. If the word [Stranger] do not
fortify your breast with flint, I shall have hope that the humble prostration
of a loyal loving heart will not hang clouds on that heavenly face.


She. I Perceive (Sir) you are well skilled in Courtship, and know how to rank
and file your complements; but I wonder what you should see in me that might
encourage you to so hold a confidence to talk of Love and Loyalty; You have
not known me (Sir.)


He. No Lady; I have lived bitherto in a dark corner of the world, my
Hemisphere has enjoyed no Sun; some duskish false and foolish fires I have
seen, but now I behold the true Venus in her full brightness: you may
(perhaps) censure of Vanity, and rank me with these that take a pride to
manifest what Masters of Wit they are, while they glut the ears of their
Auditors with oily Phrases, and varnished Discourses; but could you behold my
heart, you would there find a reality equal to any of the Ages past, when Love
was not linked to sinister ends.


She. SIR, you might be pleased to preserve your Courtship for Her, you either
are, or may be mo^e intimate with, than you are ever like to be with me; You
much mistake my temper (Sir.) I must have ample experience of that man; virtue,
whom I afford so much as a look: there are those (no doubt) that will be proud
to receive your Rhetorical Addresses; but my self am of a clean contrary
inclination, who if I cannot beg your silence, as to discourses of this nature,
shall be compelled to quit your company.


SONG II. The Wanton.
[Tune is, Fair ^idelia tempt no more]
1.
STay, (my dear Eliza) stay,
Aurora yet has not ushered in the day,
Lie still my dearest,
What is it thou fear?
Let Us kiss, and take our fill of Venus play:
Hark; what (...) do greet our ears?
(While the Doves
Sigh our Loves)
It Is the music of the spheres:
Then let us mingle souls,
And mount above the Poles,
Those active swee^s
Between the shee^s,
Loves highest fame inroles.
2.
This great world must peopled be,
And therefore Mayd^ do sin most monstrously;
Hang tedious wo^ng,
He must be doing
That means to boast a numerous Progeny.
Come then (Dearest) let us advance,
Never fear
This career
Will either break or split my lance;
Sweet, this is no more
Than thy mother did before,
Love's sacred Rices
Require these nights
Forty times ore and ore.
3.
While we thus in love combine,
(I the stout Oalre, and thou the tender Vine)
See where the graces
Smile in our faces,
And hand in hand in (...) ^^rr^^^o join.
Jove, I do not envy thee,
While I sip
From her lip
Nect^^ far more brisk and free,
Than that which hum's thy head,
Filled out by Ga^y^ed,
In her all pleasures,
And all treasures
Are summed and centered.
A queint Jeer.
SIR,
THose cleathes fit you as well as if they were made for you; sure you can
conjure, and have the Devil for your Tailor: you could never have such a
peculiar elegancy of habit else, a method that no man in Town is master of,
your spruce finified self excepted, you do not use to starch your beard (Sir)
do you?

The Retort.
Troth Sir,
THese poor ornaments found creation, as the world did, when it lay like a
lump; I spoke but the word and all was fitted to my hand; but to tell you the
Fashioners name. I confess I cannot, only by circumstances, (I mean,
comparing his person with yours) I guess him to be that very thing that got
you, you are his very picture I Will assure you Sir, and may pass for the same
slacksinew'd Tailor were your hair more gray, and clothes more gawdie.

A wanton Letter to a witty Gentlewoman, desiring her company such a day at
such a place.
LADY,
I Know I have made my self but the Ladder that your wit must mount upon by
this Address, but I shall beseech you (for credit of your own clemency) to
whip me only with Rods and not with Scorpions: I have had experience of the
tartness of your temper, and do perfectly know that six more such as your
self are able to jeer a horse to death but I shall hope my business will not
deserve your anger while I only beg your company tomorrow at two after Noon at
Mr. G^imes his house, where Tom Shallow and my self are resolved to sacrifice
as much Sack as would turn a Mill, to Mirth and Beauty; you must be our Venus,
the Oblation will not off else: your incomparable beauty must irradiate the
Templ where we mean to Tipple, our Devotion will be as cold as Scythian Ice
else. Thus humbly and earnestly begging that you would not fail, I kiss your
lilly hands, and remain,

Your eternal Servant:

The Answer.
SIR,
YOu are excellently well skilled in Metaphors I perceive, a shrewd Similist
believe me, to compare your self to a Ladder; do you think I shall ever take
the Hangmans Trade out of his hands, and throw men off the Ladder for
thirteenpence-halfpenys? but had your wit a visible body, I am confident it
were more easy to strangle a Cat at Tyburne, than to rob that lythe light
thing of life with a Rope; do you think that I use to string my whips with
Scorpions upon such trivial occasions? a be^some of birch will be sufficient
to sweep away Legions of such Lapwings as those, who travailed with their
Tenements upon their heads. Six such as my self you say are able to jeer a
Horse to death; but I must tell you, you are but an Ass for saying so: for my
conversation never extended to a Dialogue with a Dromedary. What a beastly
Quibble was this? to come to the matter, you will sacrifice as much Sack as
would turn a Mill. Oh rare! You mean that Windemill in your brain, which would
be of no use if it were a Watermill: for there is not so much moisture in that
pitiful pan of thine as would b^d^w a clout: You beg that I will afford you my
company to morrow, two after Noon, and you prattle of Temples, Oblations, and
Irradiations; will you never leave your Eloquence till the Carre-men curse you;
but I shall be with you, if it be but for Mr. Shallows sake,

Till when and ever Yours verily.

SONG III. A Dialogue between two Lovers. [Tune is, Phil Porters Rant]
He. 1.
Why dearest Mol, art thou so coy?
Why do thou fly my love?
Fie, fie! a maydenhead is but a toy,
As thou will shortly prove:
Come then my Darling,
Cease further parling,
We spend the time in vain;
Accept that duty
I owe thy beauty,
Over and over again.

She. 2.
OFie upon dissembling men!
That will cog, and swear, and lie
Till they attain their ends; but then
Bid the Less they loved God b'uy:
Ere she is a mother
They Are for another,
Never true to one;
Therefore I Will take care
Who has my were,
And all allurements sh in.

He. 3.
What though some perjured knave (my Dear)
Has sacred Love abused,
Shall he that does most truly swear
For his sake be accused:
By all things binding,
And worth the minding,
By thy beauty bright,
(With words unfeigned,
And thoughts unstained)
Thou art my souls delight.

She. 4.
Here, then, we'll knit those holy bands
That join two hearts in one,
God Cupids self does guide our bands,
No more I Will lie alone:
Thou (Sweet) shall sway me,
I will obey thee
Till Death shall drive us hence:
Then (in our shrouds)
We Will meet in the clouds,
And newfound joys commence.

A Flout. Directed to a Maid, or Widow, more proud than proper, and more coy
than comely.
Fair Lady, methinks you are not Mistress of so much beauty as might make you
proud; a Gentlewoman of ginger-bread (for ought I know) may make a better
Bedfellow; what are good clothes when the face is wanting, but like small beer
in a silver goblet; a mere Mercers Lucifer, but not a Rag of Natures Wardrobe
about you.

Her Retort.
SIR,
YOu are a strange Gentleman, and something desperate to talk thus to one you
know not; my name was never yet served up at Ordinaries, nor belcht abroad in
Taverns by any such Royster as you seem to be; I should think my self the most
unhappy of all my sex, if there were any thing in me that might merit the
respect of such a Satyr as your self.

SONG IV.
[Tune is, There were three Cheaters.]
1.
COme Francelia, come away,
Why do we waste so bright a day?
Let Us make haste to yonder grove,
There I Will give the earnest of my love,
On a bed of Daysies thee I Will throw,
Every pretty Virgin should do so.
2.
Then we'll sit and sport a while,
And with tal^ the time beguile,
Till bright Sol begin to shrink
As if he meant the Sea to drink:
Then unto Is^ngton we will go,
Every pretty Virgin should do so.
3.
There with cares and cream we will feast,
While my Host does break a Jest.
Nut-brown Ale that cures the weak,
And can compel a Cat to speak:
There will we laugh, and kiss, and woo,
Every pretty Virgin should do so.
4.
And when the envious Night comes on
Over the Fields we will begone,
There I le give thee as we pass
A Gown as green as is the grass,
For which thou shall owe me a kiss or two,
Every pretty Virgin should do so.
5.
Then toward London (though it be late)
We Will come and view thy Fathers gate,
Where (Oh sad Face!) that I must leave thee,
Thy Fathers servants will receive thee:
But we shall meet again I trow,
Every pretty Virgin should do so.
6.
Thus having parted with my Sweet,
I like a shadow pass the street;
For why? my soul is left with thee,
Keep it (Francelia) charily:
Or fix it fast on Cupids Bow,
Every pretty Virgin should do so.
The Lover Courts the Maid to mediate for him to her Mistress.
Lover. SWeet Sarah, I know your kindness can excuse my boldness, especially
when you have put on, this Toy upon your finger; nay, by Venus, you shall not
refuse it: I know you hold your Mistress in your power, you are her
Counselor, and she puts not a Flea to death without your privity: will you
indeer me to her esteem, and procure me such addresses as may be fit and
opportune? you know my meaning.


Maid. TRuly (though you may not know it) I have already mentioned your
praises, and with some vehemence; may, and which is more, she lends a listening
ear to all that she hears concerning you; I could tell you something. Sir, that
would rejoice you: let it suffice, she never hears your name but her color
comes and goes; to my knowledge, she has a good opinion of your person and your
parts.


Lover. But is it possible (my dear Sarah) that we may converse by Star or
Moonlight?


Maid. I dare promise you, Sir, but meaning no harm Sir.


Lover. Do but accomplish what thou have spoken, and command me, though to the
loss of fame, of treasures, and of life; nay, chain me as thy slave. So
farewell sweet Sarah.


Maid. Your faithful Servant, Sir.


SONG V. A Dialogue between two Lovers.
[Tune is, Fain I would if I could, etc.]
He. 1.
I Would ^ain
Once again
Fold thee in my arms,
Why should thou shun
What we have done,
Ere now on equal terms?
Can love that is grounded die?
Why art thou then so shie?
Come, prithee let me try,
And put on all thy charms.

She. 2.
While you were
My only Dear,
I cared for none but you;
It Is your own fault
Has made the halt,
You false, shall I prove true?
You first did break the Truce
By offering Love abuse,
Nor can you find excuse,
Therefore (good Sir) adieu.

He. 3.
Did never none
But I alone
Su^^y Loves snowy vest?
You Will find there is more
By many a score,
Like me, have sinned in jest,
You only I prefer,
Although (...) ^urted her;
Your name, alone, I wear,
Lodged in a loyal breast.

She. 4.
Custom and art
Has taught your heart
How to dissemble finely,
Your every thought
Is worse than naught,
Yet you can prate divinely,
But I Will believe no more,
One perjured ore and ore:
Go, get you to your W^ --
Sleep on in sin, supinely.

He. 5.
By all that can
Oblige a man,
I swear (my dearest Dear)
My future love
Shall fully prove,
I move in virtues sphere.
I loathe what I have done,
And shall such Sirens shun
Thou all my heart have won,
And shall sit Regent there.

She. 6.
The love that I
Did really
Profess to you of late,
So swayes my sense
I want a Fence
To keep out Love and Fate.
Look down ye heavenly powers
On this new league of ours
From your immortal Towers --
-- Let Us kiss and supplicate.

A Letter from some Gentleman's Creature, to a poor (but beauteous) Gentlewoman,
etc.
Fair Mistress,
THough I am not so wise to know how you will palliate my proposal, yet
probability bids me believe you will not be angry with him that has projected a
way for your profit: I saw you in a place the other day, and could not but pity
you; and withal, curse these squint eyed Times; that expose so much beauty as
you are mistress of to so extreme penury: I know you do not go so poor on
purpose to manifeft your modefty, so that by you I perceive that glorious
births (such as I am confident yours is) are made infamous by rags, and base
births are made glorious by gorgeous apparel: if you shall please to hearken
to my advice. I shall prescribe you a way how to become the Miftress of a
better fortune than at present you are, I have a Master Squire D. by name, that
will make you his Danae, and court you, like another Jupiter in a golden
shower, provided you will but ^old up your lap to receive it: do not five
hundred in this Town think you (though with worse faces than yours) do worse
than this? no woman that bears a brave mind will refuse any thing that is
good. Virtue (i^ this Age of ours) will not feed you; or ^loathe you. Thus
desiring your serious and sudden Answer by this Bearer, I commit you to your
pro^table thoughts, and remain

Your devoted Servant.

The Answer.
Sir,
BUt that I would not bring my own name in question, I would proclaim to the
world what a five persuasive Pimp you are; but Sir, you ought to know that I
had rather lodge under a poor thatcht Roose with honesty, than under carved
Seelings as a Prostitute: I know the price of Ills too well, and what th^^^
confusions are in whom they inhabit; how soon Women are won to their ruin, and
for a minutes pleasure eternally undo themselves; though I am poor my honor
is precious, and it is a Devils consequent, that because we are wanting,
therefore we must be wicked. I cannot be carried away with a cast of manchets,
a bottle of wine, and a custard: no, nor with a satin gown. music, coaches,
and midnight revels: you have a leaprous soul whoever you are, and deserve the
gallows more than a murderer, but I shall remember your name and trade and
tell the world accordingly. So wishing you a more honest heart, together with a
more manly employment, I commit you to your crimes,

And am, etc.

One Friend ingratiates another into the acquaintance of a third, etc.
1. Friend. Sir,

Let me prefer this Gentleman unto your knowledge, he will deserve your notice.


2. Friend. I Thank you dear Sir, no friend of your choice can deserve less.


1. Friend. Sir,

I shall thank you for any friendship shown to him, (...) if it were done to my
self.


2. Friend. You may command me any thing. Sir, your humble servant: give me
your hand. It is not my manner to use much Courtship* but I will proise to be
friend you in all things that are in my power, and perform it too, Sir.


3. Friend. Sir,

I Shall be happy to call my self, Your humblest Creature: your kind proffer
claims a just power over my belief.


SONG VI. The willing Prisoner. [Tune is, Bow Bells.]
1.
When first my heart
Felt Cupids dart,
I ftrove (but all in vain) its force to break;
The blind God laughed
And sent a shaft
To second the other, thinking 'twas too weak;
Then to earth I sell,
All mortals bow to mighty love, and his most po^ent spell.
Now am I the Victors prize,
Being shickell'd with gold-crisped wires,
A slave unto two Sun-like eyes
Burnt up with invisible fires.
At once I am bound, and yet free too.
Mortal and immortal at once;
I Am healthy and sound to see to,
Yet sickness has seized my bones.
2.
Oh gentle God!
Take off thy rod,
I yield, and row to serve thee all my days;
Temples He build,
And offerings yield,
Penning peculiar Hymns unto thy praise;
But be pleased great power
To send one Arrow tipped with gold from thy fair mothers bower
That may wound my Amadine,
Who Is deaf unto all my laments,
Pierce her heart like unto mine
Until the stern Goddess relents:
So shall I sing thv glory,
And mention thy praises each day,
While those that do hear my story
Shall stoop to thy sovereign sway.
3.
Why Cupid, why
Dust: hou not try
To tempt some Poet to restore thy eyes?
And with thy nature
To stretch thy statute,
Who art the strongest of the Deities.
Has not Jove by thee
Been thrown from heaven to earth to court mortality?
To behold thee Phoehm turns
His coach in his fullest carere;
Neptune in the water burns,
And Pluto is wounded with fear:
All creatures do cringe to thy Quiver,
Beasts, Birds, and what Theris contains,
Who art the Olympical Driver;
No mortal can fly from thy trains.
4.
Then let us twine
Sweet Amadine,
Platonic Lovers we at first will seem,
But when that dies
We Will wantonize,
It Is active love alone, that is worth esteem:
We Will contract our bliss
Those other sweets that should wait on the tincture of a kiss.
Then shall eithers joys increase,
Renewing their youth with the day,
When my flames thou shall appease,
And take this hot humor away.
Then like to Saints expiring
We Will breathe our souls in each other,
And having gained strength by retiring,
I Will make thee (my dearest) a Mother.
To a Rival.
A complementall, yet threatening Letter.
SIR,
CAnnot your friend purchase a little fire to thaw his appetite by but must you
that have been daily singed in the flame, be as greedy to beguile him of it:
how can this appear other than a piece of malice? if I endure this, you may
ear -- bore me for your slave, but you shall find my temper not so tam^ as
(perhaps) you imagine; for, since you neither savor of good breeding, nor
bringing up, I am resolved to slice your hamstrings but I will make you show
mannerly; my fire is not so hot that I need a screen before it, it is but newly
kindled; yet if it were risen to a flame, I should not suffer my best friend to
stand before me: You are an intelligent man, and I need say no more, but that I
am,

(If you (...) fie) Your true Friend.

The Answer.
SIR,
I Am sorry that you will needs ingrosse Hell to your self; Heaven forbid that
you should not suffer a stranger to come in, the Devil himself is not so
unmannerly: You think now, that I will beg an office there before you, and
keep you out. Now God forgive you for your huge mistake. I am none of those
gilded flies that will light upon such strange flesh; I may use Courtship, or
so, but dare not thrust my hand into another man's fire: I have no mind to
surfeit away my name and state in swinish riots, sleep away my youth, and awake
a grey-bearded Beggar. Take your Toy to your self (Sir) never doubt that I
shall attempt to supplant you, not but that if I had a will I durst stand your
fury were you armed with thunder, and could manage an Oak like a Bull-rush.
Thus Sir, I hope I have given you a plenary satisfaction as to your
Scolopendra, you shall find me upon all scores at your own appointment either
for sincere friendship, or utter enmity,

And always, etc.

A short Courtship. A Dialogue between two Lovers.
She. TRuly Sir, you think your self much a Master of my modesty, you would
never give me such continual cause to blush else; I could find courage (I am
confident) to chide you for it, but that I would not administer any cause that
might justify your departure from me. Where I have hope my prayers and
innocence shall detain you till the full consummation of our loves.


He. I Confess I have more of Mars than Minerva in me, I never sucked the air
of France, and therefore you must not expect fine language from me; yet I can
tell you (with truth for warrant) that he that hopes for better felicity in the
other world, than what I enjoy in your blessed society, must fast, pray, and live
very severely to attain it.


She. Sir,

I perceive that you willingly mistake, you make me proud with your similitude,
but whilst that I gain by it, your inference is at a loss; but this is because
you know you have as great a privilege to injure me as to abuse your self.


He. Shall I be heard then when I speak, and be listened unto cheerfully, that
so I may recover my sick hopes by degrees?


She. I know you cannot lose your virtue (Sir) and then you may assure your
self my courtesies will never fail; if I should promise you more, your self
would deem me too p^^digall of that which in nobleness you cannot rec^ive.


SONG VII. The forsaken Lover.
[Tune is, Frankin (...) ^^ed away]
1.
SInce then thy vows (false Maid)
Are blown to air,
And my poor heart betrayed
to sad despair;
Within some wilderness
I will my griefs exp^^sse,
And thy false-heartednesse,
On cruel fair!
2.
Have I not engraved thy love
On ev^^ tree
In yonder verdant Grove,
Though false to me:
Was not a solemn oath
Plighted betw^xt us both?
Thou thy faith, and I my troth,
Real to be.
3.
Some gloomie Nooke I Will find,
Some balefull Glade
Where neither ^u^ nor Wind
Ere entrance made:
There will I curse that Fate
Gave me so false a Mate,
Then thou'l^ repent too late
(D^s^oyall Maid.)
4.
Wild fruits I Will make my meat,
And drink the spring,
The earth shall be my seat,
For covering,
I Will have the Scarry-skie
My corpse to cancpie,
Till my soul from me fly
To heavens King.
5.
No Grave do I desire,
Or Obsequies,
No Groans or Funeral fire,
No warry eyes:
The courteous Red-brest, ^e
With leaves will cover me,
And sing my ^legie
In Ru^hfull wise.
6.
But when I soul-lesse am
I Will visit thee,
Thou most obdurate Dame,
Whose cruelty
Has slain the truest heart,
Ere pierced by Cupids dart,
Not Death my love shall part,
Nor Destiny.
A Letter from one crafty Citizen to another concerning a fine busin^sse.
Mr. L.
I Have a task worthy the pregnancy of your spirit, an exercise for your
pointed wits (wondrous in a Citizen) to work upon; give me a man that even out
of his recreations can cull advantages, that dives into seasons, and never
walks but thinks of something tending to his profit: know then I but lately
made a journey into Sussex, where I perused a fair Lordship belonging to one
Mr. G. his Father, but newly dead, and himself now in Town, and come on
purpose hither to learn the fashions of London; he is already become acquainted
with some Hectors of note, resorts to Gaming as well as Bawdy-Houses: this young
N^vice lately bought some cloth of me, and my Wife being in the shop he took
an occasion to court her, and finding (as I had strictly enjoined her) that he
was not scorned, but rather courted both by her self and me, he every day
visits my house, and I think will one day drown us all with good Sherry, in
reward whereof, I am resolved to murder his Estate, and sti^^^ his Right;
there are means and ways enough to hook in such Gentry: you shall come
acquainted with him, and while he is busy about my Wife, I will be as busy
about his Lands.

To be a Cuckold is but for one life,
When Land remains to me, my Heir^, or Wife.
I will ingratiate you into his company, take sure notice of him, he is fresh
and free, shift your self speedily into ^he shape of a Gallant, I Will swell your
purse with Angels, keep foot by foot with him, outdare his expenses, flatter
Dice and Brothell to him, give him a sweet taste of sensuality, train him to
every wastfull sin that he may quickly need health, but especially money.
Ravish him with a Dame or two, be his Bawd for once. I will be your^ forever.
Come to me anon in the Evening when we will confer together about this
weighty business, till when and ever

Yours all over, etc.

Exquisite Nonsense.
LIke to a Church with thirty Chimneys in it
Or like the entrails of a Cabbage Min^
Or like a Child born both with Teeth and Beard
Or like the green-blew Garter of a Lord
Or like a Maid with Child that nere knew Man
Or like the dancing of a Dripping-pan
Or like a Man that Sings without a Tongue
Or like two Adamants together clung
Such, such is he that never had a Mother
Ye^ boasts two Sisters and a younger Brother.
He. Dear Mistress,

WHy will you loss so much time? those Lillies and Roses that Nature has
planted in your blooming Cheek will one day fade and wither, your odor and
your precious Color must yield to time.


She. THe loss will not be much mourned for Sir, since it will very hardly be
discerned.


He. Sweetest, you remove your understanding a great distance from my words,
and make that of no use which tends to persuade you to a present enjoyment of
this pleasant treasure, while it lasts; why are you still enclosed like an
Anchoresse, and why does your nicety bar your chamber door, when if the
Priest were but paid for a few ceremonious words, I might be licensed to your
bed and your bosom too.


She. Our marriage Sir, may promise all you can imagine, but till then you must
give me leave not to admit of such opportunities, as may give breath to ill
reports.


He. Nay, be not angry (my Dearest) nor censure any thing I have spoken with an
unkind belief; hear but my vows.


She. Not now Sir, you have a greater power to raise my sorrow than my choler.


He. Yet please to remember, that I have your heart, by a sacred plight, our
wedding day is not now far off.


She. I shall never find the way to break my faith, but till that hour you
talk of is come, I shall desire that our converse may be more remote; you know
how liable Lovers are to the lash of lewd tongues.


A Complement. One taking acquaintance of another, as his friends friend.
1 Gent. I am bold to salute you Sir, you know not Mr. S.


2 Gent. Yes indeed Sir, most entirely well; he is a Gentleman I am much
obliged to for many favors: He is second to my bosom.


1 Gent. I shall keep Christmasse with him, where your Health shall undoubtedly
be remembered: I would sue for your name Sir.


2 Gent. Your suit shall and in one Term Sir, my name is B.


1 Gent. Kind Mr. B. your dear acquaintance, I must needs present you with a
glass of sack.


2 Gent. Sir, Your servant; I shall retalliate your love.


SONG VIII. The contemplative Lover.
[Tune is, She lay all naked in her bed.]
1.
UPon her couch Marina lay,
A thousand Cupids by her,
Like new-falne snow melting away
While I stood wondering nigh her;
The baulmy incense of her breath
Unto the rooffe ascended,
Able to drive away grim Death
With all his Train attended.
2.
Her flesh more pure, more white, more soft
Than skins of Etmins are,
Before by surly Hunters caught
In a delusive snare;
Chacte as the rare Arabian Bird
That wants a Sex to woo,
O grief for which I want a word,
She never yet learned to do.
3.
O that, that ice at length would melt
That friezes up her veins,
That as she is seen she might be felt,
And knew-Lovers pains:
Poor pottage Flowers shut up their leaves
When Sol drives to the West,
But Roses the Night-Dew receive,
As that which pleases best.
4.
O open those celestial eyes
That do enlighten mine,
Yet stay, their splendor will surprise,
And scorith me wi^h their shine:
Her fragrant breath does claim that power
By odoriferous art,
It will transform me to a Flower
Fashioned like a Heart.
A Friend comforts a Widow, who weeps for the death of her Husband.
Friend. Save you sweet Widow, I suffer for your heaviness.


Widow. O Sir, I have lost the dearest Husband that ever woman did enjoy.


Friend. Yet let me tell you Widow, if all tongues speak truth he did not use
you so well as a man ought.


Widow. Nay, that is true indeed, he never used me so well as a woman might have
been used, that is certain. In Troth it has been our greatest falling out, and
though it be the part of a Widow to show her self a woman for her Husbands
death, yet when I remember all his unkindnesse. I cannot weep a stroke, and
therefore wisely did a great Widow in this Land comfort up another: Go too
(quoth she) leave blubbering, thou think upon thy Husbands good parts when
thou sheedest tears, do but remember how often he has layn from thee, and how
many haughty sl^ppery turns he has done thee, and thou will never weep for him
I warrant th^e. You would not think how this counsel ^as wrought upon me, so
that I cannot spend one tear now if you would give me never so much.


Friend. Why I count you the wiser Widow, it shows you have discretion, when
you can check your passion; Farewell sweet Widow, may your threshold gr^an with
the weight of approaching Lovers like Hops or Harlots.


Widow. How do you mean? why do you couple them?


Friend. O very aptly, for as the Hop well boiled will make a man not stand
upon his legs, so the Harlot in time will leave a man no legs to stand upon.


Widow. You are a merry Gentleman; will you please to walk in and take what a
Widows solitary Mansion shall exhibit.


Friend. Not now Widow: I must into London with all speed: another time I will
come and dwell with you for two hours, so farewell blyth^ Widow.


Widow. Adieu sweet Sir.


A Letter from a smug Youth to a lively Less.
Sweet Thomazin,
IF your favor do not pay my Ransom, I vow I must continue a Captive till
death, though one comfort will be (in case you deny your aid) my life will be
of no lasting d^te, your looks have wounded me, and will kill me if Quarter be
not given; but you are no Amazonian Lady to put ^n steely arms and manage the
sword and shield, though your head be hi^den in a cambrick helmet, and
therefore I shall hope that the softness of your ^oule will not suffer you to
become my Murtheresse: you are my Venus, make me your Anchy^es, my souls life
and light. I protest by all things sacred that my love to you is of such
ardency, that men that are newly listed in some black conspiracy that are in
despair, or (which is worst of all) in want, do enjoy more quiet sleeps than I
do. Your Idea is always before me; to multiply your praises I know would
rather win your anger than your applause, though I would say (with immaculate
truth for warrant) that you are fairer then Hebe, wiser than Pallas, and more
continent than Penelope, it is my unhappiness to know that a creature o^ such
exquisite perfection live, and yet not to know whether my loyal service may
find acceptance; you are the true Venus, (Lady) make me your Priest, the
office will become me. However (dear Cherubine) let me not fail of an Answer
by this Bearer since I can live no longer then you shall allow me to call my
self,

Your voted Votary.

Her Answer.
Sir,
THe little experience I have hither to had of you commands me to esteem you no
less than a friend to virtue, but you do ill to talk so passionately, and
think so coolely, you men can play the Proteu^^^ at pleasure, and (with the
Chameli^n) thange your selves according to the color you look on, be (seeming)
Reallists here, and palpable Dissemblers in another place; this day deveut
Amori^^^, to morrow sullen Stoics; yet will I thank you for that love you make
me believe you bear toward me, and what ever your heart is I shall not blush
to tell you that I dare meet your love half way, provided it be honorable,
and not glew'd to sinisler cogitations: this Sir, you may believe and
accordingly determine of me, who am

Yours in all civil respects, etc.

Two Lovers complement at parting.
He. LEt me contain thee in my arms yet a little longer.


She. I Would stay, dearest G but you know what a severe hand my Father holds
over me, if he should know we were together, it were as much as my liberty is
worth.


He. How sad and dismal does the farewell of true Lovers sound, why should my
Destinies deny me thy enjoyment, when shall we meet again?


She. To morrow night at Mistress C. her house, I Will steal forth in the
Evening, my absence will be but short, consider that, which will make our next
meeting the more sweet and musical.


He. Thou precious Darling of my heart; do not we two part like Birds, who
when they see that the Sun forsakes the world, lay their little pensive heads
beneath their wings, as if they would ease that weight which is added to their
grief by his departure?


She. But when they see that bright perpetual Travailer to return, they start
up and sing their gratitude -- -- Fail not to morrow night.


He. Bid me to shun poison, or not to refuse heaven were a Messenger sent from
thence on purpose to proffer it me, one kiss and then farewell.


SONG IX. The Ravished Lover.
[Tune is,] Tell me ye wandering spirits of the air.
1.
TEll me ye Angels of the highest sphere,
Have you not seen my fair Larissa there?
Has not great Jove to make his bli^se more great
Ravished my Love unto his starry seat?
If that a brighter than his Spouse you see,
Or Venus self, or Venus self believe it, that is she:
2.
Search from the East unto the weeping West,
And plunder Flora of her flowery vest,
Search Rheas store, and Thet^s wealthy womb,
Ravish the Web from off Ar^c^nes loome,
If you one fairer far than Cynthia see,
O^ Hebe's self, or Hebe's self believe it, that is she.
3.
When she was born old Saturns mighty Son
Summoned the Gods, who met him every one,
Meaning to make a new Pan^or^, he
Himself thus spoke to every Deity;
Bestow (quoth he) on this ra^e silver Dove,
Each something that may make her more than Queen of Love
4.
This said, winged Mercury bestowed his wit,
Phoebus his skill, choice Songs and Odes to fit,
Venus resigned her beauties ('against her will)
But Pa^^as freely did her sweets instill;
Ju^o her state, and Jove to crown them all,
Confirmed, confirmed her the sole glory of this earthly Ball.
5.
Let then no rude, profane, or (...)
Dare seize that Temple where her Altars stand
drowned in the sea.
Lest that he (...) (...) what A^^x found of ^ore,
When he disgraced Minerv^'s sac^ed Lore,
Her power is equal, if not far beyond,
She can both heaven, she can both heaven and earth, and seas command.
6.
Let none be Priest unto thy hallowed Shrine,
But I (dear Goddess) hug no Love but mine,
So shall thy name not fear the teeth of Time,
Thy lasting Fame being guarded by my Rhyme.
And when together unto heaven we go,
There but one quarter, there but one quarter, thou shall find it so.
James an Apprentice, with Jane his Masters Daughter in the dark.
Jane. I swear James I will wake my Father and Mother if you offer these ru^e
tricks; I wonder how the candle went out.


James. Sweet Mistress Jane, be not angry, I scorn to offer you any incivility
but I hope you will not be angry if I say I love you.


Jane. Love me little and love me long, you are short of your time James; four
years yet to serve, think on that James.


James. I could serve four hundred years methinks had I but hope to win your
love at last, the (...) (...) of you dispells all sad thoughts (...), and I am
as free as the Air I breath in, while I can frequently gaze on that celestial
face of yours.


Jane. You have an English Expositor in your box James, and therefore I do not
wonder that you talk so fluently: besides, you write Verses now and then, I
liked those wondrous well that you made of our boar-Cat that fell into the
House-ofoffice.


James. I made one Copy to day at the request of a new married man, you know
him I am sure Mistress Jane, T. S. the Millener by the Stocks.


Jane. Let me hear them good James, he that puts a snaffle of Verses into my
mouth may lead me (...) where he list, I mean still in the way of honesty James.


James. I know that Mistress Jane, the Verses are these:

A modest Wife is such a jewel,
Every Goldsmith cannot show it;
He that is honest and not cruel
Is the likeliest man to owe i^.
How do you like them Mistress Jane?


Jane. Now by my Maydenhead exceeding well; God bodykins we are undone: my
Father knocks I swear.


James. One kiss dear Mistress Jane.


Jane. Take half a dozen but make no delay, you know my Father is a hasty man.


A Letter to a Friend, desiring he would enter into Bond with him.
My noble friend,
THe cordial love which upon all occasions you have manifested, obliges me to
think, that I shall not find you backward in a business that so much concerns
me: my occasions at this time are unspeakably pressing, so that if I do not
procure an hundred pounds by to morrow this time, my credit will receive a
mortal wound, and my reputation be stabbed to the heart, you are a man whose
estimation (and that worthily) is high in the hearts of all men, and whose very
word were sufficient (though I should not suffer it did you preffer it) without
bond or obligation to furnish me with such a sum, I shall only desire your
name with mine, and may Hell take me if I fail in the Premises, thus begging
your positive Answer by this Bearer, I rest and remain,

Yours infinitely obliged.

The Answer.
Worthy friend,
YOu were pleased to mention a matter in your last Epistle, which I protest by
all things sacred I would not meddle withal were it for the Redemption of my
Heir out of the Turks Galleys, enter into bond; I would as soon (with
Empedocles) leap into Aetna, mark but this Note and you will not much blame my
averseness; he that enters into Bond ought to imagine he Christens a Child,
and takes the Charge of it too: for as the one the bigger it grows the more
cost it requires, so the other the longer it lies the more charge it puts you
to, only here is the difference, a Child must be broke and a Bond must not;
the more you break Children the more you keep them under, but the more you
break Bonds the more they leap in your face, and therefore to conclude, I would
never undertake to be Gossip to that Bond which I would not see well brought up.

For it is a truth, come better days or worse,
So many Bonds ab^oad, so many Boys at nurse.
Therefore sweet friend excuse me; any thing but this; a small sum (either to
lend or give you) is at your service, but this I neither can nor dare, so
wishing you all felicity. I assure you that I am

Yours unfeignedly.

SONG X. The conceited Lover.
[Tune is, Honors but Air, etc. vulgarly, New the Tyrant has stolen, etc]
1.
COme my Clarissa
Why art thou so shie?
Why have thou that face,
That foot and that thigh,
But to do as thy Mother
When she willingly lay,
While thy Father did discover
Loves beaten road way.
2.
That beauty by Nature
Was never ordained
To be g^z'd at with wonder,
Bag to be obtained
A p^x of the feeble
Platonicall way,
Which none that were able
Did ever obey.
3.
To fit and to simper
Like soap-suds (in sooth)
Does argue nor wisdom,
Nor beauty, nor youth.
To kiss the fair forehead,
And sometimes the cheek,
To me is most horrid
That would do and not speak.
4.
I love to couple
The genuine way,
When both parties are supple
Loves Rites to obey,
Thus Babies are gotten
With pleasure and ease,
To live when we are rotten,
But not with a disease.
5.
Great Plato (like Gato)
Kept a plump brown Wench,
For he loved a Belly
As Well as a Tench:
In the high street at Athens
By Diana's Temple
The old Sage sung Loves Mattens,
And wrore Verses for sample.
6.
And Diogenes self
That fasted so much
Was an old pockey Elfe,
And of the French had a touch:
His life was severe,
For he took the Diet
In that very now called Corneli^ Tub by the mistake of some unlearned
Apothecaries.
Tub where
On his Roots he did Riot.
7.
Then hang up the niceness
Of gray bearded fools,
The Tenants that we own
Were not known to the Schools:
Let the sour men drink Whig
While we tipple N^ctar,
And dance the Paphian Jig
To a rare Curtain-Lecture.
8.
Come then let us dally
And daintily do,
Though Routed we will Rally
In spite of the Foe,
And charge with joint motion,
Though not without loss,
Cupid's pleased with such a portion
While the blankets we toss.
9.
He that is still saying Grace,
And nere falls to the meat,
Is at best but an Ass,
And deserves not to eat:
But were he as eager
After warm meat as I,
He Would not lie so long Leager
Till his conscience cry, Fie
10.
Then clip me Cla^issa
While I thee intwine,
We Will be incorporated
Without Church Discipline,
And vouch our Reality
Spotless and fair
To any man of quality
Except my Lord Mayor.
A Letter of Complement to a Maid or Widow, the Lover excusing himself that he
met not according to promise, etc.
Dear Mistress,
HAd I not a hope that your immaculate candor can whiten the swarthiest crime,
I should choose rather to sacrifice my life to incessant sorrow, and
consequently to inevitable death, than add to my guilt by apollogizing for a
sin that can not be remitted: by Loves Bow and Quiver by Venus Shrine, nay by
your fair self from whose bright eyes the blind God fetches his Paphian
fire, and whose sacred bosom is the true Temple of divine Love, I could not
(though I endeavored it with the hazard of my life) meet you according to
promise, some lucklesse Planet (without doubt) had governance over that ominous
day, I confess it were but justice to cast me off as a thing me worthy your
future notice, who have contemned (though not wilfully) such a happiness as
Kings could have been proud to purchase with the price of their Diadems; you
may doom me to death, I have deserved it, and am so clogged with guilt that I
have scarce confidence enough to beg your pardon, if any penance might expiate
this black oversight, I should think you more than courteous in appointing me
to Row upon the Thames for twelve Months, or to personate Jack Pudding upon
the Ropes the whole term of time that makes up a Bartholomew- Fair: so that
were I so much a Brute (as History makes Brutus to be) I should (undoubtedly)
sign my own Pass for the other World. Determine of me (dear Lady) out of
hand, it is some happiness (though a killing one) that the Malefactor is
sensible of the worst that can happen. Thus begging your speedy Reply, I humbly
take my leave, and remain

Your afflicted, but affectionate Servant.

Her Answer.
Sir,
YOu do very aptly imitate those Children, who having tied strings about the
legs of their Birds, sometimes suffer them to gain liberty to a great
distance, but when they please twitch them home again; there is no dallying
with Loves Tools, his Arrows are sharply pointed, and apt to wound a wanton
hand, can you think me so shallow to conceit that all the business in the
world should have blockt up your way to one you affected with a cordial
regard, and what fine Powers you call to witness with you that this Traditiae
could not be vaded, a blind Boys Bow, a blunt Dart, and a leaden Shrine. Well
Sir, you know what command you have ^ver me, and that a slender excuse will
serve where the injury is pardoned ere committed; all the penance I shall
impose is this, that you afford me a visit at my Mansion to morrow in the
morning about the hour of ten, where you shall find

Your faithful Friend.

A complementall Dialogue betwixt a Shopkeeper and a Scholar.
Scholar. Are you busy Sir?


Shopkeeper. Never Sir to you, nor any of your Goat: (...) confess I was but
a dull slave before I conversed with Scholars, not worthy to tread upon the
earth before I fell in love with learning, and what fresh hopes it has put into
me, I do intend shortly to biggar all the bawdy Writers, especially him that
wrote the Mock Poems of Hero and Leander; nay, I will build at my own charge an
Hospital, to which shall retire all diseased Opinions, and all halting Poets,
as the venerable Humphrey Crowch, Laurence Price, and Sam. Smithson.


Scholar. Sir, ye are a man made up of ingenuity, very charitable, more
piously inclined than Sir Paul Piodar, you are a true pattern for the City Sir.


Shopkeeper. Sir, I have been informed by Revelation (without the belp of
Arise Evans) that their shop-Books cannot save them.


Scholar. O Sir, much may be done by Manuscript, there is a kind of Spell in
bad paper, watrish ink, and worse sense.


Shopkeeper. The Muses favor me, as my intents are virtues, will ye be my
Tutour Sir, I have read Greens Groats worth of Wit, the Spanish Rogue, the
Authentic History of Amadis de Gaul, and Tullies Love written by the Master
of Art.


Scholar. You are excellently well read, Sir, you are my friend, and a friend
to all that profess good Letters.


Shopkeeper. Sir, you are very honest, and yet you have a kind of modest fear
to show it, do not darken your own worth with too much bashfulnesse, men of
parts should proclaim themselves, the world will still remain ignorant of
their worth else.


Scholar. Sir, you almost make me blush as red as those stockings you wear, I
think they are of Naples.


Shopkeeper. I thought you Scholars had known all things, you are beside your
Text there, I must tell you; they are compounded I confess of the finest
wool, and created in Iersey.


Scholar. Pardon my judgment Sir, we Scholars seldom use any other objests
but our Books.


Shop keeper. I do confess it Sir, provided alwaits they are Licensed ones,
and have some worthy hands set to them for probation.


Scholar. Sir, I must entreat your company to the Canary shop.


Shop keeper. With all my heart Sir, I am of late become a great lover of
sack, and can make shift now and then to cut out a Copy of Verses, I can tell
ye as simple as I stand here, not a bit of Prose sometimes will down with me,
but le^s away; Boy, have a vigilant care of my shop, the Times are dangerous,
and if there come ever a Scholar in black let him speaks with me, for my own
part I do begin to dote upon Books, and am very strangely taken with strange
Verses, and howsoever we are all accounted dull-brain'd Asses by Gentlemen, yet
there are those that merit renown for their parts and performances even amongst
us Shopkeepers, witness Murford, Mercer, and Scot. I do love a Scholar with
my heart, for undoubtedly very marvailous things may be achieved by Art, I
have read something though I say it that should not: Why Sir, there are those
Scholars in Town will tell you what is become of Horses and silver spoons, and
will make Wenches dance naked to their beds, I had a Sister was served so; I am
yet unmarried, and because some of our neighbors are said to be Cuckolds, I
will never be married without the consent of some of these Scholars that know
what will come of it. Please Sir, to lead the way.


Scholar. Nay, I shall wait on you Sir.


Shopkeeper. Phoebus forbid it Sir, that were a fine jest In Faith, let Learning
lie behind me, I have been better brought up than so Sir. Nay I know my
postures I warrant you Sir, and have been drunk at Court more than twice in
the days of old King Charles I Will assure you Sir.


Scholar. You will manifest what command you have over me Sir, I shall be
obedient for once my capacious Citizen.


To a Maid in love with a young Man, but ashamed to show it.
STill will you languish; see, here is pen and ink,
Write to him; let your heart and seal express
Such marks, as on his very soul may sink
And show you are blessed although with heaviness;
May your Paper seem as fair
As your self when you appear,
May the Letters which you write
Look like black-eye-lids upon white,
And may your charmed Pen such fancies bring
(Being adorned with your Hand and Scale)
As if your Quill were plucked from Cupids wing,
And so the riches of his soul may steal.
A Letter to a false Friend, queintly quipping him.
IF I thought it could be possible to find out that race of men that Pliny
talks of, whose heads stand in their breast, who scarce can tell a smooth lie,
because their hearts are joined so near to their lips, I would instantly depart
this Nation and travail to those well-meaning men, there I should forget the
calumnies of deceitful tongues, and no more remember that I once prized the
amity of so false a man as thy self, happy are those souls chat sit in the
Elysian shades, who being freed from fleshly clogs, have so clear an
understanding of each other, that there is no need of ears or tongues; words
were first made to reveal our meaning, but by a strange inversion they now
serve to conceal our intents. I have spelt your hollow heart Sir already by
joining three or four actions, but if those lent me no light, the reading of
the whole Sentence gives me perfect assurance, you can no longer delude my
sense Sir, your wellspoke wrongs are like hurtful words writ in a graceful
hand, or a bloody sword sheathed up in velvet: so wishing your conversion, or
-- I will not say confusion. I close all with this truth,

That I am for ever lost to your love.

SONG X. The forsaken Virgin.
[Tune is, For in my freedome's all my joy.]
1.
I Am a poor forsaken Maid
By a perfidious Youth betrayed,
After so many oaths and vows
While Myttle Garlands gyrt our brows
Where shall I find a place where I
May weep my self away and die:
Death's the best cure, Death's the bestcure of misery.
2.
Come O th^u^ with thy Lute and play me
Thar very solitary, Ah me,
Which for thy love thou did compose
When that thy heart strings gave the close,
A greater grief than thine have I
Destroyed by black disloyalty:
Death's the best cure, etc.
3.
Come then ye pretty Nymphs and Faieries
From your fair Meadows and your Daieries,
Come Venus deck my sable pillow
With blasted Myrtle and with Willow,
Let the rude Satyrs showt and cry
'bout her that slights my Monodie:
Come courteous Death, come courteous
Death and end my misery.
4.
O false unconstant ^^othlesse Lad,
Will not my Murder make thee sad
When swift report salutes thine care,
That I am laid upon the Biere,
An ashey Victim unto thee?
Here let me die and buried be:
Come courteous Death, etc.
5.
Like cruel Theseus do thou leave
Thy courteous Ariadne so,
Like perjured Paris will thou grieve
Aenone.
Her that has shielded thee from woe,
Here will I moan, and wail, and cry
Till like a soul-lesse lump I lie:
Come courteous Death, etc.
6.
While fervent love did fill each breast,
Have thou not often these words expressed,
Let heaven shower vengeance on my head,
And Joves dire Thunder strike me dead
When ere I prove unkind to thee;
But these were spungie Vows I see:
Come courteous Death, etc.
7.
My Ghost will tell sad tales below,
And let all loyal Lovers know
That here such monstrous men there are
Whom the grieved earth does sweat to bear
False perjured and unkind like thee;
Come courteous death, etc.
8.
If there be just vindictive Powers
Residing in the heavenly Towers,
If there is a Righteous Providence
Which but to doubt were insolence,
Worthy those plagues belong to thee,
Then look for punishment for me:
Come courteous death, etc.
9.
Mean time (as dying people do)
I Will prophecy what shall ensue
This wicked impious change of thine,
Not caused by beauty, coin, or wine,
But by thy own inconstancy
Which by the Gods chastis'd shall be:
Come courteous Death, etc.
10.
Thou of thy Helen now have joy,
But shall taste woes like him of Troy,
When thy light heel'd and gayrish Bride
Shall love another man beside,
Then (all too late) thou wilt think on me,
And I will laugh below at thee:
Come courteous Death, etc.
11.
My Ghost shall triumph in thy Fare,
And in those pleasant shades of bliss
Where each true Lover clips his Mate,
(A happiness I Am sure to miss)
I Will clap thy fall when thou shall be
Riveil'd with meagre grief like me:
Come courteous Death, etc,
12.
And now methin's I feel kind Death
Reaching his hand to stop my breath,
Thrice welcome thou best friend to those
Whose fierce Fate makes um their own Foes,
Thy dulcid Dart oh let me try,
And pass to immortality.
Come courteous Death. etc.
13.
But when my Soul has gained the P^les
Journying to the Judge of Souls,
If that my body find a grave,
This Ep^aph oh let me have,
Ben^a (...) this stone a Maid d^es lie
Murdered by Loves inconsiancy.
Come courteous Death, etc.
A Complement from a Stranger, directed to the Lady or Mistress of the house
upon his entrance.
Gentleman. Are you that beauty (Lady) whose luster gives light to this
methodicall mansion?


Gentlewoman. Sir, you have given my face a more special regard by your good
language than these^black brows can merit.


Gentleman. You are pleased to set a trivial rate upon your self; you are
wondrous fair -- you have a very moving lip.


Gentlewoman. Prove it again Sir; all the poor means I have left to be thought
grateful is but a kiss or two, and ye may reap them Sir.


Gentleman. It Is still the same, you wear Divinity about you, another kiss will
make me immortal -- How far may ye hold the time to be spent Lady?


Gentlewoman. It Is now Sir about the time when Mortals whet their knives, some
on thresholds, others on bricks, and some on the soles of their shoes.


Gentleman. You are very Metaphorical, Madam; you mean it is almost
Dinnertime, if it might be without the trouble of your house, I would stay till
your Husband comes, I have some earnest business with him.


Gentlewoman. I shall be proud of your society Sir, I beseech you stay Dinner,
a piece of Beef Sir, and a cold Capon.


Gentleman. I have greater business then eating; but am truly happy in having
your commission to wait your Husbands approach.


The end of the first Book.
THE ACADEMY OF PLEASURE.

The second Book.



Printed in the Year, 1656.

The Academy of Pleasure. The second Book.
SONG I. The eloquent Lover.
[Tune is, Pritbee die and set me free, or else be, etc]
1.
PRithee why must we no more,
As before,
Venus and her son adore?
Prithee why has that fair front
Clouds upon it?
Prithee be as thou were wont,
Lovers ever should persever,
Frank and free,
Frank and free, but dogged never.
2.
Prithee (Dear) no more express
(By thy Dress)
Such a killing sullenness,
Prithee (Sweet) unfold thy beams
Whence there streams
Beauteous and celestial gleams,
Tell me how I have displeased thee,
I Will not cease,
I Will not cease till I Have appeased thee.
3.
O speak (my Goddess) else I die,
Murdered by
Those sharp poniards in thy eye,
Speak, or else I faint away
With dismay,
I have no business bids me stay
Here on earth save to implore thee,
And to cringe,
And to cringe to all adore thee.
4.
Come, lets walk to yonder Grove
Where our love
Every plant that is there will prove
Where thy most delicious name
To thy fame,
I have engraved the wildest Wolves to tame,
At thy name (as is their duty)
They do bow,
They do bow unto thy beauty.
5.
Sylva^^ and his sh^ggy crew
When they view
Thy luster yield all veneration due,
When we last time sported there
Thou did fear
Lest some wild beast should draw near,
Did not beasts and Satyrs pay thee
Fealty,
Fealty proud to obey thee.
6.
Did not Panthers creep to greet
Thy fair feet,
Seeming humbly to entreat,
And the Genius of the place
Smoothe his face,
Hoping to obtain thy grace
While his train with flowers did strew thee
To make known,
To make known what love they owe thee.
7.
Di^ not cold Diana strain
To obtain
(With her Arrow-loving Train)
That thou should have equal sway
Night and day
With her whom all the shadie woods obey,
But oh thy goodness nere flow higher
Than that time,
Than that time thou did deny her.
8.
Thou were born (my dearest Love)
To approve
What the plyant Graces move
When they lead thee to the sport
In such sort
As if Jove should thank thee for it,
Foolish niceness does betray thee
Unto age,
Unto age that will decay thee.
9.
When those Roses shall in scorn
Not adorn
Thy cheeks now ruddier than the Morn,
When she leaps from Ty^ons bed
Wearied
As sh'had been but ill bestead,
When those hairs that now are brighter
Than the gold,
Than the gold with age grow whiter.
10.
Then surrounded with despair
And harsh care,
Thou will ^igh, I bave been fair,
And wish that thou had been more free
Unto me
Who suffer by thy cruelty,
And do find thou do but quibble
With my pain,
Thy heart being smooth, but hard as pibble.
The Master being angry that his Apprentice makes love to his Daughter, thus
schools him.
Master. Syrrah, you shall know that you are my servant, my Apprentice bound
and enrolled, though I have often entrusted thee with all I am master of at
home and abroad, yet I do not remember that I ever gave my consent that thou
should court my Daughter, and just in the nick of time too, when she is on
the very Prick of Preferment as they say, when I had found out a wealthy
Husband for her, but I shall break the neck of your design, and mar your
matter of Matrimony.


Serve. Sir, I acknowledge my self your creature, a thing that is wholly at your
disposal. yet give me leave to say, that I have not been careless of that
which concerns your profit, nor have I lavished and wasted your stock by my
unthriftinesse, I never wore your gains upon my back, or exhausted your
treasure by my riots, but for your Daughter if her love have the least relation
to me I shall not endeavor to stop it, though I were sure to be broken upon
the Wheel in case I neglected it, nor indeed am I able to frown upon her fair
wishes, whose love I durst own to the teeth of torture, nor will you (I hope)
have a thought of matching her to that lame piece of Letchery --


Master. It Is very well, I shall receive instructions from you to whom I shall
wed my Daughter, but I shall discharge your wisdom from any such employment; I
do here discharge you my house, take your own liberty, and when I know not
where to find a Son in Law I will send for you; Begone Sir, I do freely free
you my service, you are your own master now, but shall never be my Daughters
Hasband.


Thanks for a Welcome.
FOr your good looks, and for your clarret,
For often bidding, Do not spare it,
For tossing glasses to the top,
And after sucking of a drop,
When scarce a drop was left behind,
Or that which nicknames Wine, even wind,
For healthy mirth, and iusty sherry,
Such as made old (...) merry,
Such are our thanks that you may have
In blood the clarret which you gave,
And in your service shall be spent
The Spirits which your sack has lent.
SONG II. The flattering Lover.
[Tune is, Prince R^ports March.]
1.
NAy Dearest do not leare
Him that so much does adore thee,
Whose life has its dependence on thy smile;
Why should thou make him grieve
Who on his knees does implore thee
To let him live thy servant for a while:
Can such sweet beauty
Be deaf to complaint,
And despise the duty
Done to his Saint;
Forbid it gentle Boy, thy dart
Can cure this dire anoy that thus
Excruciates my heart.
2.
Those eyes of thine speak love,
Why then should my hopes be frustrate
That are upon an honest Basis built?
Would thou have my fancy rove
Thy exquisite parts to illustrate
Until the sacred Muses blood be spilt,
I Will storm the mountain
Until I come near
The holy Fountain
And drink't off sheer,
That not one Rhiming whelp
From Hypocrene least help
Shall have
His flie-blown skill to save:
3.
I Will fix^hy glorious name
If that thou will command it
With curious art and industry upon
The lips of thundering Fame,
Nor shall strong Time withstand it,
Bathing my self in happy Helicon;
All former beauties
Shall stoop to thee,
As is their duties
Swearing Fealty;
Thy shrine I Will deck with gems
Of price,
Which she that rules the Thames
Shall throw up in a trice.
Two faithful Lovers complement; each other meeting accidentally.
She. Sweet, etc. Welcome, not Dido was more joyful when Aeneas landed on the
Carthaginian shore than I am to meet thee thus happily.


He. Thrice blessed be that kind Fate, which conducted me to this place, where
I have the sight of her who is the sole comfort that I have on earth.


She. You may see how much Fortune is our friend.


He. They say that Fortune is only courteous to Coxcombs.


She. By that rule (my Dear) you should not be overwise.


He. Nay, sometimes the sly Goddess affords a glance, or so even to those
that are meriting, but that it is very seldom, and at best but to show her
mutability, not that she a friend to worth -- What says my Dear unto that
faithful love which I have ever fervently professed.


She. I shall not dissemble, though I blush to acknowledge it; that very blind
Boy who has wounded you, has also lodged an Arrow in my breast, I love you
dearly; and may those Powers who govern all things terrestiall, grant not only
the fruition, but the felicity that all loyal Lovers merit.


He. You make me happy above humane thought, my breast is too narrow to
comprehend those numerous joys that throng about my heart.


She. My Father you know will do his utmost to hinder what God and Nature I
hope has decreed, I mean, he will use all the stratagems that can be imagined
to dissolve this sacred Union; he swears I shall marry a man of wealth, and of
his choosing, or he will not own me for his Child, but I scorn Mammon and his
mines, the goods of the mind are the things that I prize, yet I would have you
use your utmost skill (if it be possible) to obtain my Fathers consent.


He. I shall be guided by thee, my Fair one, were the venture more perilous
than that of Jason for the Golden Fleece, thou art my chaste Medea, and being
armed with thy oraculous council, I shall not fear to force my way though
opposed by millions of dangers.


She. Thanks my gentle Love; but lest that my Father (whose jealous head is
haunted with more doubts than Argus was furnished with eyes) should suspect our
conference, I will presently leave you, Farewell dearest friend until our next
meeting.


He. Adieu my love, let the fairest Fortune attend thee, I will resort to your
Father to morrow to implore his consent, I have a hope to prevail upon him.


SONG III. A Dialogue between Strephon and Daphne.
Strephon. COme my Daphne, come away
We do waste the crystal day:
It Is Strephon calls. Daph. What would my love?

Streph. Come follow to the Myrtle Grove,
Where Venus shall prepare,
New Chaplets for thy hair.

Daph. Were I shut up within a tree,
I Would rend my bark to follow thee.

Streph. My Shepherdess make haste,
The Minutes fly too fast;
In these cooler shades we'll lie
Blind as Cupid kissed thine eye,
On thy bosom will I stray.

Daph. In such warm snow who would not lose his way?

CHORUS, Strephon, Dapne, together.

We Will laugh and leave this world behind,
And Gods that see
Shall envy thee and me,
But never find such joy
When we embrace a Deity.

POESIES for Bracelets.
He that sent this is faster bound
Then what about thy wrist is wound.
When you put on this little band
Then think (my Dear) I kiss your hand.
Go, keep that hand from Cupid free
Till Hymen link her heart to me.
When this silk Twist
Adorns thy wrist,
Let us two twine
My Cherubine.
On a Neck-lace.
Here he hangs alive in chains
Who late was slain with lingering pains.
Cupid take heed (by me beware)
How thou art taken in this snare,
For Love himself if he fly near
Is sure to be entangled here.
On a Gyrdle.
While that thou do her waste embrace
Be sure keep others from the place,
Nor can thy duty be orepast
Until my arm ingyrt her waste.
A Letter to a friend with money.
Dear Friend,
IAm sorry that you should be exposed to so much penury, as to want so small a
sum as -- shillings, and good faith my condition was never so tattered as it
is now, but I have sent you the money; I would beg of you to take some settled
course, you have a good wit, and must stir in the world if you wish for a
prosperous condition: but howsoever you are crossed by Fortune, you have a
retiring place: come home to me, and be as welcome as my own soul, but be a
good Husband as I am, which is to say, wear ordinary clothes, eat the best
meat, and drink the best drink; I know this doctrine is not disgustfull to
you. Let me see you as soon as may be, for assure your self, there is no man
more entirely affects you than

Your true friend.

On a Blister on a Gentlewomans lip.
CHide not thy sprouting lip, nor kill
The juicy bloom with bashful skill;
Know it is an amorous dew
That swells to court thy corrall hue,
And what a blemish you esteem
To others eyes a pearl may seem,
Whose wary growth is not above
The thirsty size that pearls do love,
And does so well become that part
That chance may seem a seeret art.
Does any judge that face more fair
Whose ^ender silk a mole does bear,
Or else that eye a finer net
Whose glass is ring'd about with jet?
Are apples thought more sound and sweet
When honey-specks and red do meet,
Or will a Diamond shine more clear
If in the midst a foil appear?
Then is your lip made fairer by
Such sweetness of deformity.
The Nectar which men strive to sip
Springs like a well upon your lip,
Nor does that show immodesty,
But overflowing chastity,
And who will blame the fruitful trees
When too much sap or gum he sees?
Here Nature from her store does send
Only what other parts can lend:
If lovely buds ascend so hie,
The root below cannot be dry.
A Dialogue betwixt Will and Jone.
Will. Come Jone, we are toward marriage, let us talk of that ^ill do us
good, What will thy Granam give us toward Housekeeping?


Jone. Marry two platters, a pot and a pan, two dishes and as many spoons, a
sheet and two slannell blankets.


Will. This pretty well indeed la, let me see: We must be as (...) in the
Market place next Tuesday, and weel be married presently.


Jone, I-faith my honey sweet Comb, Have thee, weel have a whole noise of
Fiddlers, though I pawn my patticeate for it; come Will, let us his us (...),
weel make a bag-pudding to supper.


Will. Come away Chuck.


SONG III. A Tavern Rans
[Tune is, Stay shnt the gate, etc.]
1.
STay noble hearts,
The Other quart, what dull Fate is this
That parts
Our communion?
But just now we were
Resolved to stay here
Till Phoebus dissolved our union,
Is he gone to tipple (Boys) and shall we choke here?
Is he hemmed with vapor, and shall we not smoke here?
Here 3 quarts not touched yet that we have bespoke here.
2.
Boy, fill the glass,
Here Is a health to each man here
And his taffe;
Fill't up higher,
Or give me a Bowl
(For I me thirsty at soul)
Whose top to the roof may aspire.
There Is no harm in good sherry, good faith none at all boys,
It raises us up again, though we do fall boys,
And makes even a Pigmey Gygantick and tall boys.
3.
See, Bac^bus pleads
That you light Beavers,
And your heavier heads
Might be parted,
Bring ^haplets of Flowers
For those Temples of ours,
He Is a Coxcomb that needs will be carted.
Boy, bid all our Hackney-men drive from the door,
But besure they have sack enough though on the score,
Though they suck up more seas than would swallow the shore.
4.
See, now we are
Obliged alike
To prosecure the war,
On-ships burned,
We must now fight it out,
For if they give us the rout
On a hard bench each Hero is urned.
Lets break through their ranks (the Foe sparks and smiles)
And be the sole Lords of the Canary Isles,
Inricht with Rubie-faces, Joves Sons richest spoils.
5.
Now we are glorious,
And shall prove
(In spite of Fate) victorious,
Charge again,
The half-emptied Cask
Shall prove that our task
Had halted by half witted-men.
Though the Foe have strong Rampires he trembles within,
If we storm but his outworks he will never turn again,
Yet in taking him Prisoner much danger we win.
6.
But ere the sky
Be painted
With Aurore's saffron die
Home we will march boys
And there in our beds
Clap new Helms on our heads,
Though our faces we fashion with starch boys.
For he is the only true genuine Good Fellow,
Who though sometimes Bowzie and thoroughly mellow,
Will let no body know that he sees green or yellow.
A wealthy Clown courting a witty Gentlewoman.
He. Mistress E. God speed you.


She. That Is more than I need at this time, for I am doing nothing Sir.


He. I were as good say a good word as a bad: but if you will have it more
complementicetically as they say, than thus, How does your fair and beauteous
worship?


She. Sir; it is more wisdom to say nothing at all than to speak to no purpose.


He. My purpose is to Wive you.


She. Very good; but I have a purpose too Sir, and that is never to wed you.


He. Belike you are in love with somebody else.


She. No, but I am lustily promised.


He. Make em your Worships man, I can deo many things I can tell you, else
there are lies abroad. I have heard very well of you Mistress E, and so has my
Father, who has sent me a wooing to you: nay, and I have a Copy of Verses
(cost me six pence, and a double jag of Mother Red-Caps Ale) made by our Vicar,
I have been conning them this four long hours by the clock, you shall hear me
read them.


She. I for Phoebus sake Sir, I love good Verses as I love good meat or witty
company.


He. First I do beg your Worships good relief,
(For I intend to show my mind in brief)
I call to you if that you can afford it,
I care not at what price, for on my word it
Shall be repayd again although it cost me
More than I Will speak of now, for Love has cost me
In surious blanket like a Tennis ball.
And now I rise aloft, and now I fall,
Thus do I still continue without rest
In The Morning like a Man, at Night a Beast,
Roaring and bellowing my own disquiet,
That much I fear forsaking of my diet.
How does your beauteous Worship like our Vicars Verses?


She. O rarely well! By the soul of Martin Parker your Vicar has an ingenieus
Soull; I am mightily taken I confess with your Poetry: but say I should set my
affections upon you, how will you maintain me?


He. Marry with my land and living my Father has promised me.


She. I have heard much of your wealth, but I never knew your manners before
now.


He. I have no Manours, but a pretty Homestalland we have good store of Oxen
and Horses, and Carts, and Plowes, and household stuff bomination, and great
flocks of Sheep, and flocks of Geese, and Capons, and Hens, and Ducks: Oh we
have a fine yard of Pullen, and thank God here is fine weather for my Fathers
Lambs.


She. I cannot live content in the midst of discontent, for as it is impossible
for that music to delight the care where all the parts of discord come to
composition, so the marriage life will still consist of jars where there is no
sympathy in the condition of the wedded Parties. Pray Sir, rest your self
contented with this Answer, I cannot love you.


He: I, I, it is no matter what you say, my Father told me thus much before I
came that you would be something nice at first, but he bad me like you never
the worse for that, I were the liker to speed.


She. You were best then leave off your suit till some other time, and when my
leisure shall serve me to love you I Will send for you.


He. I shall be sure to pay the Messenger, and so I take my leave of your
beautiful Worship.


An Invitation to Mirth.
HE that is contented lives for aye,
The more he laughs the more he may,
Nere meets with Acher in the bone,
O^ Catharres, or griping stone,
O^ lingringly his Lungs consumes
Into Fevers, Gouts, or Rhumes,
Never he his body brings,
Cause he ever laughs and sings,
He that would his body keep
From Diseases must not weep,
Let each man keep his heart at ease,
No man dies of that disease,
It Is Mirth that fills the veins with blood
More than wine, or sleep, or food.
SONG IV. The Convert.
[Tune is, For now the Butter-boxes begin for to v^pour, etc.]
1.
COme sweet Clarinde
My joy and my life,
I have left the Whore Dul^inda
And thou shall be my Wife,
For now I find the folly of quaffing and whoring
That ends in confusion and horrible woe,
He have no more drinking, nor drabbing, no scoring,
That dries up the body, and dams the soul too.
2.
I have been in Venice
Amongst the brave La^^es
In Madrid, in Paris, and Pad^^ too
Have had conversation,
With wise men and Asses,
With the taff^ry (...) and Coventry blew,
Yet all is done it is madness
And grief and despair
That ends in confusion and horrible woe,
Their black gloomy prisons
With outsides most fair
That dry up the body, and damn the soul too*
3.
Come then fair Temperance,
True Image of heaven,
Thee will (...) worship
Iminaculate Maid,
By thy bright self
Alone I Will be shriven
For cursed Accrasia
Too long I Have obeyed,
I Will now (with Dioclesian)
Plant herbs and sweet flowers,
And think my self greater
Than Spixe's mighty King,
And sing ore the Song
Of the witty Ephesian
Unto a Key equal
With Flaccu^ fine string
4.
What is the Camp,
But a company of Co^n^ts?
What is the City.
But a Family of Fools?
What is the Court,
But a huge hive of Hornets,
Moles, Madmen and Mercenaties,
Monsters and Mules?
Thrice happy is the Hermit
In woods that converses,
And lives on what Nature
Affords without toil,
And sings his Makers praise
In Theological Verses,
Free from the Cl^ie
The Camp or Court coile.
A Letter to a Maid or Widow.
Lady,
IN your stern beauty I can plainly see
T^ose wonders that in Ae^na b^,
If coals out of that Mountains top do^ s^^e,
Consuming ^i mes gush from your eye;
If frost do there lie on the ground below,
Your breast is white and cold as snow;
Those fie^y sparks that set my heart on fire;
Refuse to melt your own desire,
The frost that does binds up your chilly breast
With double fire ^as (...) oppressed:
Just so the hearth his proper stain withstand.
When ice it self heats others hands.
A Lover that would be, finding his Mistresie alone, thus courts her.
He. Save you sweet* Mistress, How comes it to pass that you are alone?


She. Because Sir, I desire no other company but my own.


He. Would I were your own then, that I might keep you company.


She. O Sir, you and he that is my own are far asunder.


He. But if you please you may be nearer.


She. That cannot be mine own is nearer than my self, and yet alas I cannot
call my self my own; thoughts, fears, and despairs are only mine, and those
do keep me company.


He. I must confess your Father is too cruel to keep you thus in a manner
sequestered from the world, to spend your prime of youth in obscurity, seeking
to wed you to a very Fool that knows not how to use himself, but could my
deserts be answerable to my desires, I swear by all things powerful that my
heart could wish no higher happiness than to be graced with your love, I
cannot play the dissembler as some do, nor hang my love at my tongues and.


She. Sir, I shall consider of your suit.


He. Do, and make me eternally happy:


A Marriage Song.
1.
REmember (Bridegroom) as thy Bride is fair
How many Nights of care
Waited thy honest lust,
Thy timorous distrust,
Thy conflict in the question now recall
Her easy threats, thy ^a^ier tears and all
That amorous ^tory
Which made thee glad and sorry,
How the sly Maid
At sundry times betrayed.
And often denyde her Mi^tresse now at last
When thou have liberty thy joys to taste
Thou can not put off wishing, but must woe
For kisses while thou kill'st; tie her shoe
As glad to see it s^ack, and fear to lose
Makes thee embrace her with a stronger close.
2.
On to the Chu ch, let Hymen pass before,
Sing mi^^hfull Pae^ns: Io ore and ore.
The Spring (to save me Poetry)
Has spread with curious industry
The way with Violets where she must tread
Fetched from Flora's fragrant bed,
Else would a birth stand up commanded by
One touch of he^^ though Nature knew not why,
Perfumes upon her lips the Graces scatter,
Her lips which nor her Maid nor Glass can ^^^tter.
Now bathe thy soul in blisses
And mel^ thy self in kisses:
^he will return thee love for love I Will warrant,
And bring thee every year an Heir apparent:
Ralph courts Ma^dlin.
Ralph. Faith I h^ been in a fair taking for you, a bots on you, for the other day
after I had seen you, my ^elly began to rumble; what is the matter thought I?
with that I bethought my self, and the swe^t comportnance of that same sw^et
round face of thine: out went I, and I Will besworn was never so taken, for I was
feign to cut all my points; and do hear Maudlin, if thou do not grant me
thy good will, in the way of marriage, first and foremost I Will run out of my
clothes, and then out of my wits for thee.


Maudlin. Nay Ralph, I would be lo^th you should do so for me.


Ralph. Will you look merrily on me and love then?


Maudlin. Faith I care not greatly if I do.


Ralph. C^re not greatly if I do! what an Answers that? If th^^^ wilt say, I
Maudlin take thee Ralph to my sp^^ce Husband.


Maudlin. Why so I will, but we must be cryde at the Market-C^o^se, and have
more company for Witnesses first.


Ralph. Nay, we will not want for company.


Maudlin. Why then here is my hand.


Ralph. And here is a b^sse, I long to be in bed with thee my sweet ^orsell of
Mayds flesh.


A Letter from a Batchelour or Widower to the Maid or Widow that he is sure to.
My Dear, dear,
SInce the heavens have so much favored me that your consent walks hand in
hand with the serious proposals of my lawful love, I cannot but express those
joys that crowd about my heart, and tell you that as I was never happy till
now, so I shall never find any felicity but in your blessed company, who are
more to me than the Mines of M^xico or Pe^u, your face affording the fullness
of beauty, your body the summum of all bl^sse, and your bosom the basis of all
perfection, and rest confident that the Sun shall sooner shine without
affording either ^^at or light, the Sea cease ebbing and flewing, and the Earth
be void of Inhabitants ^r^ my firm fixed affection fall from that bright Zenyth
where my cordial zeal has placed it; I am providing as fast as may be for the
Sol^^nization of our Hymeneall Rites, my true love gives wings unto my haste,
for I long to fold thee in my arms, and to lose my lusty youth in thy embraces
who art my light and life, and to whom I shall ever prove my self

Sincerely ^ff^ctionate.

Her Answer.
Sweet Friend,
I Kindly thank you for your last Letter, and think my self the happiest she
in the world who have the sincere and unbyassed affection of a man so
accomplished as your self: nor shall I fail to retribute your cordiality with
the return of a true and unfeigned zeal, my heart is wholly yours, you sit as
sole sovereign there, and command each thought ere I can call it mine; my
subjugation to you is (in my opinion) the most immense tranquillity that can
possibly wait on Mortality; command me (dear Friend) as soon as you please,
for the griping Miser is not more desirous of Mammon, or the hungry man of
meat, than I am to prost ate all I call mine to your commands, to whom I shall
ever manifest my self.

A loyal Lover.

A new Letanie.
FRom a Nose that never met For,
And from a Sword that never struck blow,
From a Red-breech to make a show
With one Copper-lac^ or two,
From a Belt of leather enough
Hung with Tobacco pipes to puff,
And from a Brawle to take in snuff.
Libera nos Domine.
From a new Hat without a Band,
From an Heir that his no Land,
From a face at Plymouth ^and,
From him that wears a Feather in's Cap,
With new white Boots without a Top,
And paid for too by wondrous hap,
With a painted Queen upon his lap.
Libera nos etc.
From a new Beard with Dogs-turd trimd,
With a new Lo e-lock, laced and limbd,
From a new favor snatched or nimd,
From him that walks as if he swimd.
Libera nos Domine.
The Lover being out of hope ever to gain his Mistress affection, thus takes
his farewell of her by Letter.
Discourteous Dance,
HE that first folded his arms, looked pale, walks disconsolately, and sighed
his sorrows in a pensive tone, was he that first taught Women how to be cruel
and relentlesse: most inexorable Woman! have I so long courted thee with all
the reality of serious love? have I l^ckt thy spittle from the earth, and
prostrated my self at thy feet as thy footstool, offering up more prayers at
thy Shrine than in the Temple, and will nothing mollify thy obdura^e heart?
what excuse can thou make for such contemptuous scorn? am I another Hyponax,
or misshapen Thyrsites? or has Time yet stamped the Characters of Age upon my
brow? or is my estate so mean that I cannot maintain thee in more pomp than thy
pride can dictate? if none of these can be charged upon me, let the world judge
of thy wisdom; for me, I have found my error, and will appoint my self the
strictest penance: in the mean time I gaze upon my quondam absurdities (in
reference to thee) as prodigies that predicted ruin but by heavenly
appointment are turned to good. So farewell fond and cruel Mistress, and may
both P^les meet before thy love and my affection, which is the firm resolve of

Thy mortal Enemy.

SONG VI. The willing Prisoner.
[Tune is, We Will go no more to the Old Exchange, etc]
1.
HAve I not loved thee pretty one
A whole month and a day,
And is it not now time to be gone
I prithee Wanton say?
I that until I viewed thy face
Have laughed at Cupids power
Nere knew what amorous worship was
Above a single hour,
Am now in slaved by thy smiles
And thy alluring postures,
Nor am I weary of thy wiles,
(...) do^e upon thy gestures.
2.
Sure thou haff some Circean char^,
Some spell the^ so attracts me,
Yet am I happy in my harm,
And blessed by that which wracks me.
So loyal Prisoners kiss their Gyves
And Martyrs play with fire.
I would not part for thousand lives
With thee my souls desire.
Then Cupid grace thy Convertite
With Pageants and Procession,
And I such favor to require
Will trumpet my profession.
3.
O thou art all so sweet, so fair,
I lose my self in wonder,
And Jove himself would quit his Chair,
And throw aside his Thunder.
But to obtain one kiss from thee,
But Jove's self shall not supplant me,
For while I boast thy amity
His fireballs cannot daunt me.
Then come my Dearest, let me clip
Thy body most divine,
And suck Nepen^^t from thy lip,
Which yields immortal wine.
4.
It is thy glory (Dearest sweet)
Thy fight-lesse Archer never
Did with a Dart my bosom gree^,
Thy eyes supply his Quiver.
Had Homer or Museu^ seen
Thy rare resplendent glories,
Hellen and Hero never had been
So famous in their stories.
Thou had filled up the mouth of Fame
And if my skill may raise thee,
I Will rear such Trophies to thy name
That after times shall praise thee.
5.
Thou art that Ve^^^ which did rise
Out of the foaming Ocean,
While all the tumid Deities
Did wait upon thy motion.
Since then thou art that Goddess kind
That rules the Babie Getter,
Let thy beloved A^chyses find
How thou his limbs can fetter.
A brace of young Aeneas his
I Shall every year find being,
While I like ^^eel-bac^t Hercules
My flesh am always freeing.
A Letter from a Woman (heaven knows) being forced to woe some obdurate young
Man.
Sweet Sir,
I Cannot but tax you of too much harshnesse and diss^nanty, who fly her who
so entirely affects you: must Daphne follow Phoebus? fi^ Sir! can you be so
uneasy, can you freez in so hot a Summers day, certainly it is your mistake
that occasions this scorn: I have youth and some beauty, else my glass is
treacherous, and all that censure me are mere Calumniators; I do confess I am
too pliant, 100 much Woman yet I can frown and ^ip the passions of others even
in the bud. I can tell others that they court our Sex only to please their
present heats, and then it is their pleasure to leave us; I can hold off, and
by the Chymicall power of my countenance draw whole Rhe^es of Sonets and
Madrigals from the brain^ of a w^^ping Lover; yet to you (dear Sir) who are my
better self, I put off all those necessary nice^ies, and contrary to custom
do that office which no way befits a Woman, and entreat a Man to love, if you
are humane, and have blood and spirit you cannot choose but relent; though you
are as hard as marble, yet I believe you are no Image; is it not deplarable
that a thing of so exact a form shaped out with so true a symetry, that has all
the organs of speech belonging to a man should render all those but livelesse
^otions that walk upon wi^^^: then (dear Sir) leave off what you have been,
and be what God and Nature intended you for, a Man, and embrace that real love
which is unfeignedly prostrated by

Your affectionate, etc.

A Soldier complementing a young Maid.
Soldier. I am a Soldier and a Batchelour, Lady, I could love such a Wife as
you infinitely, they that use many words are commonly deceitful; but the truth
is, I long to be a Husband, a good Husband: I find my self given to my ease a
little, I am young you see, and for my abilities you need not question them, if
you are diffident, try me before you take me.


Maid. You appear to me Sir, so honest and so civil, that I dare bid you
welcome without a blush.


Soldier. You have made me a bountiful amends for your strict carriage when
you saw ^e first, you will not be angry Lady if I ask you one question.


Maid. Any thing Sir.


Soldier. Are you a Maid?


Maid. You make me blush to answer you: I was ever accounted so, and durst
confirm it Sir, with an oath.


Soldier. Then would I counsel you to marry presently, for every year you
lose, you lose a Boy, together with a Beauty.


Maid. I am not so strict Sir, nor so much tide unto a Virgin solitariness,
but if an honest and noble Soldier, (such as I esteem your self) should
profess a sincere affection, I think I should accept it, but first I must have
good assurance of his love; I know well how to be commanded, and how to be
obeyed if occasion require it, nor is my Riall of less worth when it is spent,
if spent by my direction for my Husbands advantage, and I do hold it as
indifferent in my duty to be his Maid in the Kitchen, or his Cook if necessity
command it, as to know my self the Mistress of the house in the Hall or the
Parlour.


Soldier. Faith Lady, let us not linger, but be married on the sudden.


Maid. And as suddenly you will repent your bargain.


Soldier. The sooner I shall bless my Fate.


Maid. You are a Flatterer; but to speak truth, the first time that I saw you I
found something in that noble face, that commanded my notice.


Soldier. I am all yours Lady.


Maid. You have the art to cozen me, but I shall venture for once, Hymen has
sometimes shown himself.


SONG VII: A Pastoral Dialogue between Lalus and Melissa.
[Tune is, Did thou not once Lucinda vow, etc]
Lalus. HOw long (Melissa) shall thy scorn
Make Lalus curse his fate,
And wish that he had never been born
To perish by thy hate?

Melissa. Fond Shepherd, why art thon distressed,
Have I not often said
Lalus, No more thy self molest,
In vain thon crav'st my aid.

Lalus. What is it that renders me despised?
My Flocks are neither few
Nor lean; my love is highly prized
By all the Nymphish crew.

Melissa. Ask me not why I shun thy love,
I can no reason yield,
Great Phoebus could not Daphne move,
Love cannot be compelled.

Lalus. Then for thy love, O cruel Maid!
I must resign my breath,

Melissa. The Destinies must be obeyed,
I do not wish thy death.

Lalus. So sinking Mariners do pray
To Storms, and so they hear
I will not live another day
To feed on grief and fear.

Melissa. I would my power walked hand in hand
With what I could desire,
But Fate no mortal can withstand,
Farewell, I must retire.

Lalus. Farewell, thou ^tinty-hearted Gyrle,
Thou will repent too late,
When tarling Fame abroad shall hurl
The rigor of my Fate.

A new-married Wife thus discards her quondam Lover by Letter.
Sir,
COuld not your own discretion tell you that when I was married I was none of
yours: is it not time Sir, to become virtuous? I hope you will forget our past
follies, and neither talk of our intimacie, or cherish a thought of our future
familiarity; your eyes are now commanded to look off me, I stand now on the
marriage circle safe and secure; nor can all your Spells, Charms, or
Incartations be of force to remove me; it is the highest sacrilege to violate
Wedlock you rob two Temples at once, and so make your self doubly guilty, while
your ui^e hers, and bespatter her Husbands honor, but I have hopes of your
conformity and that for the time to come you will love me virtuously, chastely,
and modestly, so expecting, nay imploring your compliance, I take my leave, and
am

Yours in all civil service.

A conceited complementall Dialogue. A waggish Wench and a new wounded Lover.
She. Did your wisdom conceit, that I was in love? I wonder where I first
began to suck in that unnatural heat, I am sure not from those two leaden eyes
of yours, that sight is no way piercing; I confess they would be very lovely
ones if the balls stood right, and there is a leg of yours (to your praise be
it spoken) made out of a dainty Staff, and yet God be thanked there is Calfe
enough.


He. Be pleased to pardon him Lady, who though once refractory, is now become
soft and soluble, you see what miracles your beauty can work.


She. Alas! has it been wounded of late? pricked at the heart I Will warrant, with
a forked-Arrow.


He. Let my true unfeigned penitence procure a pardon for my former follies, I
do acknowledge that dread powerful Deity little; great Cupid, and his
all-quickning heat burns in my breast, I confess I am he that once wronged your
honor, that termed you unchaste and impudent, and yet I am he that now do beg
your love, my Contrition is as true as my Allegation was false; I am now all
love, and all your creature, nor can I live unless you will deigne to love me.


She. Well Sir, I shall consider of your suit, your Confession, and Contrition
has something wrought upon me.


He. I am at your disposal.


SONG VIII. The inspired Lover.
[Tune is, Gerards Mistress.]
1.
APpear
Thou true Aurora, suddenly appear,
The world to cheer;
For till thou shin'st all things do languish here:
Diffuse
Those lucid glories, oh diffuse thy beams
To guild Loves streams,
Where Cupid Anchors in a Ship of Dreams:
Too long thou have been secluded
When those fulgent Rays of thine
Can cloathe this Globe
In such a Robe
Shall Cymbia's self outshine.
2.
Let ou^
Hume^ous Poets flatter rottenness and paint,
And call her Saint,
Making a Queen a Queen with language qu^int,
And call
Those Ladies beautecus, whose sunk watry-eyes,
And rivell'd thighs
Would daunt Deaths self, meaning to make them prize.
Let them still dawb and varnish
Old Hecub^, and call her fair,
While we do know
It Is nothing so,
She sheds her nails and hair.
3.
But thou
Great Natures Goddess, glory of thy kind,
Where shall we find
One like thy self for person and for mind?
Thy true,
Yet Roseat color that exceeds all art,
And fires my hear^,
Those rare perfections lodged in every part.
That hie-bu^lt Ivory forehead,
That melting lip, and speaking-eye,
And such a tongue
Engaged in Song
Would slave a Deity.
4.
I do
Not envy Phoebus with his Lawreate Love,
Nor would I prove
Saturn's P^ylyra, or the Wife of Jove,
Let Bacchus
Court his Madam in a kindly grape.
Let Saturne's rape,
Beaut^ous Al^mena in Ampbitrio's shape,
I have more than heaven,
Earth, or Neptune's Empirie,
Angels and Men
Fall prostrate then
Ado^e this Deity.
5.
When I
First perused that Celestial face,
In such a place,
Where Flora tript it with her Nimphish race.
Did not
The cheerful Goddess and her Rose-crown'd crew
All flockt to view,
A mortal creature but of heavenly heiw.
Did they not each fall prostrate as sweet Ver in charge had given
A flowery Wreathe
Each did bequeath
To thee the joy of Heaven.
6.
I am
Not perpl^x^d at the great Turks store,
Or that the O^e
Of hallowed Shrines serves to adorn his Whore.
The mighty Sultan's greatness, or the Persian pride,
I can abide;
And view the great Iberian Monarch ride
In his Golden Chariot
Studded with most precious G^ms,
In thee (my Dear)
I have what ere
The mightiest Prince esteems.
A Jeering, ironicall Epistle.
Sir,
I Have so much care of your health, that I cannot but entreat you (as the
Welsh Philosopher says) to take very many heeds, that your brains bring not
your body to ruin. I hear you have undertaken all City-Feasts, Poesies for
Chimneys and Ghambers, and Entertainments whenever, and wheresoever, at the
peril of your own invention; it is a very noble resolve I confess, but you must
consider that the misery of Man may fitly be compared to a Divedapper, who when
she is under water past our sight, and indeed can seem no more to us rises
again, and does but shake her self, and is the very same she was: even so
(beloved Sir) is it still with transitory Man. You have learnt the names of the
several Liberal Sciences, and have written Epistles congratulatory to the
Nine Musess, and are indeed one of the Water-Bayliffs of Hell con. But what
then? Poverty is the Patrimony of the Muses; those that have seen the sad Exit
of many a famous Poet, have made that old Law into a new Maxim: you are not to
be taught that no man can be learned of a sudden, but let not your project for
Poetry discourage you, what (probably) you may lose in that you may get again
in Alchymie; but what ever happens, you must remember that the chief note of a
Scholar is to govern his passions; keep your hat on, the block salute few
bare-headed, especially in Winter there is much danger in it. The Poet
Aeschilus while he was complementing with his hat in his hand had his brains
beaten out by a Shellfish darted from an Eagles claw, who took his balld-pate
for a white Rock: I know you bruise your brains and confine your self to much
vixation, I know also that eight and twenty several Almanacks have been
compiled, and all for several years since first that fabric of yours was
endued with breath, and eight and twenty times has Phoebus Carre run out his
yearly course since your creation. I need not play the Aedipus, or say you are
eight and twenty years of age; so wishing you long life, I rest and remain --

Yours verily.

A Love-Song, Between Amyntas and Cloris.
1.
CLoris sighed, and sang and wept,
Sighing sang, and singing slept;
Awakes, sighs, sings, and weeps again
For Amyntas [Amintas!] that was slain.
Oh! [oh!] had you seen his face quoth she,
How ^weet, how full of majesty:
And there she stopped, and then she cryde,
Amyntas! Amintaas! and so she did.
2.
Cloris dead! Amyntas came,
Whilst the Echo sounds his name;
A false report had noy^'d him slain,
Which makes her death a double pain.
Gone! [gone] is my Love, my life, (quoth he)
The mirror of true constancy:
And then he rests, and kiffing cries
My Cloris, my Cloris! and by her dies.
SONG IX.
COrinna false! how may it be?
Let me not hea^'t again, it is blasphemy;
She Is Divine,
Not the Shrine,
Where the Vectall flame does shine,
Holds a Light more constant, pure than she:
Next shall the Night
Out-burn that Tap^r-light
Which consumes the One-Ey'd day,
Phoebus rays
Shall not gaze
Titan in his clearest face;
Snow shall burn,
Floods return
To the Springs their funeral Urne,
Shall enlive its ashes e're her loves decay.
2.
It Is said Corinna, how may it be?
As false as my affections true to thee;
That thou art
How my heart
Fears such terrors to impart
Not what thou was wont to be to me:
This! this destroys
My late triumphant joys
Which swelled when in her arms entwined,
Love's best wreathe,
You did breathe
Vows to be my life till death;
Robbed that bliss,
Leaving this,
With sighs, and every word a kiss,
Whilst that our poor souls are with love combined.
3.
Last Night I walk'e into a Grove,
Where chaste embraces did often express a love,
Pure as fire,
Whose desire
Might but with our souls expire,
This I vowed since your sad remove:
The Nightingale
Have hush't her pretty tail^,
Now leaving her dities to the Owl,
When we spy
From the Sky
Falling-Starres, our misery,
They assign
If you shine
In any O^be of love but mine,
Come, come Corinna and revive my soul.
The Muses Expositor: OR, A Poetical Dictionary, For Information of the mere
English Reader.
A.
Ajax.
AJax surnamed Telemon, who (vanquished by Ulysses invincible Oratory, who in
despite of him obtained Achilles's Celestial Arms) slew himself, out of
whose blood sprang a Flower with these letters on the leaves, A. J. which are
the first letters of his name, signifying grief, and dolor: Ajax in Greek
signifying Ahlasse.

Achilles
The Son of Peleus and Th^tis, the greatest and most excellent Warrior among
the Greciau^; the Poets will have him to be Invulnerable, only his heel might
be pierced; which (say they) was proved by Paris, who wounded him with an
envenomed Dart (in the Temple of Apollo) in that very place, whereof he died.

B.
Bellerophon,
As some will have it, the Son of Neptune, as others of Glaucus King of Epire,
an all-accomplisht young Prince; he residing in the Court of Petreus King of
Argos, the Kings Wife (A^thia) became passionately in love with him, insomuch
that (forgetting of what Sex she was) she offered him her body, but being
rejected by this frigid Hypolitus, and diffident of his secrecy, with her
heir dishelved, and on her knees she besought the King her Husband, to wipe
off her stain with spunges made of his heart who had ravished her: Petreus,
though highly incensed, would not immediately destroy him, nor permit his
stinghter in his Palace, but contrived his ruin thus, He wrote Letters to his
Father-in-law, Jobaras King of Lycra; making Bellerophon the Messenger,
intimating that upon receipt of those he should immediately kill him
(Bellerophon) as his deepest enemy, the Prince thus dispatched with the message
of his own murder, repaired to Lycia, and was magnificently treated by the
King for the space of twelve days: which expired, Jobaras inquired the welfare
of his Son and Daughter, with the present estate of Epire, demanding if he had
no Letters that might hint his desired solution. Bellerophon presently pulled
forth his Packet, which the King receiving and reading, became much astonished;
but dissembling his displeasure, he began to cogitate how he might deliver over
Bellerophon to death by some wily stratagem, and therefore using him with all
honor for some few days, he began at length to express more intimacy, often
discoursing with him of Prodigies, Monsters and Serpents, amongst the rest he
mentioned the Chymera, a most hydeous monster-, informing him, that whosoever
should destroy that beast should have Temples erected to his honor.
Bellerophon, whose magnanimity was sufficient to animate him to any adventure,
(though never so dreadful) readily undertook the encounter, vanquishing this
more than monster thanks to his plumed palfray; for which deliverance, Jobaras
not only altered his sanguine resolve, but gave him one of his Daughters,
called Cassandra in marriage, with part of his Territories.

C.
Cassandra,
A Prophetess, Diughter to Priam King of Troy: Antiquity relates that Apollo
was much enamoured on this Sybill, who for a long time remained deaf to his
demands, to the great grief of that God, as is sweetly hinted by the famous
French Poet Ronsard in one of his most excellent Sonets (translated, and almost
fitted for the Press) to his Mistress, whom he shadows under the name of
Cassandra, Son. 22.

So sacred Phoebus up and down did rove
On Zinchus banks (by Illion swiftly running)
While rivers, woods, and flowry-meads did move,
Wailing (with him) Cassandra's cruel cunning:
In vain the pensive God his Harp did plie,
(Mingling his briny tears with Zanthus stream)
In vain he taxt his Ladies cruelty,
Wasting his vitals in an amorous Dream.
As thou great God of Science, and of Light,
Gold-hayr'd Hyperion were it once perplexed;
So am I stabbed with delours day and night,
With griping care, and sullen sorrow vexed, etc.
Yet at last this lovesick Deity got a grant of his wishes, on this condition
that Phoebus should furnish her with such Prescience, that she should be able
to foretell the Fates of Men, Nations, and Cities for Ages to come. Phoebus
granted her desire, but claiming her promise, she gave a scornful negation: At
which Apollo being incensed (since it was impossible to seize what he had
already conferred for the Gods (say the Poets) cannot revoke their promise)
added this, That though she prophefied never so truly no man should believe
her, the reason that though she foretold the calamities that must inevitably
follow if Helen were not restored, yet none hearkened to her advice.

Calais,
The Brother of Zetes, both Sons to Boreas; the two brothers being imbarqued
with Jason, and the other Argonauts, for the conquest of the Golden Fleece,
happened to cast Anchor in a Haven of Bythinia, then under the Scepter of Phineas
King of Bythinia and Paphlagonca, (a man most skliful in predicting future
accidents) who, for divulging the secrets of the Gods, having been honored
with their councels, was not only struck bind by Jupiter, but most strangely
tormented by Harpies, i. e. monstrous Birds, having faces like Virgins, their
hands misshapen and woudrous large, furnished with great bellies and insatiate
appetites, these so soon as Phineas was set down to meat were constant
Intruders, either devouring all, or in case any dish escaped their rapacity,
they defiled it with loathsome excrements. Phineas having foreseen the approach
of those noble Adventurers who were now landed in his Dominions, furnishing
himself with a Guide, resorted to their Harbor; relating his misfortune, and
imploring their assistance, adding, That he was near allied to them in blood,
having married one of their Sisters called Cleopatra, also that he had a long
time expected their approach, as appointed by heaven for his deliverance. The
Sons of Boreas (whose shoulders were adorned with wings like Birds) and their
fellow-Adventurers being moved with compassion, associated him to his Court,
where at the hour of Dinner they were sumptuously feasted, but scarce had they
tasted the Vyands, when behold the Harpies (with hideous noise) invaded the
meat, filling the room with a noisome stench: then the Sons of Boreas presently
taking wing, fell upon the Harpies with such courage that they forced them to
fly, when a voice was heard from heaven, forbidding their further pursuit, and
assuring that the Harpies should no more infest Phineas, Appollonius, Valerius
Flaccus.

Castor,
The Brother of Pollux, the two Sons of Laeda, the first by Tyndarus, the
second by Jupiter; they were born in Aebalia, called also Laconia; Castor being
slain by Meleager his Brother, Pollux, (who challenged the right of
Immortality, as the Son of Jove) so infinitely loved him that he prevailed with
his Father Jupiter that his Immortality might equally be shared betwixt them;
which being granted, they live and are in heaven by turns.

D.
Delphes,
Where Apollo's Temple once stood, on the Hill of Parnassus, a Rock every where
hanging over it, where stood a City not defended by Walls but by Precipices;
the middle of the Rock did open it self into the form of a Theater, by reason
whereof the clamor of men and the clangor of Trumpets when they were sonnded,
was heard more multiplied by the Reverberation; which struck the men of that
Age (being ignorant of the natural cause) with great terror, adding a
reverend amazement to their admiration: here this Devil of Delphos a long time
gave Oracles, much about this hollow of the Rock, on the middle of the height
of the Hill, there was a little Plane, and in it a deep Hole, out of which the
Oracle proceeded, which being a cold breath driven up (as it were) by a wind,
did possess the minds of the Priests with a madness, who being filled with
the God (or rather the Devil) he did enforce them to give Answers to those that
demanded them.

E.
Empedocles
The renowned Scicilian Philosopher, he constituted two principles of all
things, viz: Vacancy and Repletion, and was of opinion that of those Attoms
congregated in one bulk; all this great ALL took being, that he might be
thought a God, he leapt into Aetna, as was confirmed by the ejection of his
brazen shoes.

F.
Faunus,
One of the Wood Gods, sometimes taken for Rebin Good Fellow; one of that name
King of the Latins, who first erected Temples, was worshipped with Divine
Honors, of whom all Temples were called Fanes.

G.
Gorgons.
Phorcus the Son of Neptune had six Daughters, three whereof were called the
Aged, because they were born with white hayres covering their bodies like a
garment; the other three were named Gorgons for their horrible shapes. Gorgon
in Greek signifying terrible: they feign thee these three had but one Eye to
see with, and one Tooth to eat with, which they mutually enjoyed by turns.
Medusa being mortal, but the other immortal: they had their heads periwigg'd
with scales of Dragons, their teeth long as those of a wild Boar, having
wings wherewith they flew; moreover qualified with this excellent property,
that whoever looked upon them were immediately converted to stone, for so the
Poets and Grammarians (as well Greeks as Latins will have it) but to speak
truth, and with Authentic Authority for warrant they were endued with such
excellent beauty that all that gazed upon them were surprised with amazement:
thence came the Fiction, that they were converted into stone, Not. Comes
Mithol, lib. 6.

H.
Hymen
The God of Marriage, he was born in Athens. It happened that the chief Virgins
of the City sporting themselves in an Evening by the Seashore were surprised by
Pirates, and with the rest, Hymen (who to enjoy the company of his Beloved had
put himself into the habit of a Woman) was brought on board, but at midnight
this masculine Maid cut the throats of all the Pirates while they were soundly
sleeping; and running to the City, demanded of the Citizens what they would
give to him that should restore their Daughters? They being surprised with joy,
promised him all they were masters of. He only requested the immediate
possession of his Mistress; which being confirmed unto him by oath, he
immediately gave every man his Gyrle, and receiving his dearest Dear to his
embraces, that marriage proved so fortunate, that after his decease it was the
constant custom of the Greeks to Invoke Hymen at every Nuptial Feast; and from
them the Latins received that Ceremony, long time in use amongst them.

I.
Io,
The Daughter of Inachus, transformed into a Cow, and Bull'd by Jupiter; at
which, Juno being angry, created a Fly called the Aestrum, which so stung poor
Io that she became mad, and afterward brought forth a Son to Jupiter, called
Epaphus Aesehylus.

L.
Laomedon,
Father to Priam, he intending to build the City of Troy, Neptune and Apollo
(degraded of their Rule) indented with him for an Annual Salary to afford their
utmost aid: This proffer was cheerfully embraced by Laomedon, but his work
finished, he not only denied to make good his agreement, but threatened in case
they departed not his Territories to cut off their ears and banish them into
some barren Island: this brace of Deities thus injuriously dealt with were
extremely incensed, and resolving to castigate this perfidious Prince, Apollo
shot his Arrows (headed with pestilence) into the Town, while Neptune thundered
his rage in impetuous Torrents that passed over the walls, threatening an utter
devastation by water, Laomedon being thus plagued with fire within, and water
without, resorted to the Oracle, inquiring the cause and cure of these evils:
Answer was given, That the enraged Powers could not be appeased but with the
yearly Tribute of an immaculate Virgin made choice ^n by Lot, and bound to a
Rock adjoining to the Seashore there to be devoured by the Monsters of the
Sea. Laomedon returning to Troy, summoned the Grands of the City, to whom he
related the harsh Doom of the Oracle: they (of two evils, willing to choose the
least) give their consent, but with this caution, that the Sortil^ge should
impartially pass: the Lots were immediately cast, and (by the appointment of
Fate) fell upon Hesione the Kings Daughter, who was immediately taken, and her
silken limbs fastened to a Rock with ironchains; as this naked Princess was
bemoaning her captivity, every minute in expectation to be buried in the
bowels of a monstrous Orke. The great Hercules passing that way, being moved
with compassion to hear her laments, gave her deliverance, by slaying the
monster. Laomedon falling at the feet of Hercules, manifested his joy,
proffering him thirty Horses lately given him by Jupiter. Hercules gave him
thanks, but refused the gratuity (being now on his journey for the achievement
of the Golden Fleece) till his return, which was in a few days after: but
demanding his Horses, Laomedon denied that he ever made such a Proposal^: at
which monstrous ingratitude H^rcules being justly enraged, sacked the City of
Troy. Valerius Flaccus Appo^^o^ius, lib. 3.

M.
Medea,
The Wife of Jason, for whose sake she betrayed her Country, ^ew her Brother,
and lastly, her her own Children.

N.
Nereides.
Nymphs of the Ocean, waiting upon Thetis: they are said to be fifty in number.

O.
Orpheus,
The Son of Apollo and Cali^p^: or, as others say, of Oxger a Mountain in
Thrace and Polymnia. He is said by the sweetness of his melody to attract the
affections of Tr^^s and Stones to calm the Winds, and stop the courses of
Rivers; his Wife Euridice dying, he took his journey to Hell, where he obtained
such favor of Pluto, (for it seems the very Devils delight in music) that his
Wife had leave to return with him to the Earth; but in case he look back till
his arrival there, the favor should be frustrate. He (who doated upon his
Wives countenance) forgetting the Injunction of the Acherontick God, must needs
look over his shoulder, and so in a moment lost his dear and long attempted
purchase; therefore returning to the earth he spent his days in the severest
solitude, and yet his mourning occasioned mirth, for,

1.
While Orpheus sweetly did complain,
Upon his Lute with heavy strain,
How his E^udic^ was slain;
The Trees ^o hear
Obtained an ear,
And after left it off again.
2.
At every stroke and every stay,
The boughs kept time, and nodding lay,
And listened, bending all one way;
The Ast^n-Tree
As fast as he,
Began to shake, and learned to play.
-- being finally (after a tedious languishment, become a Woman-eater) he was
slain by Thracian Women as the very enemy of their sex.

P.
Phil^mel,
Or the Nightingale, the Daughter of Pandion King of Thrace, who to be revenged
on her Husband Tereus (who had deflowred her Sister, and cut out her tongue to
prevent discovery) slew her own Son Iris, and feasted his Father with his
limbs, and was transformed into a Bird called a Nightingale. Strada has an
excellent copy of Verses, containing a contention between this mellifluous
Chori^ter and a skillful L^^in^^t, which for the Readers delight (as they were
lately translated) shall be here inserted.

Now the declining Sun'gan downwar'd b^nd
From higher heaven, and from his locks did send
A milder flame, when n^^r to Tybers flow
A Lutinist allayed his careful w^e
With sounding char^^, and in a greeny seat
Oth' shady Oak took shelier from the heat.
A Nightingale ore^eard him, that did use
To sojourn in the neighbour-Grove, the Muse
That filled the place, the Syrene of the wood,
Poor harmless Siren stealing n^er, she stood
Close lurking in the leaves, attentively
Recording that unwonted melody.
She conn'd it to her self, and every strain
His fingers played, her thr^at retu^n'd again.
The Lutinist perceived an answer sent
From the imitating Bird, and was content
To show her play; more fully, then, in have
He tries his Lute, and giving her a taste
Of the ensuing quarrel, nimbly beats
On all his strings --
-- As nimbly she repeats,
And mildly ranging ore a thousand Keys
Sounds a shrill warning of her after Lays.
With rolling hand the Lutinist then plies
The trembling threads, sometimes in scornful wise
He brushes down the strings, and kems them all
With one even stroke, then takes them several,
And culls them ore again; his sparkling joints
With busy descant, mincing on the points,
Reatht back with nimble touch, that done he stays.
The Bird replies, and Art with Art repayes,
Sometimes as one inexpert, or in doubt
How she might weild her voice she draws out
Her Tone at large, and does at first prepare
A solemn strain, not weaved with winding air,
But with an equal pitch and constant throat
Makes clear the passage for her gliding note,
Then cross division diversely she plays,
And loudly chaunting out her quickest Lays,
Poyses the sound, and with a quivering voice
Falls back again. --
-- He wondering how so choice.
So various harmony could issue out
From such a little throat does go about
Some h^rder lessons, and with wondrous art
Changing the strings, does up the Treble dart.
And downward smite the Base, with painful stroke
He beats; and as the Trumpet does provoke
Sluggards to fight, even so his wanton skill
With mingled discord joins the hoarse and shrill.
The Bird this also tunes, and while he cuts
Sharps, notes with melting voice and mingled puts
Measures of middle sound, then suddenly
She thunders deep and juggs it inwardly
With gentle murmurs, clear and dull she sings
By course as when the Martial warning rings.
Beleive't the Minstrell blushed, with angry (...)
Inflamed quoth he, thou Chauntresse of the (...)
Either from thee I Will bear the prize away,
Or vanquished break my Lute without (...)
Inimitable accents then he strains,
His hand flies ore the strings in one he (...)
Far different numbers, chasing here and there,
And all the strings belabours every where,
But she when practice long her throat had (...)
Enduring not to yield at once does set
Her spirits all at work, and all in vain,
For while she labors to express again
With Natures simple voice such diverse Keys,
With slender pipes such lofty notes as th^se,
Orematcht with high designs, orematcht with wo^,
Just at the last encounter of her foe.
She faints, she dies, falls on his Instrument
That conquered her, a fitting Monument.
R.
Rhea,
Called also Cybells, the Mother of the Gods, Wife of Saturn, the Father of
Jupiter.

S.
Salmacis,
A Nymph in love with a Sullen Youth, whom she one day found bathing in a
christaline River, and stripping her self, accosted him naked; but he still
refusing her love, she clasped him about the middle, and invoking the heavenly
powers that they might never part, they were incorporated.

T.
Telephus,
The Son of Hercules King of Mysia, being wounded by Achilles with an Axe
(when landing with his forces on his Continent, they were opposed by the
Mysians, being now on their journey for Troy) could not be cured in eight years
after: resorting to the Oracle to inquire what were best to be done. He
received answer, That he who gave the wound, alone could cure it. He therefore
coming to Achilles was by him stricken again with that very Axe in the same
place as before, and was immediately cured, a cure both swift and strange.

V.
Venus.
Or the Sea-born Goddess, her story is thus: Saturn, the Son of Heaven and
Earth, by the persuasion of his Mother, cut off his Fathers Testicles, throwing
them into the Sea, from the sapour whereof Venus had being, whence she is
called by Lycophron,

-- [Lover of the Privities.] -- The first place where she landed was Cythera,
from thence she set sail for Cyprus, whence she is called Cytherea and
Cyprides. The Ancients printed her (as newly arising from the Ocean) naked,
sailing in a shell. Alexander the Great commanding Apelles to give her Effigy,
afforded him his own Paramour (all naked) as his pattern; but the Painter
having finished his piece, was as much surprised with this living, as Alexander
with that dead Venus, and by Alexanders license, received her as the reward of
his Industry. On this subject the Poet Baif has an Ode, which (because it was
never yet Englished) I will here insert:

Behold her hair, yet moist with brine,
Platting her locks with artfull care,
The Sea-born Venus (all Divine)
To Cyprus Island does repair.
A Shell's her Ship, no sooner born
But Incense does her Shrine adorn.
The End of the Muses Expositor
A plaster for Priscians pate. AN APPENDIX TO The Academy of Pleasure.
Containing An Alphabeticall Explanation of Hard Words, For Instruction of the
Weaker sort of Capacities.
A.
ADulate] flatter, or cogge Abreviate] make short A^ihilate] make void Abandon]
forsake, Acherontica] relating to Hell Adulterated] corrupted, altered from its
genuine purity Abdicated] thrown down Absolved] forgiven Abhominate] hate
deadly Alienated] estranged, or lost to former knowledge Anagram] a Divin^ion
by names, called by the Ancients Onomantia; the Greeks refer this Invention
to Lycophron, who was one of those they called the Seven Stars, or Pleiades;
afterward (as witnesses Eustachius) there were diverse Greek Wits that
disported, themselves herein, as he which turned Atlas for his heavy burden in
supporting Heaven into Talas, that is, wretched. Some will maintain, that each
man's Fortune is written in his Name, which they call Anagramatism, or
Metragramatism: Poetical liberty will not blush to uso E for E, V for W, S for
Z. That amarous Youth did very queintly su^s, resolving a mysterious expression
of his Love to Rose Hill, when in the border of a painted cloth ^e caused to
be painted as rudely as he had devised grossly a Rose, a Hill, an Eye, a Leaf,
and a Well, that is if you spell it, I Love Rose Hill. Accost] salute Accrew]
gain by industry Apocriphal] doubtful Assume] take to himself Alacrity]
cheerfulness Allusion] relating to another matter Amiamble] fair or lovely
Amicable] friendly Arbitrate] decide, or end a controversy Alternate]
constantly in motion Agile] nimble Abstersive] See the deseription of Byrtha's
bed in Gondibert, Commenced on by E. R. Canto 2.
The Posts were of Abstersive Ebony,
Though no Abstersivenesse in Posts we find.
In Powder taken (the Learned not deny)
It cleanses Choler, and in Pills Breaks wind.
B.
Beatificall] blessed Barbarity] cruelty Bi-fronted] double-faced Boysterously]
rudely Bestiall] unmanly Burse] Exchange Borean] blustering Barter] traffic one
commodity for another Brutish] swinish Bottle] apt to be broken Bleak] cold
Blythe] merry or sportive Baneful] dest^uctive Blissfull] happy Barathrum] Hell
Bromtus] a name of Bacchus Bumpkinly] clownish Bordering] near adjoining
C
Capacious] witty or apprehensive Candid] of a clear temper Captions] tetchy or
quarrelsome Contemp^uou,] undervaluing, or despising Concis] brief
Contemporary] equal in time Conspiouous] visible Commemorate] call to mind a
thing past, or party deceased Consanguineou] allyde by blood Confligeate] set
on fire Cast-gate] chastise, or ce^rest Consummate] finish Co-adjutor] fellow
Aydar Cataracts] fallings of the River Nyle in Egypt Coroborate] increase in
power by a constant addition of strength Contemplate] serious thinking
Completion] finishing Combustible] apt to take fire Commence] take a degree
Chalybers] tamers of steel Connexion] joining together
D
Delusive] deceitful Devastate] lay wast Depopulate] destroy a people
Delineate] make evident at large Denude] strip bare Dethronize] thrust a
lawful King out of his Throne Decapitate] behead him Donour] a Giver Donation]
by gift Diabolicall] Hellish, devilish, or damnable Decollation] beheading
Dissimulate] hide an intent Dislocate] disjoyn, or take in pieces Debilitated]
weakened Deride] sceffe at Disconsolate] melancholy, sad, or joylisse
Despicable] worthless, not worth minding
E.
Ebriety] Drunkenness Epicedium] a Funarall Song Encomion] gratulary Verses
Epithalamium] a Marriage Song Epigram] a short, but pitby kinds of Poesy, very
delectable. The best that ever wrote in that kind were, Martial, ^nsonine,
Owen, Harrington and our famous Ben Elegant] neatly phras'd Elaborate]
accomplished style
F.
Fallacious] deceitful Frontiniack] a kind of Wine very pleasant to the taste
Fraternity] Brotherhood Facetious] smooth, polite Fidelious] trusty
G.
Garulous] talkative Gygantick] big of stature Gerion] a Monster with three
heads Ganymed] Jove's Cup Bearer Garbage] raffe, or refuse Glaciate] congeale
to Ice
H.
Hyems] Winter Hymen] said to be the God of Marriage Harrast^^] weakened with
tedious toil Harpocratos] pourtrayed with his finger on his mouth; said to be
the God of silence Hyacinth] a Boy beloved of Phoebus, by him unfortunately
stain and turned into a Flower
I.
Insaniate] mad out of ones wits Infranchise] release Invulnerable] not to be
wounded Implacable] not to be pleased, rude of soul Insinuate] flatter
himself into friendship Internall] belonging to Abyss Irradiate] beautify
Incorporated] made one Indulgent] loving (...) ardently than wisely Indocible]
not to be taught
K.
Kalendar] an Almanac
L.
Lascivious] given to Women Loquatious] talkative Landgarth] the name of an
Amazon Laudable] praiseworthy Litigious] vain, idle Lurk] lie hid Laura] the
name of a Woman immortalized by the pen of the famous Petrarch Lapidary] one
that has skill in the virtues of Stones Lynceus] said to be so quick sighted
that he could pierce through the Globe of the Moon Lunacious] Moonish
Lycanthropia] la Disease causing those that are infected therewith to imagine
themselves to be transformed into Wolves
M.
Morosity] sowrenesse, sullenness Maternall] motherly Morpheus] said to be the
God of Sleep Menstruous] putrid, defiled Mitigate] lessen the matter
(...) T.
Tantalize] to view the thing desired, but not being able to attain it
Tattarus] Hell Tarnish] Eclipse or dim a luster
V.
Venereous] sensual, wantonly inclined Vituperate] malign, slander, etc.
Vivacious] lively, lusty, etc. Varnsh] wash over rottenness with pleasant
colors Virago] a masculine woman
Warlike] addicted to Arms, desirous of Military employment
FINIS.

