ACCOMMODATION Discommended: AS INCOMMODIOVS TO THE COMMONWEALTH. Plainly
showing by five undeniable Arguments, That none but Papists, or Popishly
affected, can stand for Accommodation in these Perilous times. For the
Satisfaction of all such, as are led away by the Specious Name of PEACE.

Printed in the Year, LONDON, Of Peace, would not hear.

Accommodation Discommended, AS INCOMMODIOVS TO THE COMMONWEALTH.
ALthough in these unhapy Distractions of the State, an Accommodation has bin
desired by some, who have bin thought As the Earl of Bristoll. Earl of Dorset.

Sir Benjamin Rudiard. and M. Waller.


true Protestants, and worthy Patriots upon many plausible pretenses, and
thereby have weakened the hands of many well affected to the Cause.
Notwithstanding I will plainly demonstrate by these ensuing Arguments, that an
Accommodation at this time is a peace of Popery, as bad as the Bishops Cannons
charged with et cet. and now discharged by an Ordnance of both Houses.



First Accommodation is not the Langvage of Canaan, and therefore cannot
conduce to the Peace of Jerusalem.

1. It is no See Conon^ Concordance*
Scripture word. Now to strive to vilify the Ordinances, which are in
Scripture; And to set up an Accommodation, which is not in Scripture, no, not
so much as in the Apocrypha, is to relinquish the word, and follow the
inventions of man, which is plain Popery.



Secondly, Accommodation is a Latin word, the Language of the Beast, for it is
derived from Commodum. which signifies See Thomas Thomasius, Cooper, who was a
Bishop, And Rider; enlarged by Doctor Gray; a known Malignant.
profit, and you know all, the Popes Religion is for profit, or else from
Commodus, who was a Roman Emperor, and a persecutor of the Church.



Thirdly, Accommodation is a Merchant word, as is well known to all those who
have told twelve on the Exchange. Now the Pope and his Priests, are known to
make Merchandise, even of the Souls of men, as factors for Beelzebub, and
brokers for the Devil.



My fourth Argument shall be drawn from the persons which most desire it, which
are popishly affected as we shall show by degrees: such are the Archbishops,
Bishops, Prebendaries, double beneficed* and Common-prayer-booke-reading
Ministers, Doctors of Law, Commissaries, Registers* Nobility, and Gentry, and
able Citizens: First* the two Archbishops, though they could never agree with
one another, till they were accommodated together in the Tower yet rather then
Doctor Layton shall piss in the High Commission Court at Lambeth house and
young Hotham drink healths to Mr. Pym, in his Lordships Sack, at
Cawood-Castle, they desire an Accommodation. Next the Bishops, being most of
them have bin imprisoned (as all honest men ought to be) and so from loose
livers became fast friends do now desire an Accommodation amongst others, as
well as themselves; which is without all question as much High Treason, as that
Petition, which they preferred to his Majesty, with a Protestation. Then the
Deanes, and Prebendaries, foreseeing that their Lands and Revenues, which were
misplaced by the ungodly charity of our ancestors, will be in danger to be
employed in discharging the godly public faith, (which faith is contrary to
hope, and which public, is contrary to all private interest) most
unreasonably desire to see an end of these Rents, and a final Conclusion by an
Accommodation.

Besides your double beneficed men, fearing that the troubles of the times will
breed a distraction of their liveings, and seeing Lecturers, daily creep into
their pulpits to pick their pokets, and plunder the well affected women in
their parishes, respectively Dr. Burges.
desire to save their tithes, and parishoners wives for themselves by an
Accommodation. The common prayer Book Readers perceiving the Peoples talking
of porrage, has left them scarce any meat to put in their mouths, as being
only paid by the fi^ts of the women who have so torn the surplices, as they
have scarce left the^ ashirt to their backs, desire to conclude with the peace
of God, which passes their understanding, except there be an Accomm., the
Civilians with their hands in their pockets like butchers in a Lent out of
Parliament, finding no gilders there, as in former times; when fornication and
adultery were worth money, (which now are committed gratis) and perceiveing no
end of Sir John Lamb.
refunding such moneys as they had unjustly scraped together, and of Dr. Eden.
lending considerable sums to some worthy members, desire to go to their
graves in peace, and not to leave their estates, lands, and leases to be spent
by their sons upon whores, and a Civil war, the Nobility having more to loose
then five hundred of them and having served this King and hjs father before,
notwithstanding finding themselves now often abused by scurvy fellows, and
almost every week sent about sleevelesse arrants, perceiving they were gul'd
when they looked for Gunpowder, in his Majesty's Sack and claret, now at last
desire if it be possible to return into his Majesty's favor, by the back
stairs of Accommodation

The Gentry having lost their Race and hunting horses, their chief delight,
and only subject of their discourse, and seriously considering that this War
would produce a parity in the Laity as well as the Clergy, and their worships
will be called base fellows without any reparation in the Court of Honor, are
pricked on by their Wives toward Oxford for a Knighthood; from whence they
return, and stickle in their Countries for Subscriptions for Peace, and
Accommodation.

Lastly, all the Rich and honest Citizens finding their shops Plundered, for
the maintenance of their Property; their bodies imprisoned, for preservation of
their Liberty; the Service of God abolished, for the upholding of Religion:
their Arms taken from them, for the safety of their Persons: their Wives and
Children instigated against them, for better Order in their Families* their
Prentizes sent to the Army, for the better looking to their Shops, most
carnally desire to enjoy their former happiness by an Accommodation.



My fifth Argument is drawn from the Persons which d^ most strongly oppose it,
all which are truly Religious and (...) affected, as we shall show by degrees.

Such are the Right Reverend Lecturers, the Reverend T^^bers, the Holy Sisters,
the Devil and his Angels, the Captain^ and Officers.

First the Right Reverend Lecturers inspired from above* Bookers Almanacke, and
having Mr. Arrowsmith.
found the Red-Horse, in (...) Revelation, at Keinton-Feild, where they were
very indust^^ous, even to the spoiling of their Mr. Marshall
Bevers; and sweat (...) of pure Zeal, and M. Sedgwick who lost not a Thumb in
the Business.
running away after so many godly Exhort^^tions, for bringing in Money, Plate,
Horses. and Weddi^^ Rings (which they hope by this coining, will be ab^^lished)
after so many thanksgiving for being gloriously (...) after so many miraculous
Deliverances from unheard of, (...) even unthought of Treasons.

After such pregnant hopes of a through Reformation from all Religion, after so
many soule-saveing, heartbreaking, faith-confirming* sin destroying,
State-disturbing, King-reviling, Church-Confounding-sermons, are resolved not
to betray their lives to the Law, and their good names to perpetual infamy by
a beggarly Accommodation. next the reverend Tubbers, Who lke so many
Diogineses, bid Allexander himself stand out of their light, me^ of ordinary
vocations but extraordinary callings, those spiritual coachmen who whip up
men's souls with uses of reproof, At Ashford in Kent, the last Fast Day.
Piss the pulpit with Holy Water, and drive on so furiously that they cannot
stop for Accommodation, next under the Tubbers lie close the holy sisters, women
of extraordinary humillity and lowliness, not fearing what man can do unto
them having heretofore petitioned the ablest members, Mistress Stagg.
that they would be pleased to stand unto them, showing a great readiness at
all times to lay down themselves at their use and service, with all their
profitts and commodities against an Accommodation, the Devil having profited
very much by the aforesaid persons in accusing and slandering, and finding
himself made more an Ass by these, then by those in B. Iohnsons play, (for as
for lying he is so far from being their father* that he is but a child to
them, as for malice, so far from being their teacher, as he desires to be
their scholar, for envy he is fat in respect of them, for the every, he has
not so much permission, nor ever went so far in plundering of men's
consciences) desirous these happy days may continue, which promise to make him
a glorious and flourishing King, is resolved by all his Angels in Hell, and
agents on earth, to fix his cloven foot of dissension against an Accommodation.
Next to the DEVIL,

The confiding Captains and Commanders having no estates of their own to trust
too, desiring to see their btethrens shopsshut up as well as their own, till
they shall be enabled to repair their broken estates with breaking into houses,
and leading silly women's goods Captives, leaving their Generals ensign on
their husbands, and not willing to give over the landable custom of clubbing a
thimble or a bodkin for a mornings draught, and taking Berd.
up horses by warrant to sell them again for double their price with tickets,
(...).
whereby they may drink healthes at supper, smoking such Noses as they have,
and cursing the Parliament in meeter, and lastly, knowing well that if it must
needs come to fighting, and there be no other remedy, a good horse or a sawpit
will secure them, swear and stare that they hate the Cavalier Accommodation,
and the next time they see him, they will be the death of him.

And now my brethren, having by these 5. arguments, as by a triple cord,
fastened this abominable Idol of Accommodation to the Popes chair. from
whence, through the hole by which he is searchd, it came, what remains but
that all which are well affected to the true protestant Religion, newly Printed
and newly set forth, should oppose this Accommodation as much as government or
the Common Prayer.

FJNJS.

