An ACCOUNT from FLANDERS, OF THE Strange and Wonderful finding out AT NAMUR,
The Body of an Ancient MONK, (whole and incorrupt in a Vault) who had layn
Buried there above 500 Years.

With an Account of a Prophecy accidentally found in the said Vault, plainly
foretelling the speedy Subverversion of the French Monarchy, by the Confederate
Forces.

Licensed according to Order.

THE French having, under the Favor of the Rains and bad Weather, for the most
part of April and June 92, become Masters of the City of Namur; they took
Possession thereof about the middle of June, in fewer days than they themselves
did expect, or we did believe; and when the Castles was preparing for their
Defense against a powerful victorious Army: We thought (...), that a Place of
that strength in its self, and of that consequence to the King of Spain in the
Keeping, as well as to all the Confederates, would have held he Enemy tack for
almost, if not quite as many Months, as in the Proof it did Weeks; for by the
ancient Constitution of the Government of the Place, it was ordered constantly,
that the Castle should at all-times have sufficient Stores of Ammunition and
Provision for three Months, for Eight or Nine Thousand Men; by which appeared
the Neglect, I will not say the Treachery of the Governor of the said Castle,
in that he should oblige the Garrison in less than three Weeks to Capitulate
for want of Provisions and Stores, when he had been by right to have provided
for them sufficient for three Months, and over and above; that if he saw before
the taking of the Town, that he was so slenderly prepared, that he should
accommodate himself and Garrison upon the first hint from the Town; but as I
said, partly by Neglect or Treachery, and partly by Fear and Force, the French
became Masters of the Castle too about the last of June, or first of July. The
Garrison were hardly well marched out of the Town and Castle, but the French,
like provident Warriers, began to look about them; some to view the remainder
of the Stores, the Amun^tion and Provision, others to survey the Breaches,
Ruins, and Demolishments made by the Force of the Bombs and Thundering
Cannons; and here presently Orders were given, to repair, and put into a
Posture of Defense, all the most important places of the Town, that had been
ruinated in the Siege; and in such an hurrey and combustion no one could
provide for the Safety or Security even of the most Sacred Things, so you
should daily see the Soldiers and Pioneers, as they were digging up and
removing the Rubbish here and there, some would toss up an holy Relick or two,
others the Image of a Saint or so, others some Fragments of holy Vestments,
others some scattered pieces of Plate and Money, till at last they would
approach even to the Graves and Vaults of their holy and great Men, some of
which had layn perhaps undiscovered for Ages; here, as they were digging, they
happened upon a Vault that was very deep, and that went under a Monastery that
belonged to the Order of St. Benedict, and some of them, either out of
curiosity, or covetuousness, would needs force a Passage into the same; where,
after a small search, and the gain of a few Peter Pence, and some other small
trifling Treasures, they light upon a large stone Chest, not made in the
Fashion of a Coffin, but square, and of the Length and Breadth of a proper Man;
it had a cover that left not the least Chink or Passage for the smallest Worm
to creep in, and seemed to press into the same with a sort of Ledge upon trial,
they soon found it moveable, and opening of it at last, they soon discovered
the Body of a Gray Ancient Man, in the Habit of his Order, and to Appearance
entire and perfect; his Flesh that was visible, viz. his Face, and part of his
Hands, seemed as fresh as if he had just departed; there lay by him a Book or
two entire and whole, and one upon his Breast open, by which they could
perceive it Spanish, and treating of the Service of their Religion: Some of
them out of a vain Curiosity, would needs touch both the Flesh and the Books,
which part so touched immediately fell to Ashes: on one side lay a small Coffer
or Box, which being without a Cover, they soon discovered two or three small
Pieces of Spanish Silver: Thus, having viewed all Parts within, they began to
make Remarks on the Shape, Fashion, and Workmanship of the Tomb: And First, a
the Head of the Tomb, they observed some kind of Embossed-or Carved-Work which
curiously examined (though Time's Iron Teeth had made a little Bold with it)
they plainly discovered some Marine Trophies, as Rudders, Anchors and the like,
not in the manner of our Modern Trophies, as Regular Insignia or Regalia, but
on the contrary all shattered and broken, under (as it were some Infamy or
Disgrace, with some Fragments of Masts and Hulks of Vessels and altogether
expressing some Naval Ruins.

Over this Sculp-work was delineated 3 Flower-de-Luces, not in the order of
those in the French Arms, but inverted, viz. with their Heads downwards, and
over all these was very elaborately Carved a Figure exactly imitating our
Cipher, W and M entwisted, bearing three Crowns Imperial: The Carved Work on
the right side of the Tomb was a little of a Piece with this Front-work of it,
for here it represented a troubled Sea, in one part of which sat a Neptune in
his Sea Chariot with his Trident in his Hand, with a large Esutcheon behind his
Seat, bearing a modern Belgic Lion, whilst at some Distance from him lay a
large Dolphin, supposed by the Violence of the Stormy Sea to have been cast on
Shore, and there languishing and gasping for Life.

On the other side of the Tomb, were carved several dismounted Cannon with
their Carriages, etc. shattered and broken, with the Image of a Victoria and on
her Shield a large Louidore with this Motto, Ratio ultima Galliae.

At the Feet of the Tomb was carved a Deluge Piece with the Ark resting upon a
Mountain, in imitation of the Scriptural Description, with a Dove flying
toward the Ark with the Olive Branch in her Bill; and what was most of all
Remarkable, over the Ark was written Europa, and over the Dove Britania.

After they had sufficiently with no small Curiosity Surveyed and Discanted
upon this surprizeing Discovery, to complete their Wonder, by turning over the
Cover of the Tomb, they perceived in the middle a pretty large Plate of Copper,
or some other Metal, inserted or plastered as it were into a hollowed place of
the Stone, with an Inscription partly Latin, partly Spanish, and partly German
or High Dutch; Time had worn out some of the Words, by which some Sentences
could not be made out by a natural Guess and Connection with the foregoing and
following Words; but that they might be more generally understood, it was
thought fitter to have them translated into English: Which are as follows,

MCLXXXX.
WHen Ninety Four shall fully come,
(The Crisis of all Christendom)
Then Tyrants all beware your Doom:
He that is Cruel, Fierce, and Fell,
And boasts himself Lewis the 14th. assumee that proud Title to himself.
Invincible,
To the poorest Vermin now shall not be Hinting that his Death shall about
this Time befall.
Terrible.
The brightest Glories of the The Sun is Crest of the French Arms.
Sun,
In Shall fall in War and Tumult.
Storms, and Showers, are set and gone:
The The Lion is great Part of the English and Dutch Arms.
Lions Roaring in his Ears
Shall fill his Breast with dreadful Fears:
But now alas! he ends his Cares.
The Wanton The Lilly or Flower de Luce are the Arms of France, and are of a
pale White Color.
Lillies of the Vale, * By which is meant the French King and his Army stained
with the Blood of so many Thousands of Innocent People.

Shall now resume their Native Pale,
To more be decked in monstrous Red,
But shrink their blushing, guilty Head.
And in another Place was writ in Latin by it self,
Oh Ludovice! cave, cave,
Non amplius Terrore, magne,
Fata jam decernunt been.
Actum est de te, Jacobe,
Gaudet Orbis; euge! euge!
In English thus,
No longer, Lewis, shall thou boast
Thy Greatness at thy Subject's Cost;
Secure they stand from Thee and Fear;
And Lewis now thy self beware.
The Destinies do well Decree,
There Is now an end of James and Thee;
And this the World is glad to see.
London, Printed for W. Downing, 1693.


