CATAPLUS: OR, Aeneas his Descent to HELL. A MOCK POEM,

In imitation of the Sixth Book of Virgil's Aeneis, in English Burlesque.

Vidi and crudeles dantem Salmonea poenas,
Dum flammas Jovis and sonitus imitatur Olympi.
Virgil Aeneis. LONDON, Printed for Maurice Atkins. 1672.

CATAPLUS.
SIC fatur lacrymans classique immittit habenas;
Et tandem Euboicis Cumarum allabitur oris.

THus as he spoke weeping like child
From thence in piteous dudgeon sailed,
And by the help of wind and tide
The vessels toward Cumae ride.
Tum dente tenaci
Anchora fundabat naves. --

Then labour-sweating Seamen got up
And into Sea cast prison pot-hook
Instead of anchor; to save charges
They rowed about in boats and barges.
Juvenum manus emicat ardens.
Upon a sudden then a rout
Of Slubberdegullions lept out:
A shore no sooner had they got,
But all the Country fell to pot.
Quaerit pars semina flammae
Abstrusa in venis Silicis. --

Some struck fire, some pell mell
Down trees with trusty hatchets fell.
Pars densa ferarum
Tecta rapit, silvas, inventaque flumina monstrat.

Others went to neighboring village
Breaking open farm-houses for pillage,
Plundering yards of Ducks and Geese,
And Cupboards too of bread and Cheese.
Down from Cobweb roofs were taken
Many a tongue and flitch of Bacon;
Such was their appetite and hunger
They ransackt all the victual hung there.
But what a quarter they did keep
Cannot be expressed in stealing sheep,
And Oxen what ere they could get,
For all was fish that came to net.
Nay these whoreson villains fell fierce
Upon all butteries and sellars.
At pius Aeneas arts, quibus altus Apollo
Praesidet, horendaeque procul secreta Sibyllae
Antrum immane petit. --

Mean while Aeneas went all over
Parish and town from door to door,
Enquiring all along the road
Where the Sibyl kept abode.
Cui mentem animumque
Delius inspirat vates, aperitque futura.

This Sibyl was a cunning woman
Yielding in her art to no man:
By slight of hand she was right able
To strike a sixpence through a table.
She had the Necromantick tone
With a heigh praesto Spirit be gone.
She was at Fortune-telling good,
And Physnomy well understood:
When any goods miscarried were
To her the Country did repair.
There wa'nt a pocket picked, or house
Broke open, but she could thief produce.
She was as good at devil stradling
As Mol-Cutpurse or Mother Maudlin.
Jam subeunt Triviae lucos atque aurea tecta.
The crew were come unto a place
Where trees did grow as thick as grass,
Near which a pretty market town
With glittering shindle like gold shone.
Daedalus (ut fama est) fugiens Minoia regna
This town did get its same and glory
(As it is recorded in old story)
By Daedalus the Carpenter,
Who flew his Country and came there.
(By all report it is warrantable
He had outrun the Constable.)
Insuetum per iter gelidas enavit ad Arctos.
Instead of going in foot track
He carried was 'pon devils back,
Through thickened mist and foggy air,
The bearer scarce himself knew where.
Chalcidicaque levis tandem super astitit arce.
At last in view of all the people
He hitcht 'pon spire of magic steeple:
And truly had not some ran quick
And succored him just in the nick,
He had broke his neck and life lost there,
As sure (poor wretch) as God's in Gloucester,
Wings with him always he did carry,
Of which he was exceeding chary:
Now whether he the same did pluck
From Woodcock or from water-duck,
Or whether from the sides of pidgeon,
From pheasant, partridge, teal and widgeon;
Some say this and some say that,
Authors write I know not what*
The wings were wings, plucked from what bird
They were, it matters not a --
Let' circumstances weighty follow,
Tibi Phoebe sacravit
Remigium alarm, posultque immania templa.

To wit, he offered 'em to Apollo.
And to show himself religious
Built a Conventicle ridge house.
In foribus letum Androgeo --
-- Tum pendere poenas
Cecropidae jussi (miserum) septena quotannis
Corpora natorum --

Before the gate a Gibbet stood
Of hardy weather-beaten wood,
Where hung a spacious table, in fine
Much like unto a Country Inn Sign.
There pictured was Androgeo
With seven Varlets in a row,
In the same posture as they hung
When to Athens gallows strung;
For yearly in that roguish town
Was tied up many a mothers son.
Many a thief and highway padder
Mounted up on fatal Ladder.
Contra elata mari respondet Gnossia tellus.
On the other side a pool across was
A piece of pasture-ground called Gnossos,
Which careful Grasier did stock
With hided herd and fleecy flock.
And now I Am come (Reader) to tell
A story sad that there befell:
Hic crudelis amor tauri, suppostaque furto
Pasiphae. --

There lived a woman near an oak
As good as ever did strike stroke,
Who shall be nameless (though her name
Has not a stranger been to fame)
She with her husband not content
(For he alas! was impotent;
In short, he was another such thing
As waggish people call a ridgling)
Her self did often prostitute
To filthy lust of horned brute.
Mistumque genus prolesque biformis.
Her pregnant womb at last was full
Part by Husband, part by bull:
And when she teemed she brought forth half
A man, and all the rest was calf;
Which being grown up big, became
A monster which no folk could tame.
This the Cornuted husband cuts
To the very heart blood and guts.
Therefore having soundly bast her
Hic labor ille domus and inextricabilis error.
Into Limbo straight he cast her.
But Daedalus taking compassion
Magnum Reginae sed enim miseratus amorem. --
She should be used in such fashion
(Thinking it only forsooth
To be a simple trick of youth)
Delivered her from rack and pain,
And set her 'pon her legs again.
Ipse dolos tecti ambagesque resolvit. --
Breaking with hammer bars of iron
Which her body did inviron.
This story writ was 'sore the door,
(Of which I gave a hint before.)
But hold, for we go further on,
This Daedalus had had a son,
Who was in depth of water drowned,
Never after to be found:
He was as tender of his son Dick,
As busy Hen is over one Chick;
Tu quoque magnam
Partem operis tanti (sineret dolor) Icare haberes.

And had in that same place we told on
Hung his picture up all Golden,
Had he not met that common curse
To be poor raskal out of purse.
Quin protinus omnia
Perlegerent oculis --

Aeneas had taken more pleasure
In lingering here, but wanted leisure.
Nijam praemissus Achates
Afforet, atque una Phoebi Triviaeque sacerdos.

For the true Trojan (his old servant)
Achates back returned from errant.
In company of aged hag,
Who did on lazy crutches lag.
(If old Historians don't baulk us)
She was the Succuba of Glaucus.
In spell or Hocus Pocus trick
She did good service to old Nick.
Then with a voice like mouse in cheese
fatur quae talia Regi:
Non hoc ista sibi tempus spectacula poscit.

To Aeneas out these words did squeeze:
I wonder here ye loitering lie
When you have other fish to fry.
Ye must choose out of herd (that is given
Not to vile frisking) heifers seven,
That never have at leapfrog been,
Nor have above two Summers seen.
Talibus afflata Aenaeam: nec sacra morantur
Jussa viri:

Thus when she had spoke with much ado
Butchers about the business go.
Teucros vocat alta in templa sacerdos.
She then invited in the Trojans
To see her underground-laid lodgings,
Which much was like unto a cave
Which Capouchian Friars have,
Cut out in weather beaten rock
Proof'gainst rain and tempest shock.
Excisum Euboicae latus rupis in antrum,
Quo lati ducunt aditus centum, ostia centum.

There were East, West, North, and South,
Holes wider than a Canons mouth,
And to every one a shutter
To keep from hearing noise and clutter.
pectus anhelum
Et rabie fera corda tument --

But when the trap doors were set open,
You Would think Hells dungeon loose, and broken.
The Sibyl would belch, fart, and stink,
As if possessed, or in her drink.
Assoon's the scoundrels came she hoisted
Her bum, and in their faces foisted.
Wrigling out nasty grunt and cry,
Like farrowing Sow immured in Sty.
Then lest she should too much a scent give,
Thrust into breech finger retentive.
But bowel thorow-purging pang
Twitcht her with wombling gripe and twang.
At last by force it fluttered out
Like pump water stopped up with clout.
Flouncing about in such large doses
As made the Trojans hold their noses,
She looked of the sudden pale as ashes,
And smeared with excremental dashes,
As if she had taken a full cup
Of Chymick potion, or jallop.
Majorque videri
Nec mortale sonans. --

With that she swelled as big as quack
Drinking toad in glass of sack.
Stomach and belly then she puts out,
As if she meant to squirt her guts out.
At last she howled and gave a squawle,
And thus did 'pon Aeneas call.
cessas in vota precesque
Tios (ait) Aenaea?

Quoth she, I mar'l where thou were bred
To see a woman almost dead,
And not with helping hand come nigh her,
Nor lend so much as simple prayer.
Neque enim ante dehiscent
Ora domus.

For if thou do not come and shake me,
Another fit will straightway take me;
Unless I Am stirred and jumbled soundly
My guts will never discharge roundly.
Gelidus Teucris per dura cucurrit
Offa tremor. --

With that for fear of another spatter
The Trojans turned as weak as water,
They trembled so in every joint
Many in breeches loosed a point.
Aeneas then with stomach groans
Fell down upon his marrow bones;
Phoebe graves Trojae semper miserate labores,
Dardana qui Paridis direx'ti tela manusque;

O Phoebus that did ever pity
Troy town, O hearken to my ditty.
O thou that clapst upon the shoulder
Paris, and made him against foe bolder:
If to me now thou art difficile
Thou may for the future go whistle.
I hate ingratitude as the devil;
I must confess thou have been civil,
And willing were with all thy heart
To serve me more than my desert.
Tot maria intravi, duce te, penitusque repostas
Massylum gentes praetentaque Syrtibus arva.

Thou when I was foundered and weary
Have often made me brisk and merry:
When candle has been out of socket,
Thou have put money in my pocket.
And when I have been put to shift,
Thou have helped me out at a dead lift.
In journey and in tedious travel,
When shoes were stockt with filth and gravel.
Jam tandem Italiae fugientis prendimus oras.
For Italy I am now bound
Pray let me come there safe and sound.
For I had never hither come
Were I not drove from house and home.
Wretched I Anchises poor son
Am forced to range and seek my fortune.
Up and down to see me lurk
Would move even pity in a Turk.
Diique Deaeque omnes quibus obstitit Ilium and ingens
Gloria Dardanidum. --

O therefore all ye ranting Heroes
That were to Ilium bugs and scare-crows;
And all ye proud dames that did straddle
Scimmington 'pon warlike saddle,
I hope you are of that good nature
To pity a distressed Creature.
Tuque O sanctissima vates
Praescia venturi. --

And you too mother (whom I guess
To be a witch or Prophetess)
Pray I may (O beldam hag sage)
To Latium come with bag and baggage.
Tum Phoebo and Triviae solido de marmore templum
Instituam

To Phoebus (by the foot of Priam)
And to his simpring sister Dian,
I Will dedicate a house (though little)
And resign my right and title:
I Will do it, there is my hand, believe me,
Let me be hanged if I deceive thee.
It Is not my nature to be base,
In honor I Will not bate an ace.
Hic ego namque tuas sorts arcanaque sata
Dicta meae geuti ponam, lectosque sacrabo
Alma viros; foliis tantum ne carmina manda.

But to confirm the bargain well,
I Will give thee here my hand and seal;
And for more convenient tie
Witness all the company.
Let not the writings be destroi'd
For then you know the case is void,
And we shall be but jeer and sport
When we come to appear in court.
finem dedit ore loquendi.
At this he prudently gave over
And to that purpose said no more.
At Phoebi nondum patiens --
At which the woman 'gan again
To be troubled with her pain.
He that had at that time seen her
Would think the Devil had been in her;
See winst and caper'd as if some
Had clapped hot iron to her bum.
'Twas labor much for one of her age
To suffer so much belly garbage.
tanto magis ille fatigat
Os rabidum, fera corda domans, fingitque premendo.

At last with volly loud and full
She made in cave another stool:
Rat a tat tat the spirit bounst out,
And flakes of fierce St. Reverence flounst out.
After which crack, from out behind
Broke such an impetuous wind
(You would have swore her guts were broken)
Ostia jamque domus patuere ingentia --
As straight set all the trap doors open.
Her pop gun gave as loud report,
As Canon charged from 'laram'd port.
At length having appeased tail frothing
And cleans'd the filth of inner clothing,
She opt her mouth dropping like snowt
Of heavy Winter-idling lowt:
O tandem magnis pelagi defuncte periclis.
O thou whom Juno fell with whipcord
Has often firkt and clawed a ship board,
Art now ashore from water butches,
And out at present of her clutches.
Yet do'nt thou think thou art secure,
Sed terrae graviora manent
For thou wilt o'land more stripes endure:
The whoreson queen before shee'th done
Will catch thee again at long run.
In regna Lavini
Dardanidae venient (mitte hanc de pectore curam)
Sed non and venisse volent bella horrida bella.

Thou and this thy wretched rabble,
With much ado at length shall scrabble
Into the borders of Lavinus,
(But hold you coxcomb why do whine thus)
And there thou wilt be tormented so,
Thou Wilt wish thou were at Jericho,
And reason have to curse the hour
Thou first did stir foot out of door.
For I foretell there will be scuffles,
Many blows, bastings and buffles.
Tibrim multo spumantem sanguine cerne.
There are a whoreson surly tribe there,
That live about the river Tiber,
From whom you shall have knocks and raps
And thumps and dowses in the chops.
It Is well if after all these crosses
You shall come home with bloody noses.
Nec Dorica castra
Defuerint --

You Will meet huge raw-bone Sander huffs,
As good as Grecian lowts, at cuffs;
They Are lusty fellows, and stand to it shall
At wrestling, cudgels or at footbal:
They Will kick ye up and down with clump foot
Until they make your bellies bump out:
Unless you caution from me can take,
They Will kick thy breech as flat's a pancake.
Nec Teucris addita Juno
usquam aberit --

Juno again shall make thee smart
And vex thee to thy very heart.
Nay thou shall come to such a pass
With scarce a rag to hide thy arse,
And ramble through highway and street,
With scarce a stockin to thy feet.
cum tu supplex in rebus egenis
Heu! quas non gentes, quas non oraveris urbes?

Thou shall be, when thy food grows scant,
Ready to eat thy nails for want.
Thou Wilt begging go from door to door
Through Town and Country lean and poor.
Also thou shall have scratch and battle
Tooth and nail with black-list cattle.
Causa mali tanti conjux iterum hospita Teucris.
A wench there is given to flickring,
Who shall be cause of all this bickring.
Tu ne cede malis. --
However prithee hap what hap,
Don't in anger burn thy cap.
Be bold, and when things go amiss
Bid fortune and the slaves go kiss.
Via prima salutis
Quod minime reris Graia pandetur ab urbe.

But to set thy spirits agog
Out of Greece thou shall have prog,
Hogs puddings, oat-cakes, milk and butter,
Bacon, eggs, poultrey, and a clatter
Of pease and beans, with pannier'd baggage
Of parsnips, turnips, carrots, cabbage.
Talibus ex adyto dictis Cumaea Sibylla
Horrendas canit ambages, antroque remugit.

These words the Sibyl chopped from cell low
And gave (as Author says) cow-bellow.
She puzzled him with words and phrases
Obscuris vera involvens. --
That Janus like had different faces:
On one side was vizard uncouth,
On the other was the naked truth;
When in a trice her rage and madness
Vt primum cessit furor. --
Was turned into sober sadness.
Her breast that was with fury cramb'd,
Was now as quiet as a Lamb.
Incipit Aeneas heroes. --
So that Aeneas had his leisure
And liberty to speak his pleasure.
Mother, quoth he, I speak from heart,
I value not these things a fart.
I knew before you gave me note,
I should have holes picked in my coat:
Therefore you might have kept your breath
To cool your porridge, proverb says:
Vnum oro:
I Am come to ask without offense
A favor of great consequence.
quando hic inferni janua Regis
Dicitur. --

It Is said that hole there that is kept shut too
Leads to kitchen of cook Pluto:
Where muddy Acheron from sink
Casts hogo forth and noisome stink;
I have a father there, a wight
To whom the Devil owed a spite;
So I might come to h's sight I Am willing
To spend though it were forty shilling.
Ire ad conspectum chari genitoris and ora
Contingat. --

Prithee therefore give me some light
How I may strike the way aright.
Ille meum comitatus iter maria omnia mecum,
Atque omnes pelagi minas coelique ferebat
Invalidus, vires ultra sortemque senectae.

That Sire of mine as sure's you are sat there
I Have born (God knows) through fire and water
Upon these shoulders and this back,
When my neck has been ready crack,
And bloody rogues pursued behind us,
Damming and sinking they would find us.
Well, though I say it (he was my father
I must confess) and should not rather)
He was as lusty an old shaver
As any in this rout I have here.
Where e're I went on Land or water
He Would make a shift to follow after.
Neither had he flincht a foot, had fates
Made it rain down dogs and cats;
Though old was body and decrepit,
Yet heart was whole and naught could break it.
Quin ut te supplex peterem, and tua limina adirem,
Idem orans mandata dabat --

My father (be assured no less thing)
Gave me a charge upon my blessing
To seek you out (if to be found
In any corner above ground)
Pity begetter and begotten
(One alive, the other dead and rotten)
Potes namque omnia. --
I know thou can do any thing
Because you are good at conjuring,
Thou keep'st a Mephistophylus
To turn thee into Curr or Pusse,
So that thou can delude by barking
As well as Reinard pullets sharking,
And know the dialects of mewing
As perfectly as cats a wooing.
Thou can be tossed and ride securely
Upon a windmills hurly burly,
And sit upon the wheel or hopper
Without falling or hurting crupper.
Sometimes thou rig'st with sail and oar
An Egg-shel, and put'st out from shore;
Thus in thy little Sciff thou wilt ride
'Pon Neptunes back, and waves deride.
Thou do in secret baskets bear
Parcels of blustering wind and air,
And for a Sailer in a calm
Thou can disturb the Sea with qualm;
Sending of the the sudden Lapland blast
To shake the tackle and main Mast.
If thou do thy commands advance,
Joint stools, tables, bedsteads dance.
By virtue of thy Spells a dr^^^ stick
Shall frisk Coranto with a broom-stick.
Thou can in Orchard lay a charm
To catch base felon by the Arm.
Thou art able by singer clench
The running of fundament stench:
Thou can drive folk out of their wits,
And rack 'em with convulsion fits:
Thou can provoke man sick or drunk
To lie with filthy Turnbold punk.
Thou can make inoffensive sleep
Upon the bridegrooms eyelids creep,
Although he has a dainty bride
Snugs discontented by his side.
If thou can do these wonders all,
Then what I ask is very small.
Si potuit manes arcessere conjugis Orpheus.
If Scoundrels might to hell go, why
By your good favor may not I?
Orpheus a pimp, a mere Jack-straw,
Could get his wife from devils claw
Only by sum fum scrape of fiddle
And windy bagpipes farting twiddle.
Si fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit.
What was Pollux but a rakell?
Yet spite of Lucifer he brake hell;
And swaggering with his arms a kimbo
Freed his brother out of Limbo.
Theseus and Hercules were men
Of metal it is confessed, what then?
In what I pray were they more fitted
Than I am now to be admitted?
Et mi genus ab Jove summo.
My father was as good as theirs,
And I as either for their ears.
Talibus orabat dictis. --
These words as near as I can hit
Aeneas spoke with grace and wit.
Then she with much ado arises
Tunc sic orsa loqui vates --
Tros Anchisiade, facilis descensus Averni.
Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis.

Answering thus (O son of Anchises)
Whose pedigree is of no bad fame
But is almost as old as Adam;
The way to the Devil is plain and broad,
There is no fear you will miss the road,
Night and day always the doors
Lie open to comers and goers:
Sed revocare gradum. --
But when once foot threshold has got over
Return without toil you cannot more.
Pauci quos aequus amavit
Juppiter. --

Few but whom (what'ere's the matter)
Jove loves as the Devil loves holy water:
For there you may for ever linger,
He Will lend you not a helping finger:
Besides not one to ten so wise known
That once being pent in can break prison,
Diis geniti potuere. --
Except a brother of the blade
Which is known expert at the trade.
A wall almost as strong as iron
The place does with fence inviron;
With fortified bulwarks, which
Are compassed round with puddle ditch.
Quod si tantus amor mentis. --
But seeing thou art forward bent
With resolution and intent,
And whimsey does thy noddle take
To journey to the Stygian Lake,
Accipe quae peragenda prius. --
Something must be thought upon
Before the business can be done.
There is a tree that long has stood
In yonder neigh'bring shaggy wood,
Later arbore opaca
Ramus. --

Wherein a bough grows hidden inward
ureus and foliis. --
As bright and glittering as drawn winiard,
Which sacred is to infernal Juno
Junoni infernae dictus sacer: hunc tegit omnis
Lucus, and obscuris claudunt convallibus umbrae.

Whose favor by it you will soon know.
But though this bough be mickle bright
Yet it does not appear in sight,
Because where you must go to seek it
Is thorny copse and pricky thicket.
For the wood stands in valley humble
Where winds for want of freedom grumble.
Sed non ante datur telluris operta subire
Auricomos quam quis decerpserit arbore foetus.
Hoc sibi pulchra suum ferri Proserpina munus
Instituit. --

Yet it is so ordered by the powers
(That lie Antipodes to ours)
Without this bough none shall be whurl'd
Through gulf into the other world.
Proserpine (that in fairy coast
Sits paramount and rules the roast)
Expects it due unto her honor
If any mean to wait upon her:
Now therefore thou have thy commission,
Hasten away with expedition:
In every brake and briar hunt,
Breaking up hedge with crab-tree plunt.
Look about with as close inquest
And carefulness as boy for nest.
Rite repertum
Carpe manu, namque ipse volens facilisque sequetur,
Si te fata vocant --

When thou have found out where it is stuck
Climb up and gi't a gentle pluck,
If it is the will of courteous fate,
In spite of all the world thou wilt have it.
Ali er non viribus ullis.
But if thy fate stand opposite
Thou had as good go fairly f --.
For were thou as robust as Giant
Thy hand could not make one twig pliant,
Or should thou hardy back-sword take,
Thou Would hack in vain till thy heart ache.
Praeterea jacet exanimum tibi corpus amici.
But hold whilst thou art here advising
And projects in thy fancy raising,
Since thou came here thou have a friend
That is come to a fearful end.
Sedibus hunc refer ante suis and conde sepulchro.
Duc nigras pecudes, ea prim a piacula sunto.

Therefore in charity you are bound
To see him lain in wormy ground;
And seeing he was an honest tossed,
Spare at the burial no cost.
Upon the altar table put on
Good store of beef and kindly mutton;
Sic demum lucos Stygios, regna invia vivis
Aspicies.

Then thou may go with freedom down
To dungeon by none living known.
-- dixit, pressoque obmutuit ore.
With that she was as mute's a fish
As mute as woman you could wish.
Aeneas moesto defixus lumina vultu. --
Aeneas at this sad news started,
And with sheep-biters face departed.
His stomach was as full of sorrow,
He could have even roared out for woe.
Cui fidus Achates
It comes and paribus curis. --

Achates kept him company
And looked as pitiful as he.
As both they through the high way walked
Multa inter sese vario sermon serebant.
They much of this disaster talked,
Admiring who the Devil 'twas
Of whom grim death had made an ass.
When they were come to quart'ring house
Where they kept all their rendevouz,
Misenum in littore sicco,
Vt venere, vident indigna morte peremptum.

They found an honest fellow named
Misenus, to all fortune damned,
Who was in filthy pickle laid,
Dead as a herring, and beraid.
Quo non praestantior alter
Aere ciere viros. --

This whipster had a plaguey knack
At trumpet blowing and horn-crack,
By which he could raise sullen coward
And make him for the battle toward.
Hectoris hic magni fuerat comes. --
He had served Hector all the wars
In open and in civil jarrs:
And for his merit had come up
To be trumpeter of a troop.
But when Achilles had in field,
The Trojan Captain Hector killed,
Dardanio Aeneae sese fortissimus heroes
Addiderat socium. --

He made friends to Aeneas for
The office that he had before.
Aeneas pitying his condition
Gave him at first word a commission.
Now how he came dead (if you will know)
According to report 'twas so:
Sed tum forte cava dum personat aequora concha
Demens, and cantu vocat in certamina Divos.

Close by a River as he sat
A playing 'pon a Flagellate,
Crying out ever and anon,
Come who will I Will yield to none;
Aemulus exceptum Triton --
Inter saxa virum spumosa immerserat unda. --

One Triton that was a Sowgelder
And in a house of rushes dwelt near,
Taking it in snuff and dudgeon
To hear boasting of vile Curmudgeon,
Ran and caught him by the shank
And shook him roughly till he stank;
Then knocking out his brains he slew him
And madly into water threw him.
Ergo omnes magno circum clamore fremebant.
Aeneas therefore and the rout
Stood the mangled corpse about,
Yelling like hounds in a full cry
With Irish note, why would thou die?
But before they could in solemn plights
Duly perform the funeral rights,
They put themselves in equipage
For work which Sibyl did engage.
Itur in antiquam Sylvam, Stabula alta ferarum.
Procumbunt piceae, sonat icta securibus ilex

Helter skelter every man
In among the thickets ran,
Where Snakes and Adders without number
Did the ground and hedges cumber,
Some with Hatchets, some with Chopping-
Knives went up and down a lopping,
Some with Hand-saws, some with crooks,
Axes and wedges, pruning hooks,
Down went Crab-tree and bush of sloe,
I marry, Elm, Oak, ground-ash too.
Nec non Aeneas opera inter talia primus.
Nor was Aeneas idle seen
But labored with tool sharp and keen,
Suggesting in the rest an ample
Encouragement by his example.
Seeing at last but little hopes
To find the bough in spacious copse,
He 'gan to be quite out of heart;
Then from his mouth these words did part:
Si nunc se nobis ille aureus arbore ramus
Ostendat nemore in tanto, quando omnia vere
Heu! nimium de te vates, Misene, locuta est.

If in a wood so wide as this
I shall not bough I look for miss,
Then I Will be sworn O beldam Nun
Thou art a Witch as sure's a gun.
Vix ea fatus erat, geminae cum forte columbae.
No sooner had he spoke these words
But over his head he spied two birds,
Flying to ground where grain did grow,
As swift as arrow out of bow.
Maternas agnoscit aves --
Grammercy quoth Aeneas to 'em
My trusty Pigeons are ye come?
You being Letter-carriers know
All the by-places here I trow,
My mother Venus has I warrant
Sent you to me on an errant.
I do beseech you of all love
Este duces. -- ubi dives opacat
Ramus humum. --

Lead me directly to the grove
Where glittering bough like Sunburned apple
Does the twining branches dapple.
Tuque o dubiis ne defice rebus
Diva parens.

And Venus if thou do forsake me
In nick of time, the Devil take thee.
The birds well knowing what he uttered
Into the air with all speed clutter'd.
Observans quo signa ferant, quo tendere pergant.
He stood stark still and marked their flight
Till they were almost out of sight.
Inde ubi venere ad fauces grave olentis Averni
Tollunt se celeres. --

Where 'twas their awkward luck to hover
A stinking house of office over,
From whence such fumes and hogo's broke forth
Enough in all reason to choke both,
Which made them with a murrain fly
Something loftier in the sky.
Then in a trice (whilst you can say,
What Is this?) through air they cut their way.
Sedibus optatis gemina super arbore sidunt,
Discolor unde auri per ramos aura refulget:
Quale solet sylvis brumali frigore viscum
Fronde virere nova. --
Talis erat species auri frondentis. --

And on the tree (concerning which
We had discourse before) they pitch,
From whence (the place being dark) a cluster
Of glowworms cast a dainty luster;
Or have you seen in Wintertime
On hedge a kind of brittle-slime?
Or frothy trash which sluggish snail
Draws along the ground at tail?
Such was the brightness of the bough
Of which I gave a hint e'ne now.
Aeneas finds by sign and token
It was the same which was fore-spoken:
Then up he skips as quick and pat
As Squirrel, or mouse-hunting Cat,
Corripit Aeneas extemplo avidusque refringit
Cunctantem, and vatis portat sub tecta Sibyllae.

And off he snapps it at one grapple,
As greedy as boy Orchard apple:
With half face-snears and shoulder shrugs
He with it to the Sibyl trugs.
Nec minus interea Misenum in littore Troes
Flebant.

But course of story does confine us
To say something more of Misenus.
The woeful Trojans cried right out
Sniv'ling and casting snot about.
Pars calidos latices and ahena undantia flammis
Expediunt. --

Some of the rabble (men of metal)
Heat water in a copper kettal,
Corpusque lavant frigentis and ungunt.
And with purgative soap and wash ball
They cleanse away the body's trash all;
Then on their shoulders forth they fetch it,
And on a knotty deal-board stretch it.
His shirt that stood him much in stead
Alive, must serve him now he is dead.
This for a shroud must wrap his arse
Cause linen was amongst 'em scarce.
Because there was no Joyner near
(And Coffins too besides were dear)
They made a shift and thought it best
To lay the corpse in gentle chest,
Which worms had eaten so all over
There scarce was food for any more.
Purpureasque super vestes. --
His doublet made of hardy leather
Which proof was against all sorts of weather,
And breeches of undaunted freese,
Hanging in quirpo down at knees,
And jerkin lined with skin of dog
In which he looked like armed hog,
With other raiment (which we may
Suppose he wore on holy day)
Were advantagiously displaid
And woollen blanket overlaid.
Thurea dona dapes, fuso crateres olivo.
Others very busy were at
Preparing diet-bread and burnt claret.
Then up the loaded corpse they fix
Pars ingenti subiere pheretro.
On backs of brawny Porters six,
And on to burial place they bore it,
With links and wax candles before it:
They pil'd up heaps of faggots higher
Than usually are at bonfire.
And in they cast the carcass whole,
Burning it straightway to a coal.
Postquam collapsi cineres, and flamma quievit;
Relliquias vino, and bibulam lavere savillam.

As Soon as e're they saw the fire gone
They put relics in tub of iron,
Pouring in that little bub
That lest was, into the said tub.
Then (where we all decline to must)
It was committed to the dust.
Dixitque novissima verba.
And many a wish and prayer was given
Hoping his soul was gone to heaven.
At pius Aeneas ingenti mole sepulchrum
Imponit. --

Aeneas sent to a stone-cutter
To have a tombstone fitly put over,
On which an Epitaph in Text
Was cut with coat of arms annexed,
And there if ever you have been
The fellows name is to be seen;
I know nothing to the contrary
But it may there for ever ta^ry.
His actis propere exequitur praecepta Sibyllae.
Aeneas after this ado
Was in a readiness to go
Without fa^ther stay or quibble
As he was ordered by the Sibyl.
Spelunca altafui vastoque immanis hiatu.
There was a hole broader than what
Could covered be by buttock fat,
Much like unto a privy dungeon
For quagging Scu^t of baud to lunge on;
Around which an offensive lake
In ropes of excrement did flake,
From whence came such a noisome smell
Enough to choke the Devil of hell;
Quam super haud ullae poterant impune volantes.
'Twoud kill Kites, Vultures, Ravens, Crows,
Bustards, Magpies, and Jack-daws.
Inde locum Graii dixerunt nomine Avernum.
Wherefore it is called Avernus by
Pedantick Etymology.
Aeneas fearing greatly to make
An entrance with a fasting stomach,
Quatuor ^ic primum nigrantes terga juvencos
Constituit. --

Good store of Beef he did command
To be roasted out of hand,
Which (soon as e're 'twas took from spit)
He and his men eat every bit,
And knuckles with promiscuous clatter
Scrap't the clammy fat from platter.
No sooner was he risen up
From meal, but calls for a grace-cup,
Voce vocans Hecaten. --
And here, quoth he, ye snaky sisters
That raise in men fanatic blisters,
And Pluto (be thou Smith or Tinker
It Is all one to me by this drink here)
And Proserpine (of whom go speeches
Thou wear'st too much thy husbands breeches)
Here Is to all your generation
A whole one upon reputation.
He was a friend to the pot you will say
Being the sober time of the day;
For at this rate he sat and bows'd
Ecce autem primi sub lumina solis and ortus.
Till Sun from Thetis lap was roused.
The Ale being in his head, the ground
Sub pedibus mugire solum and juga coepta moveri
Sylvarum. --

Seemed on a sudden to turn round.
And Mountains that really stood still
He thought (cause he himself did) reel.
He fancied noises in his scull
(No wonder when in it waves did roll)
-- Visaeque canes ululare per umbram.
Such as Mastiff howl, and screech
Of kennel-fraught benighted bitch.
The Sibyl too was there as drunk
As Windsor wife or Whetstone punk.
She cries out in Prophetic rapture
(Like Puritan a reading chapter)
-- Procul, O procul, este profani,
Conclamat vates, totoque absistite luco

O all that are profane, and none
Of the religious, be gone:
Away ye scoundrel Rascals hence
Who are of a reprobate sense.
Tuque invade viam vaginaque eripe ferrum.
And now man 'gin to look about
Thou must be resolute and stout:
Out from eaten scabberd pluck
Thy man-slaying unpeaceful tuck,
And now or never make a venture
And follow me close as I enter.
Tantum effata furens antro se immisit aperto.
Then down from brink with care and heed
On naked bum she gently slid.
What need she fear? for she could fright
With Devils face the dreadful'st sprite.
Ille ducem haud timidis vadentem passibus aequat.
Aeneas very bold and pert
Followed and caught her by the skirt.
Dii quibus imperium est animarum umbraeque silentes
Et Phlegethon. --
Sit mihi fas audita sequi --

But O ye Devils great and small,
Lucifer, Beelzebub, Belial,
O all ye fiends and hobgoblins
Who plague poor mortals for their sins,
O bugbears, Oberon, and Fairies
Who pitch uncleanly slats of dairies,
O Chaos, Phlegethon, and all
Hard words upon which Poets call,
Give me a vein that may surpass
Homer a la mode, or Hudibras.
Give me high and mighty wit,
To the grandeur of my subject fit.
Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per umbras,
Quale per incertam lunam sub nocte maligna
Est iter in Sylvis. --

They both went in vault under ground
Unbeaten ways dark and profound;
Like traveling a wood a night time
When neither Moon nor Stars with light shine,
When people are force grope with hand,
Nor what color it is understand.
Vestibulum ante ipsum --
At last they came unto a gate
Against which Aeneas ran his pate,
Stumbling over a promiscuous heap
Of mortals that lay there asleep.
Luctus, and ultrices posuere cubilia carae,
Pallentesque habitant morbi, tristisque senectus,
Et metus, and malesuada fames, et turpis egestas.

There were a company of rakels
Fettered up in jives and shackels,
Barretars, and those whose profession
Wast o cheat at size and session.
There were likewise Misers decrepit
Who scrap't money up only to keep it.
And husbandmen that hoarded corn
When bellies were with famine torn.
Another parcel lay of women
That had been thorns and thistles to men:
Such as would force their honest good
Husbands perform more than they could;
Such queans as would curse, swear and huff,
And their contented cuckolds cuff.
Under an Elm old and decai'd
A bundle were of idlers laid,
Fellows produced from natures sink
Good for naught but to eat and drink,
Who slept and dreamt of nothing but
Provision for ungodly gut.
The Sibyl having unlockt door
(Which we told you of before,)
Multaque praeterea variarum monstra ferarum;
Centauri in foribus stabulant, scyllaeque biformes,
Et centum geminus Briareus. --

Within the porch was stable wide
Wherein strange monsters did abide:
There was a beast the like was none
Ever at Bartlemew fair shown;
The forepart was exact mad mallion,
The hinder shaped like racing stallion.
There also was an overgrown
Curr, that had more heads than one:
There was a Giant too as high-a
As Danish Colborn, or Goliath.
Ac bellua Learn
Horrendum stridens, flammisque armata Chimaera,
Gorgones harpyiaeque, et forma tricorporis umbra.

There was a Lion looked as sower
As any Lion in the Tower.
Another strange creature there was
Like smug wench in body and face,
But claws it had with bristled shag on,
Like those of Griffon or fierce Dragon.
Besides there was Ens ratiouis
Which would young Sophister astonish.
Corripit hic subita trepidus formidine ferrum
Aeneas, strictamque aciem venientibus offert.

Aeneas at these sights a while
Stunk so you might have smelt a mile;
(For he before, poor harmless Elf
Had seen nothing worse than himself)
Fear made him skip, curvet and caper,
And out he drew his study Rapier;
And traversing his ground prepared
Himself to stand upon his guard.
Et ni docta comes --
Had not the Sibyl flown upon him
And snatched the brandisht weapon from him;
In testy wrath discharged he had blows
To incorporeal forms and shadows.
Hinc via Tartarei quae fert Acherontis ad undas.
From thence they came unto a ditch
In which was puddle black as pitch,
Where sprawling frogs and croaking toads
Lay enwrapt in spawny loads.
Terribili squalore Charon, cuiplurima mento
Canities inculta jacet. --

There Charon (much quoted by pitiful
Poet in funeral Ditty)
With wrizzel'd countenance of hew
Would make a dog or Devil spew;
And knitty beard of Carret color,
Than rubbing-brush or besome fouler,
Or hair 'pon bird-pickt soul of traitor,
Pent on pole London bridge-gate over;
Sordidus ex humeris nodo dependet amictus.
Whose clothes hung 'pon him like a fardle
Most wretchedly trussed up with girdle.
This Charon (for convenience
I name him twice to bring in sense)
Rowed passengers with boat, that looked
About the sides like tub unhoopt,
And yet with Scullers or with Oars
Et ferruginea subvectat corpora cymba.
He wafted every day over scores:
Huc omnis turba ad ripas effusa ruebat
Matres atque viri, --

Both men and women of all ranks
Waited for passage on the banks.
Many a brave fellow crossed the ferry
To laugh and quaff and drink old Sherry.
Many a stripling over did pass
In company of buxome Lass.
A good house was on the other side
Which made so many there abide.
Quam multum sylvis autumni frigore primo
Lapsa cadunt folia.

Have you not seen in Autumn season,
When Zephyr blows out of all reason,
The trees shake to and fro and showers
Of leaves descend in groves and bowers?
Or have you seen in time of frost
Quam multae glomerantur aves. --
Wild fowl come from foreign coast,
Blackbird, Woodcock, Plover, Quale,
Partridge, Lark, Widgeon, and Teil?
So many folk (you will think it strange
But faith it is true) did thither range.
Stabant orantes primi transmittere cursum
Navita sed tristis nunc hos nunc accipit illos.

They hoopt and hollowed 'bout the shore
And at poor Charon cursed and swore,
But he from wafting never swerved,
And he that came first was first served.
Some that were moniless and poor
He drove them with his pole from shore.
Aeneas miratus enim, metusque tumultu,
Dic ait o virgo, quid tult concursus ad amnem?

Aeneas wondering at the clatter
Asked, what a Devil was the matter?
Tell me, quoth he, O mother Sibyl,
What makes this concourse here of people?
What a plague ails 'em, are they mad?
I never saw such a feud in dad.
Olli sic breviter, --
Quoth Sibyl I Will declare in short
A satisfying reason for it:
Cocyti stagna alta vides, stygiamque paludem,
Dii cujus jurare timent, et fallere numen.

Thou see the deep pool of Cocytus,
And Styx, whose very sight would fright us,
By which the Gods do damn and sink
When ever they are in their drink.
Those that the Churl away does scare
Have got no dust to pay their fare.
Those that he receives in boat
Pay him for his pains a groat:
They had as good even go knock out
Their brains, who bring no coin in pocket.
He Will let em sit, call names, and scold
Until their arses are a cold.
Gallants and Ladies first he will waft over
Let Tatterdemallions come after.
Constitit Anchisa satus et vestigia pressit,
Multa putans, sortem que animo miseratus iniquam.

Aeneas shook his head and dampt
His breast with fist, whilst foot ground stamped:
And 'cause he knew in days of yoar
What 'twas to be in want and poor,
He seemed to be the more concerned,
And with mere grief his bowels yern'd.
He saw there some that pined and fainted
With whom he had been well acquainted;
But such misery had overthrown 'em,
He was almost ashamed to own 'em.
Leucaspin and Lyciae ductorem classis Orontem.
Leucaspis stout who had been Bosen
Of a ship, with Orontes whoreson,
Who both were blown by sudden squeck
Of wind into the Sea from deck.
Ecce gubernator sese Palinurus agebat.
Aeneas also spied his dear man
Bold Palinurus, quondam Steerman.
To whom, quoth he, in midst of rout,
How fares it with thee trusty trowt?
-- Quis te Palinure Deorum
Eripuit nobis? --

What a crotchet did in noddle take thee,
Or what a plague was it thou did forsake me?
Dic age, namque mihi fallax haud ante repertus
Hoc uno responso animum delusit Apollo.

In sober sadness prithee give me
A true account, and I Will believe thee.
The cunning man Apollo, whom
We asked concerning future doom,
Told me thou shou'd'st come safe and sound
To Latium and not be drowned.
-- En haec promissa fides est!
But there is no trust to be given
To any creature under Heaven.
Ille autem: nec te Phoebi cortina fefellit
Dux Anchisiade.

Quoth Palinurus (O thou heir
Of Anchises to all his gear)
I must confess ingenuously,
Apollo to thee told no lie:
I fell indeed headlong into Sea
(Where fishes of all sizes do play)
But'twas as fate would have it, my luck
To have but one good sowsing duck,
Which made me stare again, but after
I made a shift to keep 'bove water,
Namque gubernaclum multa vi forte revulsum
Praecipitans traxi mecum. --

For no wave could me overwhelm
Whilst I had in my hand my helm;
Which I plucked with me when in sleep
I tottered from the pocky ship,
Making it cut the stream like oar
Of Gally, or stiff Battledore.
-- Maria aspera juro,
Non ullum pro me tantum cepisse timorem
Quam tua ne spoliata armis excussa magistro
Deficeret tantis navis surgentibus undis.

I swear by foaming spurt of wave,
And as I have a soul to save,
I thought it was my greatest mischance
Thou were in want of my assistance:
For (though I say it my self) you well know
I was a very honest fellow.
Well, so I floated clear and glib
(You Will think I Am telling now a fib)
Three Summer days and put to them
Three nights, by help of wind and stream.
The fourth day was half past before
With much ado I got ashore.
Ni gens crudelis, --
When suddenly a crew of ruffains
(By looks and clothes mere raggamuffins)
Came running and with speech severe
Asked me what business I had there?
One gave me with his foot a spurn,
Another took me at half-turn,
And gave me by the nose a twitch,
Which made me lamentably screech:
Then to make sport they took a Rugg
And tossed me in it like a Dog:
I fell to ground often with squelch,
Which made my very entrails belch.
When they had used me like a Jackanoddy
And shak'd my breath out of my body,
Nunc me fluctus habet. --
The sons of whores, the Devil rot'em
Whurl'd me into the Oceans bottom.
Per genitorem oro. --
O therefore Master let me beg
With cap in hand, and turn'd-back leg,
For your good old fathers sake
Upon a servant pity take.
Eripe me his invicte malis --
The sum of all that I desire
Is, that you would lay down here my hire.
For without money surely Charon
(And troth I have not a cross) will waft none.
Coepit cum talia vates:
Vnde haec tam dira tibi Palinure cupido?

Quoth the old Beldam, marry come up
Mr. Gentleman, will you have a roap?
It is in vain cursed fate to cark at,
But make the best of a bad market.
To make complaint (for my own part)
I think thou would e'en's good let a fart.
Sed cape dicta memor duri solatia casus.
Have but a little patience
Thou shall at length be carried hence,
Thy mortified Fish-pickt bones
(That lie among Sea-shels and stones)
Shall be, thou need'st not be a-fear'd,
With all solemnity interred.
His dictis curae emotae. --
With that the rogue grew blithe and glad
As louse or beggar in fresh pad.
Ergo iter inceptum peragunt. --
Aeneas with his Companion
Jog'd from that place further on.
Charon spying 'em approacht near
Wondered what a pox made such there,
Then making stately step toward 'em
Sic prior aggreditur dictis atque increpat ultro.
Thus accosts (of his own accord) 'em.
Do You near you friend you saucy Jack,
And you old Gammer, what do you lack?
Stand I conjure you, if you stir shall
A foot farther, be it to your peril.
Fare age, quid venias. --
What are you and from whence, speak quickly
Or (take it as you will) I Will lick ye:
Vmbrarum hic locus est, somni noctisque soporae.
This is a place for incorporeal
Substances (that sleep and snore all)
Here is no room for scowtish rakel
That comes with earthly tabernacle.
Nec vero A'cidem, nec Thesea Perithoumque
Accipere lacu me sum laetatus euntem.

Theseus and Perithous stout
With Hercules that heavy lowte,
Did me and my boat more damage
Than I can get again in an age;
Tartareum ille manu custodem in vincla petivit.
The one put 'pon us a shrewd slur,
And stole away our household Curr;
The the other two I warn't were good,
(A couple of pure sticks of wood,)
Hi dominam Ditis thalamo deducere adorti.
Who came to have a fellow-feeling
With Proserpine, bat she wa'n't willing.
Quae contra breviter fata est Amphrysia vates:
Nullae hic insidiae tales. --

Quoth munching Beldam, friend of mine,
We come not of an ill design,
For my part I am near fourscore
And can do little harm I Am sure.
Nec vim tela ferunt. --
And he (though he wears a sword and belt)
Yet nothing e're his fury felt.
Does he (lord help him) look as though
He had strength to do so and so
With Proserpine, or master tripple
Headed Cerb'rus, who does keep hell?
No no, this is the long and short
That made us hither to resort,
Troius Aeneas pietate insignis and armis
Ad genitorem imas Erebi descendit ad umbras.

To see if any where among
The Ghosts and the infernal throng,
We can by our enquiry gather
Any news of this fellows father.
Si te nulla movet tantae pietatis imago,
At ramum hunc. --

If thou art of a temper evil,
And art resolved to be uncivil,
Tarry a little, here is a bough
In butchet, look, what think you now?
With that the courage of the fool
Began to be appeased and cool.
He for a while upon it gazed
As if knocked on the head amazed.
Then to the pool like mad man flew
Coeruleam advertit puppim. --
And close to shore with chain boat drew,
Diving away from banks with pole
Every inconsiderable soul:
He took Aeneas by the arm,
And set him under a tilt warm.
Then in with much ado they lag
The old unprofitable Hag.
Gemuit sub pondere cymba
Sutilis, and multam accepit rimosa paludem.

The chinky boat was ready break
With weight, and forthwith sprang a leak.
At length he landed fleshy load,
But both up to the knees in mud.
Cerberus haec ingens latratu Regna trifauci
Personat.

And now they hear a fearful howl
With barking whine and murmuring growl
Of Cerberus, who yelpt at once
From rattling throat three several tones.
(No wonder that he still was bawling
Having thousands of vermin 'bout him crawling)
Melle soporatam, and medicatis frugibus offam
Objicit. --

The Sibyl did a wheaten scrap take
Out of Aeneas victual Snapsack,
Then tampering among it sloppy
Opium, and juice of Poppy,
She stretched it to him with colouge
Like thief in Fable tempting dog:
-- Ille fame rabida tria guttura pandit,
Et rapit objectam, atque immania terga resolvit
Fusus humi. --

He snapt it before it fell to ground,
And swallowed it in gat profound,
Which made him in less than half an hour
Stretch out in a dead sleep ali four.
Occupat Aeneas aditum.
Aeneas (you will think) did not want age
Nor wit to lay hold of advantage:
The Porter being lain fast and sure
He had possession of deaths door,
Which whether he unlockt with key
Or broke it open I cannot well say,
But I suppose, I will not swear to it,
He bounst it open by force of foot,
Because no key (you may go look)
Is hinted of in Author's book.
Continuo auditae voces, vagitus and ingens,
Infantumque animae flentes. --

No sooner were they got within
But ears were stunned with second din.
The cry of suckled brats a brawling
In louder scream than catterwauling.
They saw whole shoals of by-blow babes
That had been made away by drabs,
Some squeaking out for Mam (hard hap)
Others for teat, and sloppy pap.
Hos juxta falso damnati crimine mortis.
From thence they came into a Region
Where was a Gaol and in it a Legion
Of younger brothers, who were glad
For want of quodlibets to pad
Which were ashamed to beg, yet feel
No bite in conscience to steal;
But 'twas their fortune, though they are highborn
Sweetly to swing in noose at Tybourne.
Quaesitor Minos urnam movet ille silentum
Consiliumque movet, vitasque and crimina discit.

In these precincts lived Justice of peace
That never had palm lickt with grease,
(And 'cause our Author does confine us
To tell his name) his name was Minos:
He made a strict examination
Of every ones life and conversation:
Some he judged to whipping-post
And some he sent to foreign coast.
Some he condemned to bastinado,
And others to cruel strappado.
Many from liberty exempt
Were made for ever to beat hemp.
And thus he kept in rule and order
With punishments all that same border.
Proxima deinde tenent moesti loca qui sibi lethum
Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi
Projecere animas.

The next place that they came unto
Was the mere Barathrum of woe,
Where lay a miserable pack
Of men that died for honors sake,
Some that had drowned themselves in River,
Others thrust Poniard through Liver,
Because forsooth they could not sip
Nepenthe from a Mistress lip.
Some that had been past worldly hope
And ended all their cares with rope;
But were become the unhappier
(Out of the Drying Pan into the fire,)
Fas obstat. tristique palus inamabilis unda
Alligat. --

For here they are cramb'd up in a hole
Which always lies bedung'd and foul.
As for with brooms and mops to cleanse it
I wonder who in conscience means it,
Because like privy or a sink
The more it is stirred the more 'twill stink.
Nec procul hinc partem fusi monstrantur in omnem
Lugentes campi --
His quos durus amor crudeli tabe peredit.

From thence they came unto a Field
Which did many rueful objects yield,
Such as at Bedlam may be seen
(If Reader thou have thither been)
One was a gazing like a Sceptick
Another mused like Dialectick;
Some were a lifting up their eyes
And catching after moths and flies;
Others were reading with loud babble
But understood not a syllable;
Some were a plucking hair with claws,
And others lay a picking straws;
One did nothing else but d'off
And put his shoo again on hoof.
Others by active fancy led
Were at turning arse over head.
Some were dancing, singing, laughing,
Ranting, swearing, cursing, quaffing,
With many such like frantic fits
Common to those out of their wits.
To speak in short, there wa'nt one there
But was as mad as a March hare.
His Phaedram Procrinque locis maestamque Eriphylen.
There was also a tearing crew
Of Dames and young wenches true blue:
Joan, Cisly, Margaret, or Peg,
And bounsing Rose, as right's my leg.
-- Et juvenis quondam nunc foemina Caeneus,
Rursus and in veterem fato revoluta figuram.

Next these were double-member'd creatures
Of different and amphibious natures,
Such as can play the parts of men
And straight be women, and to'tagen.
Inter quas Phoenissa recens e vulnere Dido
Errabat syiva in magna. --

Near by these folks walked lovesick Dido
Alone within a private Meadow,
Whom when Aeneas spied through hedge
His teeth for sorrow stood an edge.
Dulcique afflatus amore est
Infoelix Dido --

Quoth he in soft heart melting phrase
With tears a trickling down his face,
Ah Dido, Dido, I am sorry
And much in grief and anguish for thee,
For since I went from Carthage town
(Where thou art well trusted and known,)
Verus mihi nuncius ergo
Venerat extinctam --
Funeris heu tibi causa fui. --

I heard thou have a months mind to me
And that was the thing did undo thee.
But may I never be worth a shilling
If I departed not unwilling;
Necessity forced me withdraw,
(Which has (as wise men say) no law)
Siste gradum, teque aspectu nec subtrahe nostro.
But prithee stay and hear me out
What now I am to say about;
I mean no harm t'yee nor abuse
If you will not tarry you may choose.
Illa solo fixos oculos aversa tenebat.
But she with choler from within swollen
Looked as the Devil looked over Lincoln.
She did no more his tatling mind,
Than if he had talked to the wind;
Tandem corripuit sese atque inimica refugit
In nemus umbriferum, conjux ubi pristinus illi
Respondet curis, aequatque Sichaeus amorem.

At length to avoid his senseless tongue
Into a neighboring wood she flung,
Hooping and hollowing for Sichaeus
Her husband, to drive off Aeneas.
Prosequitur long lachrymans. --
He followed after close to breech
Like hot grained dog pursuing bitch.
But though he did in passion burn
She was not at that time for's turn.
Therefore he seeing 'twas in vain
Turned, as he came forth back again.
-- Jamque arva tenebant
Vltima quae bello clari secreta frequentant.

From thence they trudged into a green
Where were a troop of Soldiers seen,
Men that had been bred up in wars
And well skilled in Martial affairs,
That make no more to kill a man,
Than I do to take off a Can,
Fellows of an undoubted courage,
The like can scarce be found in our age.
Hic illi occurrit Tydeus, hic inclytus armis
Parthanopaeus and --

There was Orson and Valentine
The valiant sons of King Pepin.
There were the seven Champions all,
Bevis and Amadis de Gaul,
Sir Eglamore, and Guy that slew
The dreadful Giant and Dun Cow.
With Robin-hood and Little John
And many others of renown.
Nec videre semel satis est, juvat usque morari
Et confer gradum and veniendi discere causas.

Aeneas questioned 'bout their fights,
Their hard adventures and exploits,
And what deeds they did undertake
For honors and for Ladies sake.
Et Danaum Proceres Agamemnoniaeque Phalanges
There was a troop of Grecian Dons,
Achilles, and his Myrmidons,
Ajax that was in battle haughty,
And Ulysses in counsel crafty,
With the Commanders all in chief
Who were these I shall name in brief:
Agamemnon, Diemedes,
And he, by Paris horned whose head was.
Vt videre virum --
Ingenti trepidare metu pars vertere terga.

Assoon's they saw Aeneas coming
They took their heels and fell a running
Like chaff (as they say) before the wind,
Or ship with Don-quixot behind.
Atque hic Priamiden laniatum corpore toto
Deiphobum vidit, lacerum crudeliter ora,
Ora, manus ambas, populataque tempora raptis
Auribus --

There was one among the hindermost
That by a shot both legs had lost,
But for supply two wooden ones
Were put to succor cripled bones.
His nose was off by doubtful hap
Whether by dint of sword, or clap,
The same uncertainly appears
In the sad loss of both his ears,
For generally they subject are
To Pillory as well's to War.
Aeneas in time long past knew
This shake-bag as well as I know you.
Vix adeo agnovit pavitantem, and dira tegentem
Supplicia. --

But now was at a stand (although
He looked close) whether 'twas he or no.
The fellow in this wretched case
Was quite ashamed to show his face:
Deiphobe armipotens --
Quis tam crudeles optavit sumere poenas?

Then quoth Aeneas, O Deiphob
(So was his name) with witty dry bob)
What make thou look so like a tench?
Come come, I fear thou love a wench.
The bridge is down, then (by your leave)
I may with ease the cause perceive.
I know thou were a Soldier, but
Venus in Mars his arms is shut,
And so by consequence it sounds
From Mars and Venus came these wounds.
Tunc egomet tumulum Rhoeteo littore inanem
I found thy body rent and tore
By Rooks and Crows, on Rhoetus shore,
And buried it in Churchyard bustum
Calling out thrice as 'twas the Custom.
Constitui, and magna manes ter voce vocavi.
-- Nihi tibi amice relictum.

Quoth Deiphob, friend thou have done me
As much as could be expected from thee;
You may imagine what you please
That I have had an ill disease;
I must confess, I have had play
With women, and who has not I pray?
Scelus exitiale Lacenae
His mersere malis --

But I had thoroughly sound and well been
Had it not been for pocky Hellen,
Namqueu supremam falsa inter gaudia noctem
Egerimus nosti nimium, and meminisse necesse est,
Illa chorum simulans evantes Orgia circum
Duceba Phrygias --
Tum me confectum curis somnoque gravatum
Infaelix habuit thalamus.

For that same night, (and we have reason
To remember matters of treason)
Wherein the Grecians without force
Entered the town with wooden Horse,
She danced about with mirth and glee
In jovial mood, and who but she?
She and her Comrades drank such swigs
They were all of them as drunk as pigs,
When on a sudden horse and foot
Fell upon us before we knew't,
I was at that time in my warm
Bed, a dreaming of no harm,
Sleeping without all fear and care, no
Coach could wake me or wheel-barrow.
I had (thinking all safe at home)
No sword or pistol in the room:
Intra tecta vocat Menelaum and limina pandit:
Irrumpunt thalamo. --

When this same base perfidious queen
(You know by foregoing speech who I mean)
Led in manly sort a File
Of Musqueteroes at her tail,
Who with bold resolution bore up
And rudely broke my Chamber door open,
Then rushing on me fierce and passant
Slic'e my nose off left what was on it,
And to spite my beloved wife
Cut my stones out with a Bread-knife,
Plucking me limb-meal besides
Dii talia Graiis
Instaurate, pio si poenas ore reposco.

(A plague consume for it their hides)
I wish they may de damned as black
As Buttermilk, or Oven-cake.
Sed te qui vivum casus age fare vicissim.
But what wind blew thee hither prithee
For I am much surpised to see thee?
An quae te fortuna fatigat?
Vt tristes sine sole domos loca turbida adires.

Were thou by witchcraft driven hither
Or by unluckiness of weather?
Was it a frolic moved thee (speak)
To come to the Devils Arse a peake?
Hac vice sermonum roseis Aurora quadrigis
Jam medium aetherio cursum trajecerat axe.

The day was now above half run
About three a clock in the afternoon,
The time that Plowmen have from fields
To see what bever Cupboard yields.
Sed comes admonuit, breviterque affata Sibylla est:
Nox ruit Aenaea. --

The Sibyl then put in a rub,
What do you tell us a tale of a tub?
It Is high time to be gone, quoth she,
We have other fish to fry.
Then turning to Aeneas, marry,
Quoth she, how long do you mean to tarry?
It draws toward night, if you stay
How shall we see to find our way?
Hic locus est parts ubi sevia findit in ambas.
Here is a place where four roads meet
In form like Cross of Jesuit,
Dextera quae Ditis magni sub moenia tendit:
Hac iter Elysium nobis --
-- at loeva malorum
Exercet poenas. --

The right hand to fools Paradise,
The left to Purgatory lies.
Ne saevi magna sacerdos.
Quoth Deiphob I pray, good mother,
What makes you chatt and keep a pother?
But seeing she no leave would give,
He doft his Hat and took his leave.
Aeneas as he looked a-thurt
Saw ancient Castle near a Fort,
With three walls, besides moat and ditch
Stronger than Dunkirk or Mastrich.
'Twas built of neither stone nor flint,
Neither was brick or timber in it,
But all of subtle air, watch well
Compacted was by charm and spell:
Such fabrics as St. George for glory
Invaded (as you read in story)
Vis ut nulla virum, non ipsi exscindere ferro
Coelicolae valiant. --

But of this if he had made proof,
He would have found it much more tuff.
David nor Andrew, nor the rest all,
Neither the Knight of burning Pestal,
Had not been with joint forces able
To make it not impregnable.
Grenades, Bullets, Blunderbusses
Would do no more than hostile curses.
Instead of Giant or Dragon fell
To keep at entrance Sentinel,
Tisiphoneque sedens palla succincta cruenta
Vestibulum insomnis servat. --

Tisiphone (whom Poets use
To call upon instead of Muse,
When any have a mind to purge
The vices of the age with scourge)
Stood in a mantle clad as black
As that on witch of Endors back,
And night and day did watching keep
Without so much as a dogs sleep.
Hinc exaudiri gemitus --
They listened and heard from within
Strange noises like a Newgate din,
Clinking of shackels tied to shanks
Of Malefactors, and whip-clanks,
Which were imagined to be smarter
Than those of Coachman or fierce Carter.
Those exercised on bums and breeches
Made 'em break out in cries and screeches,
Louder by far than Schoolboy howles
In Eaton, Westminster, or Powls.
Constitit Aeneas strepitumque exterritus hausit.
Aeneas at this fearful clutter
'Gan with weather-end to make butter:
Quae scelerum facies, o virgo, effare; quibusve
Vrgentur poenis, quis tantus plangor ad auras?

Mother, quoth he, since I was first born
I never heard the like combustion,
What is it a Bridewel or a Gaol,
Tell me what means there such a coil?
Tunc vates sic orsa loqui: Dux inclyte Teucrum,
Nulli fas casto sceleratum insistere limen.

Quoth she (O thou that bear command
Over Trojans all by Sea and Land)
This Castle will not opened be
Thou need'st not fear for I or thee,
For it is for such as play the rogue
And without conscience cheat and cog:
But for our parts it is well known
We are no bodies foes but our own.
Gnossius haec Radamanthus habet saevissima regna.
Within this building does inhabit
A Sorcerer in visage crabbed,
As sage as Zabarel, and as subtle
As Don Scotus, or Aristotle,
One, in a word, wiser by half
Than Balaams Ass, or Walkams Calf.
He for his most judicious learning
Has prerogative concerning
All Caitiffs that do kill or steal
And do mischief to the Common weal:
Against whom he is no less severe
Than Country Constable or Mayor,
Though rogues, as now their common use is,
Make cunning shifts and neat excuses,
Castigatque auditque dolos subigitque fateri.
Yet he can evince quirks and slaws
And know the blind side of a cause.
He Will draw confession from each soul
Either by fair means or by foul.
Some are burnt in the hand, and some
Like Soldiers vile the Gauntlet run.
Others in little ease are put
And others fast'ned head to foot.
But more than can be numbered saving
For villainy in hempen string.
-- Tum Tartarus ipse
Bis patet in praeceps tantum, tenditque sub umbras.

To tell you of dungeon without bottom
In troth I almost had forgotten.
Hic genus an iquum terrae Titania pubes.
The Grants that of old waged war
With Pikes and Gans against Juppiter
(As it is in Ovids book, which thus
Begins, In nova fert animus)
Are here one 'pon the the other rolled
To teach 'em to be proud and bold.
There lie the sons of Gath, and brood
Of those that lived before the Flood.
Vidi and crudeles dantem Salmonea poends,
Dum flammas Jovis, and sonitus imitatur olympi.

Here is the man to all folks wonder
That imitated noise of thunder,
Salmoneus named; but for my part
I rather think Gilbertus Twart,
Who is reported long agone
To be the inventor of a Gun,
For this Salmoneus was but maker
(As I have read) of Squib and Cracker,
For which (according to relation)
He got much fame and reputation:
You may see in Records of Greece
The circumstances if you please,
Some here are like dead Horses flead
And gi'n to dogs (as you may read)
Nec non and Tityon terrae omniparentis alumnum
Cernere erat, rostroque immanis vultur adunco
Immortale jecur tundens --
Quid memorem Lapithas, Ixiona --
Quos super atra silex jamjam lapsura. --

Vultures and Kites devour as many
As they did of old at Cannae.
Others are whurl'd upon a wheel,
Or crushed 'twixt hoppers of a Mill,
Till bones and very guts are torn
And ground to particles like corn.
Some have their brains dashed out with stones,
With iron bars and tough battoons.
Lucent genialibus altis
Aurea fulcra toris, epulaeque ante ora paratae.

Another trick there is devised
How wretches may be tantaliz'd,
Which by weighing its intent
Is none of the slightest punishment;
A Table spread with Beef and Mutton
As delicate as can be put on,
With figgy puddings piping hot
Newly taken out of pot,
With Veal, and Bacon, and green Pease,
Besides Pies, Tarts, Plum-cakes and Cheese,
Then down the hungry guests are placed
Only to see, not touch nor taste;
If one but snatches up a scrap
His fingers have for it a rap.
Down must again be put the victual
Let it be never so vile and little;
Woe be to him that puts his claws
In dish to slop up sugared sauce,
-- Furiarum maxima juxta
Accubat, and manibus prohibet contingere mensas.

Alecto for so small a cause
Gives him a lick across the jaws.
Hic quibus invisi fratres --
Pulsatusve parens. --

The company does most consist
Of such as live in the world as they list,
Who value not a rush their Parents,
Brothers, Sisters, Uncles, or Aunts;
And care not if the Kingdom sink
So they might have but meat and drink.
Quique arma secuti
Impia. --

Such also as out of Zeal fell on
Their King and Country in Rebellion,
And for a liberty of Conscience
Breed schisms by loud noise and nonsense,
(And Hypocrites (as old wives tell)
Shall have the hottest place in Hell)
Phlegyas --
Discite justitiam moniti and non temnere Divos.

Here Phlegyas that was a bad stick
Of heresy, and a fanatic,
Cries, O friends of self-toleration
Let my hap be to you a caution;
By Orthodox Laws be advised,
The gods ought not to be despised.
Who could expect (without offense)
That fiends could speak reason and sense?
Vendidit hic auro patriam, dominumque potentem.
Here are your Jockyes that came forth
From territories of the North,
Who stuck not to exchange for pelf
Their Country and their Prince himself.
-- Leges fixit pretio arque refixit.
Here are men that set out torutim
Statutes, but never would execute 'em,
Who handle would the purse-strings first
And then conclude which cause was just.
Besides these also there are millions
Of other sundry humored villains,
Pimps, Catchpoles, Hectors, Bully rocks
Valley de Chambers (with a pox,)
With vagabond unwholesome Varlets
That deal with Alehouse trulls, and Harlots*
Non mihi si linguae centum sint, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox. --

If I had as many tongues and mouths
As I have teeth, fingers, and toes;
If I had voice sounding louder
Than Christchurch Tom, or Westminster.
I could as soon kiss my own arse
As to run through all (by the mass)
Therefore because I would not fiddle
Give me leave to break off in the middle.
Having thus concluded fair speech
She gave a clawing scratch to bare breech;
As if a louse or twitching flea
Did 'bout her nut-brown buttocks play.
Come come, quoth she (plucking his sleeve)
Acceleremus ait, cyclopum educta caminis
Moenia conspicio. --

Let Us hasten and these quarters leave,
For not far off I spy a Smiths-forge
That does from Chimney sparkles discharge,
It Is but a wey bit before we 'gin
To get out of the Devils gin.
Dixerat, and pariter gressi per opaca viarum
Corripiunt spatium medium. --

With that she tore away with stride
More than the ordinary yard wide,
I mean with crutches, for they straddle
Whilst sustained body between waddle;
And he also shuffl'd as much
And kept in full pace with her touch.
At length they came unto a style
And there they rested for a while.
Corpusque recenti
Spargit aqua. --

Aeneas stripped off all his clothes
Unto his very shoes and hose,
And washed his sleaky skin throughout
In pool, and rubbed it with a clowt:
Then putting on his clothes again
He bid to coasts of night good even,
For now they came to sight of skies
Which made 'em twinkle with their eyes,
As usual it is (if you but mark)
To those that have been in the dark.
Devenere locos lactos, and amoena vireta.
There was a meadow green and gay
As any is in midst of May,
The Sun flamed 'pon it like a torch
Yet it did not their faces scorch:
A crew here gat together bent
To jollity and merriment:
Pars in gramineis exercent membra palaestris.
The jovial lads were in ring jostling,
To make room for appointed wrestling,
Showting as at a Wake or Feast,
Heigh for the North and heigh for the West.
Some at Skittels their time past,
Others at rub and a good cast.
From Arbours all about the Close
Was music heard like twang of nose,
From windpipes that in form and figure
Resemble Glysters, though much bigger.
Hundreds a sitting on stools and benches
Slobber'd and tows'd the Country wenches;
Some had a special love for pretty
Abigail, and some for Betty;
Whilst wags and arch anointed cracks
Trol'd ballads full of pleasant knacks.
So every one performed his part,
Or told a tale, or let a fart.
In another part of spacious green
Pars pedibus plaudunt choreas. --
A sort of Revellers were seen
In holland Drawers, lac't Crevats,
Hair tied with ribbands, but no Hats,
Who wearing on their feet light pumps
Trac't 'long the path with ambling jumps:
One bore a kind of little Drum
And fumpt it with finger and thumb,
Which made the bells that round it were
Sound like those at forehorses ear;
Ask what they were, the vulgar answers,
They were (as they call 'em) Morrice-dancers.
In places distant and remote
From scoundrel or inferior sot
Hic genus antiquum Teucri pulcherrima proles.
Were many a gallant spark, and Lady
As any in Hide park of May day:
Some Capapee a horseback rid
Like French Mounsieur or Spanish Cid,
With Lances held in warkike fists
As just preparing for the lists.
Others in Coaches rid at ease
Sleeping, or picking lapdogs fleas.
There was also in other places
Hunting, Hawking, and Horse-races,
With many other such like kind
Of sports, as people were inclined.
Conspicit ecce alios dextra laevaque per herbam
Vescentes, laetumque choro Paeana canentes.

Close by a purling Rivers side
Where streams did with a torrent glide,
Sat sage Philosophers discoursing
And knotty Syllogisms scorcing
With Wits of the age and men of parts
Masters of Sciences and Arts,
And Poets (not whose bloodless vein
Can produce nothing besides rhyme,
For look in Iter Boreale
You Will find much rhyme, but sense will fail ye;
Or have you heard of Poetaster
That set a Poem out but last year,
That treated of the Kings returning
And of the Cities plague and burning?
He nurtured was (the more's the pity)
In the Oxford Universitty,
Read but that Poem, and in it
You Will find much fancy, little wit.)
I know of more such, but it is best
To go back from whence we digrest.
The Sibyl got among this gang
And to 'em made a large harangue.
Musaeus taller was by the head
Than all the rest with tiptoe tread,
Standing in the midst like a Colosse
Or' mong footmen man 'pon a Horse;
Quos circumfusos sic est affata Sibylla,
Musaeum aute omnes. --

Whom she with eye chiefly respected,
And to him most her speech directed:
Dicite foelices animae, Tuque optime vates
Quae regio Anchisem, quis habet locus? --

O happy Sirs, friends to the Muses,
I pray speak where Anchises house is?
We are but strangers to this coast
And know the way no more than a post.
Quoth he in civil manner (Mistress)
Truly here are no Edifices,
Nulli certa domus, lucis habitamus apertis.
No certain habitation
Have we that we can call our own.
We live where we can get (god bless us!)
In mazes, woods, and wildernesses.
But hold let me consider, stay
By the cast of the Country that is your way
Hoc superate jugum. --
Over that hill, some two miles off,
Look just directly against my staff.
But come seeing you strangers are,
I Will bring you on the way so far.
Dixit, and ante tulit gressum. --
Then on he led the way until
They came on the other side of the hill:
In Valley at the foot of it,
At Pater Anchises penitus convalle virenti
Inclusas animas superumque ad lumen ituras
Lustrabat studio recolens, omnemque suorum
Forte recensebat numerum. --

Anchises did on Mole-bank sit,
Musing in melancholy sort
With hands to ears, and all a mort,
In study deep and meditation,
Casting upon his generation,
Their fortunes, livings, and estates,
And circumstances of the Fates.
Isque ubi tendentem adversum per gramina vidit.
But when he saw his Son Aeneas
Coming toward him through the grass,
He roused himself from thoughts and dumps
And up like one of twenty, jumps,
Stretching both arms out for his boy,
And wept out like a child for joy.
His passion did so crowd his throat
A while he could not speak a note.
At length recovering his speech
By tweak of nose and scratch of breech,
Venisti tandem --
-- Datur oratueri
Gnate tua, and notas audire and reddere voces?

Quoth he, welcome my lad of gold,
Do I thy countenance behold?
I Am in a maze, art thou the same
I talk to, or am I in a dream?
Not half an hour ago at end
Sic equidem ducebam animo rebarque futurum.
I had discourses with a friend,
Wherein you were the chief concerns;
Talk of the Devil and see his horns.
Quos ego te terras and quanta per aequora vectum
Accipio, quantis jactatum, guate, periclis.

When of thy dangers I did hear
It cost me many a sigh and tear,
For fear thou should in passing thorough
So many difficulties know sorrow.
He having made conclusion, his Son
Began with mannerly submission.
Had I come of my own head, you will,
Quoth he, (dear Father) call me fool,
autem, Tua me genitor tua tristis imago
Saepius oc arrens haec limina tendere adegit.

Were not for your continual haunting,
My presence now had here been wanting.
But seeing my time's but short, Father,
Da jungere dextram
da, genitor, teque amplexu ne subtrahe nostro.

Come let us for shame shake hands together,
It Is fit Father and Son should hug:
Puh, quoth Anchises, Coxen pug.
Then tears began to trickle out
As fast as water from a spout.
Have you not read of Aesops dog,
That instead of substantial prog
With greedy snarie at shadow snapt
Whilst real flesh in water dapt?
Or rather as Ixion woed
With wanton grasps an empty cloud:
Ter conatus ibi collo dare brachia circum,
Ter frustra comprensa manus effugit imago.

Aeneas just in such a sort
Did incorporeal Father court,
But Ghost was in compliance shy,
And like a coy wench put him by.
Have you not (in Glamorgan-shire)
From mountain high up in the air,
Looked down upon the Country under
And seen blind houses lie asunder,
Houses of turf and thatcht, wherein
People do live that card and spin?
Hunc circum innumerae gentes, populique volabant.
Ac veluti inpratis, ubi apes aestate serena
Floribus insidunt, strepit omnis murmr campus.

Aeneas such a Valley spied
From ascent where he did abide.
And (once again) have you not seen
In any place where you have been,
In Summer-season swarms of bees,
Or Chafers roaming 'bout the trees,
Or Grasshoppers, or eager Ants
A tugging to relive their wants?
So many folks he did descry,
And if you will believed you may.
And as it is the nature of those,
So these did also hum and buz.
Or rather like as you may hear
In Market or tumultuous Fair.
Horrescit visu subito causasque requirit
Inscius Aeneas. --

Aeneas was at first amazed
And like one knocked in the head gazed.
Quoth he, what means that yonder feud?
So much disorder cannot be good.
Lethaei ad fluminis undam
Securos latices, and Ionga oblivia potant.

Quoth Anchises, these drink a liquour
Called Lethe, which is by much quicker
Than March beer, bottle-ale, or mead,
And sooner flies up to the head:
They drink this so long till the Elves
Grow sottish and forget themselves,
And here they madly drink whole ones
Till they put on new flesh and bones.
I could tell many pleasant stories
Relating to these drunken Tories,
Jampridem hancprolem cupio enumerare meorum.
But I must tell of noble Heroes
That shall be to the world mere scare-crows,
Who though we look like fools shall be
Dashed from the loins of I and thee.
But hold, quoth Aeneas, pray hold,
Father (if I may be so bold)
Let me (before you proceed on)
Propose to you one question:
O pater anne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum
Sublimes animas, iterumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora. --

Why should the staring Jacanoddies
Desire to resume new bodies?
Quoth Anchises, I Will tell thee all
By notions Philosophical,
As orderly as Problem is
When Ergo follows premises.
Principio, coeium and terras camposque liquentes
Lucentemque globum lunae Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit. --

The Sun and Moon, Stars, Earth and Ocean
Internal Spirits have, and motion,
And (as the Stoics have defined)
There rules in them a certain mind,
Which does material part control,
As body managed is by Soul;
Inde hominum pecudumque genus. --
These second causes are, whence spring
Existency to every thing,
To all sorts of beasts, fish, and fowl
(Let it be Badger, Dace or Owl)
There Is not an individual being,
But from these Elements you see spring,
(For nothing Nature can create
Without earth, water, air, and heat;)
These four, as it were, being tried,
And in a Limbick rarefied,
Igneus est illis vigor and coelestis origo
Seminibus. --

Turns into life, which leaps and mounts
Like quicksilver upon the joints,
And as it is variously composed,
So variously it is disposed,
Hinc metuunt cupiuntque, dolent gaudentque. --
For now in appetite it is boiled,
Another time in grief turmoil'd,
To day it sneaks and shrinks for fear
With jealousy, doubt, and despair,
To morrow fits of joy come in
Making it ready leap from skin.
Quin and supremo cum lumine vita reliquit,
Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt pestes. --

Now when this life forsakes the lump
Of body by deaths utmost thump,
It Is tossed and tumbled in the air
Like smoke or feather here and there,
It has no clothes, no not a smock
So much to keep it from a shock:
Sometimes it feels the heavy rap
Of hailstones or a thunderclap:
In Sunbeams fried, in frost benumbed,
By showers half-drown'd, and by storms thrumb'd:
Thus being naked becomes more
Weather-beaten than before.
But like a ship that has been banded
By waves and winds at length is landed,
So after difficulties have been
It shall arrive to quiet haven:
Then when time's snake is wreathed about
This life is cleans'd and purged throughout,
From filthy thoughts with which 'twas tainted
When with the lower air acquainted:
Exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium. --

It Is put into a modish dress
Pestered with weather, lice or fleas.
Dixerat Anchises: gnatumque unaque Sibyllam
Conventus trahit in medios turbamque sonantem,
Et tumulum capit. --

Anchises had his fair speech ended,
Which nothing to the purpose tended.
Then down the way he led along
Toward the giddy-headed throng:
Himself, the Sibyl and his Son
Got up upon a tomb of stone,
Because they thought it not so good
To be at flats with multitude:
Besides if there had been no less thing
'Twas cause enough to avoid pressing.
Now quoth Anchises fix your eyes
And mark what Spirits shall arise,
I Will show you plainly to your face
The Chavalieroes of our race;
Who shall in Italy bear sway,
And from the rest bear bell away;
Ille vides pura juvenis qui nititur hasta
Proxima sort tenet lucis loca. --

He there that wears his Hat a cockt
With Javelin in his clutches locked,
Shall first drop from the womb of night
Into the Regions of light,
Quem tibi longaevo ferum Lavinia conjux
Educet sylvis. --

Whom thou shall get upon thy wife
At the latter end of life,
So that people of the town
Shall say the child is not thy own:
One that shall be as stout I Will warrant
As any Knight that ere rid errant.
The next is Procas of high worth,
With Capys, Numitor and so forth.
But look what yonder fellows are
Qui juvenes quantas ostentant aspice vires.
See how they swagger, huff and swear,
As if they would drink dry a fountain
And swallow at one bit a mountain:
These shall convert wild heaths and downs
Into Mart and Burrough-towns.
Nomentum, Fidenae, and Bola,
Pomety, Gabii and Cora,
In every one of which a Mayor
Shall the sword of Justice bear,
With reverend Aldermen assistants
To Carbonadoe rogues, and miscreants.
Quin and avo comitem sese Mavortius adds
Romulus. --

Next Romulus, the Bully Rock,
Comes strutting like a Turky-cock;
Fame and report in time to come
Shall sound as loud as trump and drum,
And glory with a golden stamp
Shall coin his name as bright as lamp:
Have you not seen town full of people
Wherein stands a Cathedral steeple,
Which for it is bulk and antiquity
Is termed by Geopraphers a City?
En hujus, Gnate, auspiciis illa inclyta Roma
Imperium terris, animos aequabit olympo,
Septemque una sibi muro circundabit arces
Foelix prole virum. --

Such a Town Romulus shall found
And call it Rome for stately sound,
With walls and seven Towers lofty
To keep it in defense and safety.
Housekeepers dwelling in this place
Shall be very well to pass
By the advantages of trade
And traffic which shall seldom fade:
From Bankers, Scriveners and Drapers
To old shoos, boots, and kennel-scrapers,
Scarce one but shall have in his purse
Enough to buy a score of us.
Huc geminas nunc flecte acies --
Romanosque tuos, hic Caesar and omnis Iuli
Progenies. --

But bend both eyes hitherward, son,
Here are the men when all is done,
These are Romans against weather,
As true as ever trod shoe-leather,
Fierce Julius, surnamed Caesar,
Who domineer shall at his pleasure,
With a mighty, high renowned Augustus,
That shall be at the least a Justice.
Super and Garamantas and Indos
Proferet imperium. --

He shall have jurisdiction over
Turk, Tartar, Scythian, Jew and Moor,
Extending out his power and sway
Farther than Horse can reach a day:
Governors of Forts and Castles
Shall yield their rights up and be Vassals
In future expeditions, cries he,
Io, veni, vidi, vici:
Nec vero Alcides tantum telluris obivit
Fixerit aeripidem cervam licet. --

He shall march to remoter coasts
Than where Alcides set up posts;
Alcides it is known well enough
Slew monstrous Stag with brazen hoof
And by the force of Cudgel basted
Wild Bore that Woods and Forests wasted.
Nec qui pampineis victor juga flectit habenis
Liber agens celso Nysae de vertice tygres.

Bacchus indeed in wrath and quarrel
Bestrid triumphant butt and barrel
Drawn by a team of tugging Swine
Who raged with dreadful grunt and whine:
But what of that? Augustus shall come
To have the Government of all Rome.
Therefore O son, why art thou fearful,
Bestir thy stumps and go on cheerful,
Words are but wind, nothing but action
Can give a wise man satisfaction.
Quis procul ille autem ramis insignis olivae.
But stay, what whipster gay and trim
With black Mustachoes on his chin
Moves on with slow and gentle pace?
Methinks (troth) I should know his face;
Gramercy (now I recollect)
It Is Tullus sage and circumspect,
He shall be the man of the age,
And guide times in right equipage,
Reforming illegitimate Brutes
By power of wholesome Laws and Statutes,
-- Quem juxta sequitur jactantior Anchus
Nunc quoque jam nimium gaudens popularibus armis.

Next Anchus height that swells as big
As Aesops toad or roasted pig,
One who ('it is pity) even now is
Conceited boaster of his prowess.
Vis and Tarquinios Reges, animamque superbam
Vltoris Bruti? --

Yonder comes supercilious Tarquin,
(He Is worth your observation, mark him)
Next Brutus with dire threat and frown
Follows like snarling Curr at clown,
This Brutus shall for freedom barter
And stand up stiff for City Charter.
He Will not admit or hear of thing
That sounds like Emperor or King,
He Will be a jot no more at odds
With Devils, than with earthly gods.
The man will therefore quite cashier 'em
And out by root and branches tear 'em,
Consulis hic primum imperium, saevasque secures
accipiet. --

So that by dealing with them fiercely
He Will tumble all things arsy versy:
As when the head submits to tail,
And State dwindles to Commonweal,
When Crown is do in humble rate
To a Plebeian new-fumpt Hat,
When crafty roundheads booty share
Ravished from honest Cavalier,
And those that were subjects before
Usurp authority and power,
When dame Religion and Zeal
From crimes to Justice do appeal,
And good deeds are but flams and flaws
If not in defense of the cause;
So Brutus Tarquin did out-hector
That he himself might be Protector.
His two sons from the very strummel
Shall be as loyal as Dick Cromwell,
And often at the barrels head and board
Shall drink healths to their fathers Landlord.
At length they will make an insurrection,
Gnatosque pater nova bella moventes
Ad poenam pulchra pro liberate vocabit.

But father brings 'em to correction.
First he will have the wretches stripped
And by the common hangman whipped,
With Cat a nine tails, until blood
Shall run down sides in purple flood,
And then they shall be packing sent
To be on scurvy gibbet pent,
Thus they shall be used worse than dogs,
Hanged, drawn and cut abroad like hogs,
And quarters shall be stuck 'pon hooks
To be devoured by pies and rooks.
Quin Decios Drusosque procul. --
Next come the Decii sworn brothers
By one father but several mothers.
-- Et referentem signa Camillum.
Camillus also, in fleet who
Shall be the Admiral of the Blew,
With the ill natured grim Torquatus
Who looks as if he had a mind to 'ate us.
Ille autem paribus quas fulgere cernis in armis
Concordes animae nunc, and dum nocte premuntur,
Heu! quantum inter se bellum si lumina vitae
Attigerin^? --

Yonder come two who now in love
You may perceive are hand and glove,
But their society together
Seems too great to last for ever.
At length they will alter in a word
From all honey into all t --
Though in civility it is fit
Ne Pueri ne tanta animis assuescite bella.
The elder should have the more wit,
And the other should have so much grace
To know his quality and place.
Eruet ille Argos Agamemnoniasque Mycenas.
The one shall do more harm in Greece
Than he that stole the Golden-fleece
He Will bring large bowties and rich Cargo's
From Corinth, Mycene, and Argos:
Much plate from thence in Carts and Wagons,
Tankards, Basins, Bowls, and Flaggons,
To Rome in triumph shall be led in
(Nay) even their very bed and bedding.
Quis te magne Cato tacitum, te Cosse relinquat?
Yonder appear Cato and Cossus
Who look graver than brewers horses,
With Gracchus and bold Scipio,
That will to fighting sooner go
Than others to their meat and drink
(The Devil's in 'em troth I think.)
Next comes Fabricius who shall know well
Mysteries of State and Plow-tail,
A Husbandman by his profession,
And yet a plaguey Politician.
-- Vel te sulco Serrane serentem?
With Serranus, that to a nail
Shall not come short of Machivail,
And yet he will be bred but a Yeoman
Though afterward in power some man.
Excudent alii spirantia mollius era --
Let some know how to shapen metal
Into porridge-pot and kettal,
And others may have special skill
In sawing deal-board in a Mill.
And some have found out arts and ways
To form hard iron how they please,
Make grates for Seacoal, Andirons, Jacks,
With forty other household knacks,
Such as Shovel, Tongs and Fork,
And hook to fetch out bottle-cork.
Vivos ducent de marmore vultus.
Others may cut out in a stone
The statue of Hero and Don,
And of the same stone make the shape
Of Lion, Mongrel, Horse or Ape.
Some in the Mathematics may
Have a thousand things to say,
Tell of what figure Rhombus is,
Cylindrus, Prisma, Pyramid,
Know how the Chapter agrees
With the Conus, Basis, and the Freez.
-- Coelique meatus
Describent radio, and surgentia sidera. --

Who by plodding devices can hit
The height of such and such a planet,
And in a narrow shindle take
The compass of the Zodiac.
Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento,
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos.

But O thou son of Rome let this
Be thy only master piece,
To have an order and decorum
In the affairs of Court and Forum,
Be kind to honest bully Sanders
But pluck down proud and saucy panders.
Sic Pater Anchises atque haec mirantibus addit:
Aspice. --

So said Anchises and withal,
Quoth he, here comes a General,
That shall the Carthaginians slay
And flash the French men hip and thigh.
Aeneas spied out one that had
A good face, but his looks were bad,
With folded arms and lover-wise
Having his Hat down over his eyes:
O Father, quoth he then, I wonder
What may be he there that goes yonder?
Quis strepitus circa comitum. --
Lord what a bustle, what a Courtship
Is there to attend his worship,
By this retinue he seems one sure
Of no small quality and honor,
Sed nox atra caput tristi circumvolat umbra.
And yet methinks I spy some mark
Denotes him to be a shark.
Tum Pater Anchises, lachrymis ingressus obortis.
Then, quoth Anchises, weeping sore,
This will be a mere son of a whore;
A Caterpillar, Rascal, Rogue,
A Thief, a Villain, Puppy-dog,
One that will be a very moth
Of The Family, the scum and froth,
And yet the whelp will be a Soldier
None more resolute and bolder,
He Will make a venture of his neck on
Any exercise and weapon,
He Will fight (this of him may be sed)
With any man that wears a head.
Sic tota passim regione vagantur
Aeris in campis latis, atque omnia lustrant.

Thus Father, Son, and the old Woman
Walked along the Elysian Common,
Mingling discourses here and there,
And building Castles in the air.
Sunt geminae somni portae. --
Somnus the lazy god of sleep
Two doors to enter in does keep,
The eyes, to wit, which are supposed
Sometimes open, sometimes closed:
Aeneas had lain long a napping
(These doors being shut) in quiet Cabin,
When on a sudden opening them
He found he had been in a dream.
FINIS.

