An Account from PARIS of the ARTICLES Of PEACE concluded betwixt the Two
Crowns of FRANCE And SPAIN.
THE Articles of the Peace signed by the King of Spain, ever since the 17th
Currt in Spanish, were received by an Express; and at the same time that they
were received in France, the King of Spain received them Signed by the King in
French.

The Cardinal gave them to the Marquis Pimentel to explain them, and he gave
him them again the ninteenth. They are Signed by the two Kings, and two
Ministers of State.

The Articles are, That we restore to the King of Spain Mortara, Valentia, and
all that was taken from him in Italy, Rosas in Catalonia, Graveling, La Bassee,
Montmedy, and Thionville. Arras remains in our hands, and they give us Cambray,
the County of Artois, Perpignan, and the County of Roussillon, as a Dowry to
the Infanta in Marriage to our King.

The Duke of Guize is to go into Spain to fetch the Infanta; and the Interview
of both the Kings and both the Queens is to be at Bayonne, where the King
intends to go very shortly, with all his Court.

The Cardinal has dispatched away two Posts, one to his Holiness, and the
other to the Prince of Conde, to give notice of what is past.

The Peace is to be published, as is believed, the first of May, between both
the Armies.

The Prince of Conde has sent a Blanck to the King, to fill as he shall
please, demanding nothing of him but his favor: he is to remain three years
without returning to the Court, during which time he may stay at Rocroy,
Catelet, or at Anjou. In the mean time, he shall enjoy his Revenue according to
appointment.

The Duke of Enguien his son returns to Paris, to continue his Exercises,
Lodgings are preparing for him at the house of Monsieur de Menoult. It is
reported, that he has sent to Complement Mademoiselle Hortance, Niece to the
Cardinal. The King gives him the Survivancy and Revenue of his father's
Offices.

The English are comprised in the Peace. The Spaniard consents, that we should
redeem or regain Dunkirk, which probably may be done, in consideration of a
Million of Money to defray their charges.

The Marquis of Piementel is within few days to take upon him the quality of
Ambassador.

The Duke of Lorrain is also set at liberty, and his Country is to be restored
wholly to him, excepting Nancy, which we are to keep yet six years.

The Letters from Bayonne of the 19th Currt do certify the arrival of the
Plate-Fleet at St. Andre in Gallicia, being in number fifty Gallions.

Yesterday departed hence an Express to the Emperor, to communicate these
Articles to him from the King.

FINIS.

