An ACCOUNT of a Second Victory obtained over the Turks by the Imperial Army in
Servia. And of the taking the Counterscarp, and the other Outworks of BONNE, by
Storm.
Published by Authority.
Vienna, October. 2, 1689.
Just now arrives here the Baron Hauck from the Imperial Army under the Command
of Prince Louis of Baden; with the following good News.
PRince Louis of Baden understanding that the Serasquier was drawing what
Forces he could together near Nissa, and that he had begun to entrench himself,
he decamped on the 23d of September, with a resolution to attack the Enemy; and
arrived the next day with the Imperial Army near Nissa: He found the Enemy
posted in a very advantageous place, above 40000 strong, and their Camp very
well fortified. The Imperialists, who could not be discouraged by any
Difficulties, advanced toward the Enemy, to force them to a Battle: And, about
five in the Evening, the Fight begun, which was very sharp for some time; but
our Men pressed so hard upon the Turks, that they at last broke their Body, and
put them to flight: It is reckoned, that above 6000 were slain, and the
Slaughter would have been much greater, had not the coming on of the Night
hindered our pursuit. We took 29 pieces of Cannon, all the Enemies Tents,
Baggage, etc. And the next day our Troops entered, without any opposition, into
Nissa, which is fortified with several Redoubts, a good Ditch, and Palissado's.

From the Camp before Bonne, October. 11.
ON the 9th instant, about four in the Afternoon, we stormed the Counterscarp
with 8000 Men, the Brandenburghers on the Right, and the Hollanders and
Munsteriens on the Left; and, after a warm dispute of about two hours, made our
selves Masters of it, and of two Half-Moons, with the loss on our side of about
800 Men killed and wounded, and 600 of the Enemy. At the same time the
Imperialists attacked and took the Hornwork, with little loss; and afterward
lodged themselves likewise on the Counterscarp. During the Assault, as well on
the Counterscarp as the Hornwork, the Enemy sprang several Mines, but with
little effect. After the Fight was over, Count Alsfelt, the Governor, desired a
Suspension of Arms for two hours, (which was granted;) and offered to surrender
the place upon certain Conditions, one of which was, That 20 Persons should be
permitted to march out masked; but the Elector of Brandenburgh absolutely
rejected them. In the Night we lodged our selves in the Ravelins, the
Contregard, and in the Ditch; and fixed our Miners to the Body of the place.
The next morning the Enemy again beat a Parley, and, Hostages being exchanged,
three Officers were sent out of the Town with new Proposals; but his Electoral
Highness would only allow the Garrison to be Prisoners of War; however the
Treaty still continues, and the Suspension is prolonged till this day at Noon;
and if the Besieged do not, by that time, accept of the Terms that are offered
them, we shall storm the Town.

The principal Officers killed or wounded in the Assault on the Counterscarp
are, The Lieutenant Generals Delwich and Swarts lightly wounded; the
Major General Baron de Heyde wounded in the Arm, and Major General Belling in
the Shoulder; Colonel Kroesmarke and Colonel Swerin killed; and Colonel Count
de Dona wounded. Lieutenant Colonel Natsmer wounded; Major Prus killed; and
Major Grand dangerously wounded; with several other inferior Officers killed
and wounded.

Yesterday the Duke of Lorrain received by an Express the News of another
defeat of the Turks near Nissa.

Printed by Edward Jones in the Savoy, 1689.


