Sober and Useful REFLECTIONS UPON A TREATISE OF Mr. RICHARD BAXTER'S, STYLED,
[Sacrilegious Desertion of the Holy Ministry rebuked, and Tolerated Preaching
of the Gospel vindicated.] WITH A most serious PREFACE to the same, Out of the
said, Mr. BAXTER.

Written about eight years since, and not Printed, but now made Seasonable to
be Published, by the Repetition of some Material Points, which are here
reflected on, in Mr. Baxter's late Hasty Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon.

-- Nonumque premantur in Annum. LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

To his Respected Friend, Mr. R. C. BOOKSELLER.
SIR,
THe ensuing Reflections were written about eight years since, and then upon
the coming out of a more particular Defense from the Worthy Person immediately
concerned, [call'd, The Doctrine of Schism fully opened, and applied to
Gathered Churches, 1672.] were consigned by the Author to a perpetual
obscurity: But since this Daring Champion has entered the Field again in his
battered Armor, and threatened to appear still further in the self-same Cause
and Argument, the Publication of these Notes is made seasonable, to the intent
that he himself, and others, may take notice, what Advances have been already
made by him; and how, notwithstanding the Flourishes of his Anger and
Ostentation, he has really little afresh to offer unto the World, but odious
Repetitions only.

And to this purpose, if you please, you may print them: And together with
them, this Honorable Character, which one of his professed Friends bestows
upon him:

[That he never yet wanted Argument against the Cause, or Rebuke against the
Person of any Man that ever opposed him.

That he has Troops of Propositions always at command, and so many Yokes of
Distinctions, as to make good whatsoever he has said, be it never so bad.

That he has one very strange and wonderful piece of Artifice, that be the
Controversy what it will, he can make his Adversary differ with him about the
Existence of a God and Christ, an Heaven and Hell.

Nay, that he can make him say any thing that he himself thinks he can most
easily oppose; or if he cannot make him say it, affirm and prove that he says
it, and then thunder out a Volume against him for saying so.

In a word, That He is the Man of [One that has read Lullius, and his
Commentators.] Answ. to Dr. Stilling. p. 45.
Art, that can do and undo, prove and disprove the same thing.]

Which yet I had not added here, but that it is so very agreeable to his new
Attempts.

It would have looked more modishly perhaps, to have entitled the Book,
Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter. The truth is, as it was said of
Arcesilas, He has introduced Genus Philosophiae (...), a self-contradicting
Philosophy, which, if it prevail, will fill the World with Skepticism, and
endless Disputations. [(...).] And if there be any thing that seems severe in
these Reflections, he must thank himself for it, who has furnished the
Collector with so many Materials: So easy a thing it is for self-esteeming Men
to talk to their own Reproach, as he somewhere has it.

But nevertheless I am for retaining still the more modest and less affected
Title.

SIR, I am Your Friend and Servant, M. A.
July 20. 1680.
A most Serious PREFACE Out of Mr. RICHARD BAXTER.
To the Christian Reader.
IF I speak plainly of the Quality of the Author's Arguings, Sacril. Desert.
page 4.
I desire the Reader not to interpret it, as if I had not the heartiest desire
of Peace. -- But Words are not answered according to their Nature, when the
Nature of them is not opened. -- Plain-dealing is not the Sign of Enmity, but
Love. Page 132.


The Law is open, our Writings and Doctrines are easily tried.
If we say Evil, bear Witness of the Evil. Page 32.


Mark that Preacher, Conformable or Nonconformable, who stirs hardest for
his own Honor, Page 88.
and would raise it by dishonouring others, and is most impatient of all that
cloudeth him, and is only for those that set him up; and look out no further
for a Mark of Badness,
but take that Man for one of the worst, how wellsoever he preach or pray.

Art thou ready to censure the Doctrine of thy Teachers, the Actions of thy
Rulers, and the Persons of thy Brethren? Beyond doubt thou art a proud Person;
Saints everlast* Rest.
Pride has seized on thy Heart: There is too much Hell in thee, to have any
acquaintance with Heaven. -- There is no more Heaven than there is Humility.

Certainly Pride is a greater Sin than Whoredom or Drunkenness; Gild. Sal^ian.
p. 179.
and Humility is as necessary as Chastity and Sobriety. Truly, Brethren, a Man
may as certainly, and more slily and dangerously, make haste to Hell in a way
of Profession, and earnest Preaching of the Gospel, and seeming Zeal for an
holy Life, as in a way of Drunkenness and Filthiness.

Above all, see that you be Followers of Peace and Unity, both in the Church,
Epist. Ded. to Saints everlast. Rest.
and among your selves. He that is not a Son of Peace, is nor a Son of God. All
other Sins destroy the Church consequentially,
but Division and Separation destroy it directly. Building of the Church is but
an orderly joining of the Materials; and what then is Disjoining, but pulling
down? Many Doctrinal Differences must be tolerated in a Church; and why,
but for Unity of Peace? Therefore Disunion and Separation is utterly
intolerable. Believe not those to be the Churches Friends,
that would cure and reform her by cutting of her Throat. Those that say, No
Truth must be concealed for Peace, have usually as little of the one as the
other.
Ibid.
-- Do not your Hearts bleed, to look upon the State of England, and to think,
how few Towns or Cities there be, where there is any Forwardness in Religion,
that are not cut into Shreds, and crumbled as to Dust, by Separations and
Divisions? To think what a Wound we have hereby given to the Christian Name? --

Ibid.
I differ from many in several Doctrines of Moment, -- And yet if I shall
zealously press my Judgment on others, and seek to make a Party for it,
and disturb the Peace of the Church, and separate from my Brethren, I should
fear lest I should prove a Firebrand in Hell, for being a Firebrand in the
Church. And for all the Interest I have in your Judgment and Affections, I here
charge you, that if God should give me up to any Factious Church-rending
Course,
against which I daily pray, that you forsake me, and follow me not a step. --

I thought once, that all that talked against Schisms and Sects, did but vent
their Malice against the best Christians under those Names: Pref. to C^re of
Church Divis.
But since that, I have seen what Love-killing Principles have done. I have
long stood by, while Churches have been divided and subdivided; one
Congregation of the Division laboring to make the other contemptible and
odious, and this called the Preaching of Truth, and the purer Worshipping of
God.
I have seen this grow up to the height of Ranters, in horrid Blasphemies; and
then of Quakers, in disdainful Pride and Surliness; and into the way of
Seekers, that were to seek for a Ministry, for a Church, a Scripture, and
consequently a Christ. I have many times heard it break out into more horrid
Reviling of the best Ministry, and godliest People, than ever I heard from the
most malignant Drunkard. I have lived to see it put to the Question, in that
which they called the Little Parliament, Whether all the Ministers of the
Parishes of England should be put down at once? When Love was once killed in
their own Breasts by those same Principles which I here detect. I have seen how
confidently the Killing of the King,
the Rebellious Demolishing of the Government of the Land, the Killing of many
Thousands of their Brethren, the Turnings and Overturnings of all kind of Rule,
even that which they themselves set up, have been committed, and justified, and
profanely fathered upon God. These, with more such Fruits of Love-killing [
King-killing] Principles and Divisions, I have seen. And if after so long, so
sad, so notorious Experience, you would have me still to be tender of the Brood
of Hell, I mean, these Love-destroying Ways,
and to show any countenance to that which really has done all this: you would
have me as blind as the Sodomites, and as obdurate as Pharaoh and his
Egyptians, and utterly resolved never to learn the Will of God, or to regard
either Good or Evil in the World. -- The same Sins are continued in without
Repentance.
And how guilty are those Ministers of the Blood of Souls, that will not tell
Men of their Sin and Danger?

He that after the Experiences of this Age, Cure of Church Divis. p. 365.
will think it fit to follow the Conduct of Injudicious Zealots, is left as
inexcusable, as almost any Man that never had a Sight of Hell.


Preach Faith and Repentance, the common Catechism-Principles, (which are of
greatest need and use, Sacril. Desert. p. 94.
and require the greatest Skill in Preachers,) the Baptismal Covenant, the
Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Decalogue; and do not, on pretense of going
higher, trouble the Peoples Heads with unnecessary things, nor turn them after
vain Janglings, much less against Conformity, or any thing that reflecteth upon
the Parish-Ministers. You may quickly kindle in your Religious Hearers,
a factious opinionative kind of Zeal, that shall make them Firebrands in the
Church, and no whit tend to save their Souls; and you may deceive your selves
by exercising an opinionative Zeal, whilst you think you are doing the Work of
Christ.


If there be any among you, that by such a sinful unpeaceable Zeal, Ibid. p. 95.
will be censuring and deriding Conformists, -- and making them odious to the
Hearers, rebuke them sharply, and cherish not their Sin:
And if they hear not, rebuke them before all; and if they amend not, cast them
out of your Communion. And, as you love your selves, the Church, and others,
let not the proudest censorious People be your Masters: Take heed of that base
complying Humor,
that makes some they dare not displease them, lest they should call them as
bad as they do the Conformists. But if you come to this, it is the Women and
Boys, that have least Knowledge, and most proud censorious Passions, that will
be the Church Governors. Keep your Authority, let them take it how they will,
and be not servile Followers of the Peoples Errors and Irregular Ways.

If you set your selves in a dividing Way, secretly to rejoice at the
Conformable Minister's disparagement, Ibid. p. 90, 91.
and to draw as many from him as you can, you are but Destroyers of the Church
of God:
Call your selves what you will, I call you Destroyers, if you are Dividers.

Preach zealously for Love, against Love-killing envious Zeal: Teach them to
know that all Men are imperfect and faulty, Ibid. p. 95, 96, 97.
and so is all Men's Worship of God;
and that he that will not communicate with faulty Worship, must renounce
Communion with all the World, and all with him. Unteach them that false
Conceit, that all Book-Prayers are unlawful, yea, or all that is imposed.
Read over to them those Psalms, which have frequent Repetitions and Responses,
that they may know that such are not unlawful. If it be lawful for the People
to sing God's Praise, it is not unlawful to say it: Do you doubt of the
Consequence? Prove to us what difference there was between the Ancient Singing,
and our Laudatory Saying, and you will find your Task too hard. Unteach them
that paultry Principle of placing Religion in being cross to the rest of the
Congregation;
as when they will not stand up at the Creed, or at the Hymns of Praise, when
Reason and Use tell us, that standing up is a convenient praising Gesture: and
when the Primitive Churches (from an unknown Original, calling it an
Apostolical Tradition,) unanimously commanded Standing only in all the Lord's
Days Adorations; which because we cannot now well observe, it is decently
confined to Praises only. And in this the Conformists do better and more
decently than you. And it is sorry Perverseness to fly from a better Way,
because others use it. Unteach them their unwarrantable Self-made Tests of
Church Communion,
as if there must be any other Proof of Holiness needs given, besides a sober
Profession of Christianity, that is, of the Baptismal Covenant, not provedly
contradicted by Heresy or a wicked Life. If we are Nonconformists, because we
cannot comply with all invented incapable Terms of Communion from others, why
shall we make such Engines to divide the Church our selves, and do the very
things which we condemn in others?
Unteach them their expectations, that all the Church must be satisfied of the
Sincerity of each Communicant;
or that the Presence of the Unworthy, who are admitted by their own false
Profession, or by the Ministers Fault, does make it unlawful to others there to
communicate. The Book called the Cure of Church-Divisions, will tell you more
such dividing Principles, which you must unteach them. The Ministers that have
bred and cherished these, have been our Subverters, and are our Shame;
and such Principles are the Shame of too many well-meaning honest People. Woe
to the selfish Teachers, that for their Personal Interest dare not contradict
them, but cherish them into their dividing Errors!

In a word, Help to save Religious People from being superstitious, while they
cry out against Superstition: Ibid. p. 98.
And make them know, that a Religion which consists in our own Modes and Ways
of Worship,
and in decrying other Men's, may stand with all unmortified Sin; and that the
Flesh is no more denied by sitting, than by kneeling.

Brethren, suffer me to tell you, that pleasing the ignorant Professors
Humors, Ibid. p. 101.

is a Sin that shows us too humane and carnal, and has always sad Effects at
last. If any say, We shall thus lose our People; and the Separatists, who will
cherish all such Humors, will have them all. I answer: We have too long tried
the pleasing Way already,
and see that we cure not, but cherish their Disease. Take God's Way. -- And if
they will follow Separatists, it is fitter they be misled by such erroneous
Persons than by you.

Should the Ministers of London, that have suffered so long, but use any part
of the Liturgy, Ibid. p. 105.
and Scripture-Forms, though without any Motive but the pleasing of God, and
the Churches Good, what muttering and censuring would there be against them?
And Woe to those few Teachers, that make up their Designs by cherishing these
Distempers!
One would think that their Warning had been fair. But, si nati sint ad bis
perdendam Angliam, the Lord have mercy upon us!

Ibid. p. 102, 103, 104
Let me say a word to this Kind of Religious People: Is it not a Shame to you,
that your worthiest Ministers should be fain to go besides their own Judgment
in God's Worship,
to humor you? And that they must tell the World, we would mix Free-Prayer and
Forms in Public, but the People then will be gone to the Separatists? But how
come you to be so much holier and wiser than the holiest and wisest of your
Teachers? Mark:
Is it not more of the Women and Apprentices, that are of this mind, than of
the old experienced Christians? Is it not an high degree of Pride,
in Persons of your Standing and Understanding, to conclude, that almost all
Christ's Churches in the World, for these 1300 Years at least, to this day,
have offered such Worship to God, as that you are obliged to avoid it, and all
their Communion in it?
And that almost all the Catholic Church on Earth this day is below your
Communion, for using Forms? And that even Calvin, and the Presbyterians,
Cartwright, Hildersham, and the Old Nonconformists, were unworthy your
Communion? Would you have run away from Dod and Perkins, or from Cyprian or
Augustine, and said, they are Formal Fellows, not to be joined with? Does God
use by Miracle to make self-conceited Women, and young Men, so much wiser than
the most ancient, studious, and experienced Divines? Brethren and Friends, I
profess, for your Sincerity many of you are our Joy,
and it is not a little that we have done and suffered for your sakes: But I
must tell you, (for Adversaries will tell it you) that for your Ignorance,
Injudicicusness, Pride, Self-conceitedness, you are our Grief and Shame: We are
hit in the teeth with such self-wise, ignorant, giddy, and unpeaceable
Followers: And we have nothing to say, but to blush, and say, you mean well,
and that it is not long of us. Can God's Spirit,
which ordains Elders to be Pastors in his Church, be the Guide of your
Judgments, when with such shameless Pride you set up your Errors against the
Knowledge of your Guides? -- It shameth us, it grieveth us, to hear from
England, and from New England, this common Cry, We are endangered by Divisions,
because the self-conceited Part of the Religious People will not be ruled by
their Pastors, but must have their Way, and will needs be Rulers of the Church
and them.

Yea, I tell you with Truth and Grief, I am confident, ( next to Men's own Sin,
which leaves them to a Judicial Delusion,) Nothing has done more to set up
Popery, -- than the scandalous Instances of your Vnruliness,
and Church-tearing Humors. And that you have made more Papists, than ever you
or we are like to recover. Nothing is any whit considerable that a Papist has
to say, till he comes to your Case, and says, Does not Experience tell you,
that without Papal Unity and Force these People will never be ruled or united?
It is you that tempt them to use Fire and Faggot, that will not be ruled, nor
kept in Concord, by the wisest, and holiest, and most self denying Ministers on
Earth. -- Woe to the World because of Offenses, and Woe to some by whom they
come!

Epist. to separate Congreg.
The Hand of God is apparently gone out against your Ways of Separation: You see
you do but prepare Persons for a further Progress.
Seekers, Ranters, Quakers, and too many professed Infidels, do spring up from
amongst you, as if this were your Journey's end, and the Perfection of your
Revolt.

Id. against Crandon, p. 83.
I think, Till we have better taught, even our Godly People, what Credit and
Obedience is due to their Teachers, and Spiritual Guides,
the Churches of England shall never have Peace, or any good and established
Order. We are broken for want of the Knowledge of this Truth.
Till this be known, we shall never be well bound up and healed.

Gild. Salvian. p^ 179.
To be against Discipline is tantum non to be against the Ministry; and to be
against the Ministry, is tantum non to be absolutely against the Church;
and to be against the Church, is near to being absolutely against Christ.
Blame not the Harshness of the Inference, till you can avoid it, and free your
selves from the Charge of it before the Lord.

All which is the most serious Judgment, Admonition, and Advice of

RICHARD BAXTER.

The Protestation of the Writer of these Reflections, to all that shall
vouchsafe to read them, touching Himself, and his Design.
THe Writer of these Reflections does here protest once for all, his real
Belief of a God, a Christ, an Heaven, and an Hell: And that he is neither
Papist, nor Popishly affected, nor under any Covenant not to obey our Blessed
Savior, against the World and the Flesh; nor yet an Enemy to those truly
modest, humble, quiet, and peaceable Dissenters, who do what they can of that
which is enjoined them, and for the rest, submit themselves wholly with
Patience and Meekness, without contempt or reviling to the Laws and Government.

That he has no Malice, nor personal Grudg against Mr. Baxter in particular;
nor any Controversy with him, further than as in his public Writings he
disagreeth with, and reproacheth his more calm, considerative, and sober Self;
or seeks to undermine and cast dirt upon the Venerable Establishment of this
Church and Kingdom, with the Bishops and Governors of both, and All that (as
it becomes orderly Christians and Subjects) pay their conscientious Obedience
thereunto.

And, That his Design herein was not to villify and disparage any thing that is
otherwise good and commendable in this Author, (whereof a competent Collection
may be seen in the Preface before-going); much less to expose real Piety and
Virtue unto Scorn, by reason of the Pretenses unduly made unto them; or to
embitter the inordinate Passions and Rage of any, against those that differ in
some Opinions from themselves.

But only to check and abate somewhat (if possible) of that fond Esteem this
Man of Contradictions expresses of his own Abilities and Judgment, and that
Popular Admiration of Him, which may redound to a Public Mischief.

And, To warn every one to study a due Consistence with Himself, and Deference
to his respective Superiors, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical:

And, to expose all Pride and Arrogance, Opinionatry and Affectation,
Singularity and Self-conceit, Envy and Ambition, Censoriousness and
Incharitableness, Morosity and Peevishness, Frowardness and Perverseness,
Cavilling and Quarrelsomness, Strife and Contention, Schism and Division,
Faction and Sedition, Defamation of God's Priests, and speaking evil of
Dignities, Pharisaism and Hypocrisy, Headiness and Rashness, bitter Zeal and
Giddiness, Abuse of Holy Scripture, and Superstition, Rudeness and
Vnmannerliness, (those Brats of Hell, Pests of the Church, and Incendiaries of
the World, which it is great cruelty to be tender of,) unto Infamy and
Detestation.

And finally, To admonish, if any have private Persuasions of their own, not to
trouble the Church with the unseasonable divulging them; or if they have
Petitions to prefer unto Authority, not to make them first to the People, nor
to mingle them with Reproaches, Challenges, and Threatenings; or if they have
Apologies and Defenses to offer for Nonconformity, briefly and cooly to give
their Reasons, with what nervousness they can, but without vain and idle
digressions, needless multiplying of Controversies, slandering the Laws and
Constitutions, or contumelious and provoking Language.

Romans 14.22. Have thou Faith? Have it to thy self before God: Happy is he that
condemns not himself, in that thing which he allows.

Sober and useful Reflections, etc.
IF it be demanded at our Entrance, whence I conclude so positively, Mr. Baxter
to be the Author of this Book, [Touching the Author of Sacril. Des.]
[ Sacrileg. desert.] since there is not any Name affixed to it? I answer:

As certainly, as if both Name and Picture, with a Nos quoque floruimus, -- had
been set to the Title Page of it. It has so much of his Likeness as to own the
Father, and so resembles others of his undoubted and declared Offsprings, as
to leave no room for hesitancy about it, to any one that is but a little
conversant with his Way and Writings. -- But to satisfy the Reader, that I have
not wronged him, I will suggest some matters here of easy observation.

And First; I note in the General the Imperious Style of the Man, assuming to
himself as Head of the Nonconforming Brotherhood, speaking in their Name, and
upon every occasion, charging and counselling of them. But more peculiarly I
observe, what he tells us of himself, [ Apt to speak sharply against the Humors
and Weakness of Religious People: Page 126.
] Which is a Commendation hardly to be given to any other of the Way besides.

2 dly; What think you of this? In the Preface to his Cure of Church-divisions,
he has it thus: [If the Fierceness of any contradict what I say, I only add,
that it is not an unexperienced Person that speaks it; and one who through
the Mercy of God has long kept a numerous Flock, in Love, and Unity, and
Peace, by such like means, and has seen the lamentable Effects of the contrary
Way.] In this other Book thus: [I think those many Religious People I have had
the Oversight of, Page 105.
are as ready to be ruled by me, and as undivided, as any I have known. Page
130.
] And, [I can confidently say, that when I had a Pastoral Charge, where I
needed many Assistants, if I had known where that Man lived, whom the People
would have loved,
honored, and profited by more than my self, I would have rid night and day to
get him to be the Man.

And yet for all that, it seems he needed not to have rid many Miles neither;
for it follows immediately: -- [And when I have heard my Neighbour-Ministers,
Page 131.
that were younger Men, (I can scarce forbear naming of them) preach much more
affectionately and profitably than my self, I have sat under them with Tears of
Joy.] Now if much more affectionately and profitably, the Godly People
doubtless would more profit under them, and consequently for their Work-sake
love and honor them. -- But I quote this here by the way, because I find a
like Observation dropped from Dr. Pierce on Mr. Baxter, upon such an occasion:
New Discoverer discovered, chap. 6.. 13. p. 153.
[That you are below some of your Brethren, it is enough that you have told me:
I am not concerned to contradict you; yet some may say, you contradict your own
self, because you add, you would presently quit your Place, if a probable
Evidence could be given you of a better Supply. Every Usurper may say as much,
if he be but qualified with an haughty Opinion of himself.]

3 dly; Scarce any Man has boasted more publicly, (and possibly with less
reason) of his own Study,
Wisdom, and Experience; or betrayed a more arrogant Conceit of his own
Abilities and Performances. -- So that we might have known him without that
Confession: [For my own part I am conscious of Pride and Selfishness. Page 130.
] As he has also formerly acknowledged. Mark his Vanity and Ostentation in an
Instance or two 'in Print. [To the Praise of God I speak it, ( O Lord, I thank
thee, Pref. to Disp. to right to Sacrament.
) -- that in those ancient, common, disturbing Controversies, between the
Arminian and Anti-arminian, Lutheran and Calvinist, Jesuit and Dominican, I
have discerned those Principles which quiet my own Mind, and which, I am
confident, were they received according to their Evidence, would quiet the now
contending World. Epist. Ded. to Saints Re^.
] [I have showed you, I think, the true Mean in the Doctrine of Justification
and Redemption, etc.] In like manner for Discipline, as well as Doctrine,
touching the Differences about Church Government and Worship, in a fawning
Preface to Richard Cromwell, he adds: [ -- In this Book, and one of
Confirmation, which I lately published, Epist Ded. before his five Disp.
I confidently affirm, is contained much of that reforming reconciling Truth,
which must heal us, if ever we be healed.] Did ever any sound the Trumpet
louder, to summon all to take notice of him? Did ever Quack offer more to
recommend his Pills or Balsam? -- And after this, who can doubt whom he means,
that the younger Ministers should look upon as the Extraordinary of this Age?
Sacril. Desert. p* 115.
[If God endow here and there one Man with an extraordinary Judgment, it is the
Wisdom and Happiness of the Times to know him,
and to kindle their Torches at his Fire. So did one Luther, one M^lancthon,
one Calvin, one Erasmus, one Jewel, Whitaker, Reynolds, Davenant, etc. profit
many. You may go a hundred Miles among the less judicious Sort, and miss of
that Light, which one Amesius, one Strangius, one Le Blanc, etc. could show the
World. And it is the Plague of corrupted Nature, that Ignorance keeps Men
from knowing it self; and not one of a Multitude, even of Religious Men, who
are injudicious, will believe that they are injudicious: but every Man is so
much the more confident that he is in the right, and others err, by how much
the more he erreth himself: So that few ignorant Ministers are teachable, Page
116.
because by Office they undertake to teach. But through God's Mercy, My own
Converse has been with an humble Sort of Ministers, which was the Occasion of
our Unity and Peace.
] -- Do you not see here the one Baxter of the Age, whom it were the Wisdom and
Happiness of the Times to know better,
and kindle their Torches at his Fire? The Gamaliel, at whose Feet the younger
Ministers (Ay, and Bishops too) should all sit down, and approve their
Humility, by learning of him, and submitting to his Directions and Dictates,
for Unity and Peace sake? And so avoid that great Mischief, which he thus
speaks of: Page 115.
-- [The Self-conceitedness and Pride of the younger and more injudicious Sort
of the Ministers, (and yet such he was certainly himself at his early setting
out,) hindering them from following the Counsel of wiser and more experienced
Men. For tho we must have no arrogant Lordly Usurpers among us, yet all that
know any thing must confess, that in all Professions wise and eximious Men are
few. It is but to few Divines that God gives clear and accurate Judgments.] So
as to quiet the contending World in the most perplexed Controversies, whether
about Doctrine, or Discipline and Worship, by the Evidence of their Principles,
etc. [And undoubtedly there is a threefold Superiority and Submission of Divine
Obligation: 1. Of Subjects to Men in Office over them. 2. Of the Younger to the
Elder. 3. Of them that have less Knowledge, to them that have more. For Office
and Seniority are but Formalities, did they not suppose an eximious Fitness by
superior Knowledge.
]

He can therefore grant, we see, to Prince and Prelates, those two Formalities
of Office and Seniority; and yet reserve to himself the all-commanding
Superiority of eximious Knowledge,
a most clear and accurate Judgment, by virtue of which we are all under the
divinest Obligation to submit unto him. And thus he has got the knack of
imposing upon others, beyond what the Laws and Canons are able to do. And this
he knows well enough: -- 'Do you think, says he, that there is no Imposition
but by Force? Cure of Church Divis. p. 181.


4 thly; If we look a little more into the Proof of his Accuracy and exactness,
even to the splitting of an Hair, we shall get some further discovery of him.
An Episcopal Protestant of the severest sort, Sacril. Desert. p 5.
who is neither for Sects, nor for Church-Tyranny.] The Man evermore in the
Mean, [between dividing Errors, and the extreme of Formality, Page 97.
] for the Point of Honor in the Escutcheon. Page 113.
Thus for Synods, his Rule is, [Be sure to keep out both the Tyranny of Major
Votes, and of the proud magisterial Arrogations of any Individuals.] Thus all
along his Cure of Church-divisions, we find him brandishing a two-edged Sword,
and ( Ambo-dexter like) laying about him on both sides, against the Conformists
on the one hand, and the Separatists on the other. The same Course he exactly
imitates in this: And so elsewhere again, in the Controversies between the
Convention at Dort, and the Remonstrants, of which he may have heard
sufficiently from Tilenus. And his Hap too, as well as Genius, in all Disputes
almost, is much-what the same; pretending to the Mean, to take part usually
with one Extreme.

5 thly; Observe this other Place well: [The most Non-conformable Ministers of
my acquaintance, Pag^ 29.
whose Judgment I ever asked of that matter, do seem to think, as I my self do,
that the Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independents, and Erastians, have each of
them some Truth and Good, which above the rest they do defend; and each of them
some special Mistake, where they err above the rest: And, if we could know it,
we would take the best from among them all, and leave the worst.] And if you
know it not, how came you to assert it? But compare we this with Mr. Baxter
elsewhere: [For my part, were my Judgment of any moment to others, Plain
Script. Proof for Infants Church-memb. p. 228.
after serious Study in this Point, both in Scripture and Antiquity, especially
the Writers of the three first Centuries, I am confidently persuaded, that the
true way of Christ's Discipline is parcel'd out between the Episcopal,
Erastian, Presbyterians, and Independents, and that every Party has a Piece of
the Truth in peculiar.

6 thly; You may know the Man by the Story of Ithacius, which he gives more at
large in his Cure of Church-divisions, glancing at himself as the St. Martin of
our Times, Cure of Church-Divis. p. 373.
where he refers likewise to other Writings wherein he had quoted it: And
again, at the end of that Book, he recommends it from Mr. Hooker. In this
Treatise of Sacrileg. Desert. we are pointed to it twice, Page 17. Page 124.
Page 68. Page 113.
and from thence have the Elegancies of [ Ithacian Masters in our own Coats]
applied to the Conformists, and [ Ithacian Synod] by proportion to the
Convocation.

7 thly; Look out the Man of Eminency among those concerned in the Work at the
King's Return, 1660, who offered for Concord the Episcopal Form, as he calls
it, Page 4. Page 5.
which Archbishop Usher is said to have proved to be the true Government of
the Ancient Churches. It Is Mr. Baxter's Glory, that he conversed with that
Prelate, The Disput. P 344, 345.
and the Account of what passed between them he has elsewhere related more at
large. And again, in this Treatise he tells us: Sacril. Desert. page 56.
[ Baxter, (modestly!) whom you name, has told you, that Bishop Usher
professed his Judgment to him.]

8 thly; These other Phrases are characteristical enough of themselves: Page 65.
[We have almost twelve years ago cried out, even to Vnmannerliness, that, if
possibly, we might have been heard, to the Reverend Prelates. Page 81.
] And again: [Have we not so many years ago besought his Party, with all humble
Petition and Importunity, Page 118.
and disputed it with them?] Again: [Fathers and Brethren, tho I have presumed
to counsel the Nonconformists as my Equals, I will presume no higher with you,
than to lay my self at your feet, and humbly a second time to become your
Petitioner for the Souls of Men.] Once more, [To these Reverend Fathers I have
formerly spoken, to their great Offense. Page 119.
]

However, you will say, here is deep Humility in the Case; Hypocrisy rather,
and Irony or Abuse; the Petition to the Prelates and Conformists, presented to
the People, as has been the Puritan Fashion. And it is no Uncharitableness
thus to construe him, who says expressly, the silenced Ministers were [ as wise
and as good as themselves, Page 20.
] nay, and better too; if I can make any Sense of this other Passage: ['I must
give them, (meaning the humorous and weak Sort of Religious People, Page 126.
there spoken of,) this Testimony, That tho many of them cannot judge of
Judiciousness in their Teachers, yet most of them love a serious Preacher, and
a godly Liver; and few of them distaste either Prelates or Conformists, if they
preach seriously, and live holily. But when in all the Countries they see such
Preachers and Livers chosen out for silencing,
all the World cannot keep them from disliking such Bishops, as shall do thus.]
Now what a wicked Generation, what an ungodly Crew of Men must they needs be,
who not in one Country only, but in all the Countries of the Kingdom, thus
maliciously choose and cull out the serious Preachers and holy Livers for
silencing? Are these Persons likely to be reverenced in good earnest by him, as
Fathers and Brethren? etc.

Lastly; After all this, I need not add, Page 48.
[ Ball and Baxter have much against you, but nothing for you, and understand
themselves better than you can understand them; and he that surviveth, (i. e.
Baxter,) takes himself to be abused by your Allegations, and provokes you to
cite, etc.] This must certainly come from an Intimate, and had been [ Mr.
Baxter] at least from another hand. And again, [We that have lived in an Age,
Page 110.
when the Engines of Church-Division have so sadly prospered, and born our
Testimony against them, -- ] The Author then of the Cure of Church-Divisions,
must be concluded by us, the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion, etc.

And now having given this particular Account of my Belief touching the Author,
[ Of the Book it self.]
(whom at this distance from London I cannot otherwise search out, than by
these intrinsic Characters of the Book it self,) I pass on to some brief
Reflections upon certain other Passages of his Treatise; wherein yet I design
not at all to enter on Another's Task, or prevent that truly learned and
moderate Person whom he undertakes to answer, under the abusive Name of the
Confident Questionist, by offering at his Defense; but will only drop some
occasional Remarks upon diverse Passages, as they come to hand.

[ -- I am not without fear, says he, of the Weakness, [ Mr. B' s fears of
some N.C. Ministers Abilities.]
Rashness, Injudiciousness, and Imprudence of some, that are yet earnest and
profitable Preachers.] And again, [I really fear, lest mere Nonconformity have
brought some Men into Reputation,
as conscientious, who by weak Preaching will lose the Reputation of being
judicious, more than their Silence lost it. Page 86, 87, 88.
-- Verily the Injudiciousness of too many among you is for a Lamentation. But
the grand Calamity is, that the most Injudicious are usually the most confident
and self-conceited; and none so commonly give way to their ignorant Zeal to
censure, backbite, and reproach others, as those that know not what they talk
of. I impute not this unto you as Nonconformists, but as Sons of Adam: For
Experience has convinced me, that Pride of Understanding, when Men have little
to be proud of, or Confidence of all Men's own Apprehensions, is the Vice of
Men, Women, and Children, when they are past eighteen years of Age, which seems
to me most desperately incurable.] -- [Few Sorts so silly, but are always in
the right, and others erroneous in comparison of them,
as Bedlams pity the Ignorance of their Keepers.] And again, [Partiality may
make some of your own Mind think all well that you say, and all weak that
others say, but the rest of Men will the more despise you. Be not wise in your
own Conceit.
-- Pride is the Firstborn of the Devil; and Pride of Knowledge and Goodness is
more common and pernicious, than Pride of Comeliness, Wealth, or Greatness.

We may say of him, as Lactantius of some of the Philosophers, that he is in
sua vitia facundus, in nothing more eloquent than in his Invectives against his
own Vices. The proudest Man that lives, as I find it observed, is yet a
professed Enemy to his Brother's Pride, treads on Pride often with a greater
Pride, and cannot endure his darling and beloved Sin in another: And all, as
Mr. Baxter well has it, [Because Pride would make every Man a God to the
World, Page 23, 24.
on whom all must depend, whom all must honor and obey, and no Man must
contradict; and all that depart from them are supposed to accuse and undervalue
them. And thus as of our own selves, some Men arise to draw Disciples after
them; so others set the Churches in a flame, for fear of losing any of their
Disciples or Esteem. Page 107, 108.
] [We have all naturally, says he, a Pope born in us; and, when Men have never
so much talked against Popery and Prelacy, too many censure, and run away from
all that are not of their way.] -- Here is now most certainly the Root of all
Contention, Schism, Disobedience and Nonconformity to the innocent and wholesome
Establishments of our Superiors,
both in Church and State. And the Brethren he speaks unto, have reason to take
it to themselves in a peculiar manner, whether as Nonconformists, or Sons of
Adam, I will not dispute. We may rather comprimize the Business, and for
Peace-sake allow them both Titles, or grant them Sons of Adam upon a double
Score, once as Men, and again as Nonconformists.

But how shall the Weakness, Rashness, Injudiciousness, and Imprudence of these
proud, self-conceited, and ignorant,
yet earnest and profitable Preachers, (as we are often told concerning them)
which is so justly to be feared, and may prove so hurtful, be either prevented
or remedied, whilst those to whom it belongs to super-intend, correct, and
regulate such Disorders, are utterly abandoned by them? Whilst they are all of
equal Power and Liberty, and will not endure a Bishop over them, and none may
presume to silence them?

[I have met with few Presbyterian Ministers in England, [ Of the Names,
Presbyterian and Nonconf.]
tho most have that Name given them in their Licenses. -- Impudence has called
them Presbyterians many years, who offered the Episcopal Form which Archbishop
Usher proved to be the true Government of the Ancient Churches. Page 4 and 5.
] If there are but few Presbyterians in England, the World is well amended
since the Scot's Invasion, the taking of the Covenant,
the sitting of the Westminster- Assembly, and the Settlement of many Classes
in London and elsewhere. What is become of them all, since there were no other
of any Name or Account, but a few Dissenters only? And yet, if most have that
Name given them in their Licenses, why should any own them for other than what
they are there called? Or, if they renounce the Appellation, what have they to
justify their License? I have heard, I confess, of one, who being asked by what
name he would be entered, after some pause, could resolve on no other, but a N.
C. or one dissatisfied with the Establishments.
But the good Man grows warm upon it, as if the Name now were an Abomination:
[Impudence, says he, has called, etc.] And this Impudence, it seems, their
very Licenses are guilty of, fall the Reproach where it will, for therein, as
he tells us, is that Name given them.

Well, but what is the Appellation they are willing to assume in lieu of this?
[An Episcopal Protestant of the soberest Sort, Page 5 and 6.
neither for Sects, nor Church-Tyranny.] I know many that are for a Pastoral
Administration, without Church-Tyranny and Schism.] Good! ['An Episcopal
Protestant,] but against Bishops: ['Of the soberest Sort,] others, it seems,
are drunk or mad. ['Neither for Sects, nor Church-Tyranny,] But will not the
Seclaries and Schismatics tax him with Church-Tyranny, whom they find an Enemy
to themselves? And is not this too, the setting up of a new Sect under another
Name?
Mark well the Apostle: Every one of you says, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of
Cephas, and I of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.12. Nor were they less carnal that pretended
to Christ only, against Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, than those that laid claim to
any of those Apostles, as the Head of their Faction, and took their Names from
Men.

Diogenes Laertius makes mention of an (...), Secta electiva, introduced by one
Potamon of Alexandria, whose professed Principle it was, to pick out of every
Sect that which best liked his Humor. -- And of this, it seems, Mr. Baxter is,
as we heard before, however here he call himself an Episcopal Protestant, in
truth, a Free-Philosopher, another Potamon, neither Episcopal, nor
Presbyterian, nor Independent, nor Erastian, but somewhat of each, could he
once tell what.

Page* 29.
Ay, but Archbishop Usher's Form of Episcopal Government would down with him,
and others of his Persuasion. This is pretended often, since that Learned
Prelate's Death. How far he might condescend in the worst of Times, to keep up
some appearance of Authority in the Church, when Prelacy was abjured, I know
not: But can it enter into any Man's belief, that his Grace would ever call the
Government of the Church of England, or of Ireland, as it was in his Time
settled, and now again is restored, Tyrannical? Or, that he should submit to do
Penance himself for Church-Tyranny? Or did he ever allow of Ordination by mere
Presbyters here as valid? Mr. Baxter has it: [The Bishops to some of us, Page
58.
and Senior Pastors (a new word for Presbyters,) to others, by Ministerial
Investiture imposed the necessity (of Preaching) on us.] Hear we now the
Primate, (as one who well knew reports it): Holding, as I do, that a Bishop
has Superiority in degree above a Presbyter, L. Primate's Cens. of Presbit.
Ordinat. By Dr. B. page 125, 126.
you may easily judge, that the Ordination made by such Presbyters, as have
severed themselves from those Bishops, unto whom they had sworn Canonical
Obedience, cannot possibly be excused by me from being Schismatical.] Will
these Episcopal Protestants hold, as he did, a Bishop to have Superiority in
degree above a Presbyter? And will they declare, as he did, the Ordination by
Presbyters revolted from their Bishops to be Schismatical? Then perhaps they
may begin to lay some claim unto his Patronage: But until then, for Episcopal
Protestants, they may write themselves, with more both of Truth and Ingenuity,
Protesters or Covenanters against Episcopacy. -- But all this while, do any
amongst us plead for Church-Tyranny? No, that is the Abuse of the It was
Solon's Rule of old, to make a City happy: Si Cives quidem Magistratui
obediant, Magistratus autem Legibus.
lawful Power our Bishops are invested with, and which they disclaim no less
than he. But here most invidiously designed, I fear, it was, to insinuate into
the Peoples minds, that our Bishops are but so many Church-Tyrants. God bless
his Majesty next from the Imputation, which his Father of blessed memory, with
all his Innocence and Condescension, could not escape!

Be it known to the Reader, Page 7.
that the Name of Nonconformists was not made by our selves, but by others, as
the Names of the four Confessors, Dan. 1. were.] Sure this must needs be
thought a matter of some great moment, proclaimed, as it were, with a Noverint
Vniversi, to the World; and we are much to blame, if we make not some
Observations upon it. But what! is the Name of Nonconformists so odious, as not
to be owned, when the thing it self is a Glory? Page 86.
Does mere Nonconformity bring some into Reputation, as conscientious? And is
the Name yet deemed a Reproach? The thing it self is sure odious, if the Name
be so odious, as to turn your Stomachs. Gild. Salvian. p^ 191, 192.
How should the Presence and Guilt of it terrify you, if the Name make you
start? So Mr. Baxter elsewhere reasons. -- But do you conform to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, or do you not? If not, why are you so shie of the
Appellation of Nonconformists, as if there were somewhat in it that you were
really ashamed of? I have sometimes seen a Book entitled, A short Survey of the
grand Case of the present Ministry, by some Conformable Nonconformists, printed
in the Year, 1663. So there you prettily style your selves, Conformable
Nonconformists;
i. e. if I understand English, Nonconformists, which do or can conform.
Nonconformists, which do conform, sounds a Contradiction; Nonconformists, who
can conform, but will not, denotes Perverseness. Choose whether you like best:
Non-conformists you are still by your own Subscription; and it is not unlike,
but Mr. Baxter among the rest may be concerned in it. -- But there is somewhat
else the Reader is to gather from this grave Intimation: The People by all
means forsooth must look upon you, as so many Confessors, Daniels, that will
not be defiled with the Portion of the King's Meat,
and resolved with the other three, whatever come of it, not to bow down to the
Image which the King has set up; no, tho you were like to be cast into a fiery
Furnace, heat seven times hotter than ordinary for it. We take the Hint: The
King is or may be -- And you are the Non such Confessors, Dan. 1.19, 20. None
like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: Therefore stood they before the
King, and in all matters of Wisdom and Understanding, that the King enquired of
them, he found them ten times better than all the Magicians and Astrologers
that were in his Realm. The Application and Use is left to the Populace.

However, for once let us bear the blame of naming you what you are. You
certainly, who take offense at so small a matter, must be presumed innocent and
blameless your selves, as to all others, and those especially you here
challenge: Then whose, I beseech you, See the Key for Cath. Pref. to Five Disp.
Grot. Relig. etc.

Page 25, 29, 39, 30, 68, 113, 119, 13, 120.81, 60, 138, 5, 6.


are all these? 'The old and new Strain of Bishops: The old Episcopal Divines,
and the new reconciling Papists or Grotians: The new Prelatical Romanists and
Separatists, etc. I need not send you from the present Treatise: A silencing
Diocesan: The Sect of the Diocesan Prelatists: Usurpers: Mr. Fulwood, and some
such other Pamphleteers: Ithacian Masters and Synod: Learned, zealous,
High-Conformists: Selfish envious Conformists: Sober, godly, unwilling
Conformists, who have stretched themselves to do what they have done: Masters
of the Game: Got into the Saddle: Lovers of Church Power: Self-obtruding
Prelacy: Church-Tyranny. -- Sir, you have the Mint with you, and can coin what
you please.

As to the Point of Church Government, the Quarrel of the present Age, we
easily confess that we are not all of a mind; [ Not all of a mind.]
which is no Cause of Alienation of Affections, nor should be a Cause of mutual
Persecutions: It being our Judgment, Page 7, 8.
that Christians are to bear with one another in greater Matters, than
Episcopal, Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists disagree in. And if any
among us have done otherwise heretofore, it was from a Vice homogeneal to that
of the present Conformists, which now they smart for, and the Conformists may
repent of in due time.] [If we have been at Cudgels, Page 52.
we mean not to live and die at a Work so unsuitable to our Religion, and to our
Minds.]

['The Quarrel of the present Age.] Examine well the Quarrellers; the Law on
the one side,
and the several Parties that contend against it on the other. [ -- Confessed,
we are not all of a mind:] It is well you will confess any thing; it shall be
no more, we may be sure, than you must needs: For what here you sentence as a
Vice, is very cautelously expressed, with an If as to your former Guilt, and a
Mitigation of it, by reflecting the like on others: [ -- If any among us have
done otherwise; -- If we have been at Cudgels; -- It was from a Vice
homogeneal, etc.

It is to be feared, the Case is yet much-what with you, as it ever was: You
are well enough agreed, and all of a mind, as to the pulling down the
established Government and Worship,
in this part of the Quarrel of your Covenant; but when you should come to
build and settle any thing in the room of what you demolish, there you fall
into Confusions, like the Workmen of Babel, not understanding each others
Language. Here it was that the Dear Brethren first began to quarrel. But
certainly it behooves wise Men not to consent to the Extirpation of that which
is, till they find the Enemies to it better agreed upon a more perfect Model to
be erected instead of it.

You tell us yet: [This is no Cause of Alienation of Affections, nor should be
a Cause of mutual Persecutions, it being your Judgment.] The Case is altered,
it seems; well altered indeed, since the Presbyterians were Masters of the
Game, and got into the Saddle, (if I may borrow your Elegancies) till the
Independents shuffled the Cards otherwise, and unhorsed them. -- We have here,
may it but hold, what they are loath to come to, a Recantation of all their once
zealous Pursuit of the Holy Covenant,
for maintaining Presbytery in the Church of Scotland, and Reforming themselves
to an Uniformity, and the Rooting out of Schism and Heresy, that the Lord might
be One, and his Name One. -- The Independents began sooner to look upon this
League, as an Almanac out of Date; and now the Presbyterians follow them,
confess themselves Persecutors, and guilty of what the Dissenters then laid to
their Charge. O the Effects of mutual Sufferings and present Interest! What
strange Vniters and Reconcilers they are, of the most distant Apprehensions and
Affections, all of a sudden.

But it is not safe Trusting you for all this: Aegrotat Demon, Monachus tunc.
-- Nor may we easily believe, that you are really so kind each to other, as is
pretended, remembering what you your self have told us: Page 24.
[It is so rare for separated Assemblies not to make it their Religion and Work
to make others odious, and factiously to draw Disciples and Associates to
themselves,
that they may also thank themselves that others are so impatient with them.]
And again, [I confess, I have ever been jealous of such arbitrary Churches,
Page 127.
(where there is room for all in one Church,) lest they should turn
Anti-Churches, and Theaters of Emulation and Contention.] -- Had it not been to
charge an Homogeneality upon the present Conformists, which reflects wholly
upon the Law, we should scarce have had so much in your Confessions. And yet it
is, methinks, observable, that though you acknowledge, that you smart your
selves for what you have done, you are willing to leave the Repentance unto us.

[ Their Candor and Charity to Conformists.] Page 8.
I pray you try, if you will not believe us, whether Papists or Quakers take us
or you for their greatest Adversaries. Remember, after the Fire of London, the
Papists in Print did court you, as Men much nearer to them than we are, and
much liker to befriend them:
And I doubt you will never make them think otherwise.] An ugly Insinuation!
That we of the Church of England are greater Friends to the Papists and
Quakers, and much nearer to them, than the Nonconforming Brethren, who in
Recusancy, (not to name some other Principles,) agree in part with them. You
could tell us elsewhere, who have done more to the setting up Popery, by their
Vnruliness and Church-taring Humors. See it in the Preface.
But if so, and we cannot make them believe otherwise; it is to be hoped, they
will in requital prove greater Friends to us too, provided any Spark of good
Nature remain in them. What the Papists have said that way in Print, I cannot
tell; but this I can, that it is no more Argument that therefore it is true, or
that their Words and Hearts agree together, than if a Presbyterian had said as
much. -- We know by too sad Experience, that the Church of England is the
greatest Eyesore to them in the World. And what ever Countenance you put on,
we do confidently affirm, that you are all so far their Eriends and
Instruments, as you wish and seek the Destruction of it. But let us know the
Depth of your Charity to us.

We take you for Men of the same Religion with us, Ibid.
and much fitter for our Communion, than such Nonconformists as Papists and
Quakers are.] An Act of extreme Grace and Favor! [Much fitter for our
Communion, than such Nonconformists;] but not, it seems, than Independents, and
Anabaptists, etc. And it is well yet if you flinch not before the end; or else
there is some Salvo reserved in the Case. You take us for Men of the same
Religion with you; but have a care, I pray, how you pronounce your selves of
the same Religion with us. [Tho we differ not at all from the Doctrine of the
Church of England, till the New Doctrine about Infants, etc. Page 45.
] Of which by and by.

[But we that suffer from you, (hear it now, for you shall hear it from God ere
long,) all the Poverty, Confinements, Page 8*
Calamities, Silencings, that have been inflicted on us, because we would not
subscribe, say, swear, and do -- you know what. Can no more go against our
Conscience in conforming to one another than to you.
] No hopes of any Settlement then, I perceive, among you; no, not among the
Soberest of the Party: for you tell us of them too, Page 12.
that they are not all of them of one mind. -- But see we here a Specimen of
the Justice, Meekness, Humility, and Modesty of this Man. [We that suffer from
you. -- ] How from Us, when the same way of Impunity is open to you as to our
selves? If any thing must be arraigned and condemned, it is in plain terms the
Law, or else the Guilt lies at their Door who disobey it. [All the Poverty,
Confinements, Calamities, etc.] It may be so, and yet not very much neither, as
to the greatest part among you. Leves curae loquuntur, ingentes stupent. To be
sure, nothing comparable to what the Honest and Legal Clergy suffered in Times
last past, (you know by whose means) and nothing so illegally as they; whose
Return to their proper and long detained Rights was the Rise and Occasion of
most of your Calamities,
whom they found in the possession of them. -- [Because we would not subscribe,
say, swear, and do -- you know what.] Speak out, Sir, what you mean, and leave
not such a filthy Slander upon Authority, to be supplied from the worst of
Conjectures which it is possible for any to make; as if somewhat had been
required of you by your Governors, that it were an horrid Impiety and
Blasphemy but to name. -- ['Hear it now, for you shall hear it from God ere
long.] What a Thunderclap is here! But are you privy to the Divine Counsels,
that you thus presume to threaten us? Or is it a Cast of your good Will only?
Dat Deus immiti. -- We stand and fall to our own Master; and who are you, that
you should take upon your self thus to judge us?

[They, ( i. e. the Nonconformists,) suppose, that the Ministry does not save
Men, Page 9.
as Wizards think their Charms do heal, by their Presence, Titles, Names, or
Habits; by standing in the Reading-Place, or Pulpit; or being called, the
Parson of the Parish; or saying his set Words over them, when they are dead:]
As Conformists ignorantly believe; for that is to be supplied. And so this is
but a squinting and obliquer Way of Calumny, and False Witness-bearing.

[They suppose, Page 10.
a greater Number of the Conformable Priests than they are willing to mention,
do preach so ignorantly and dully in the Pulpit, and do so little of the
personal private Work besides, as that there is great need of a far greater
Number of Assistants, than all the present Nonconformists be.] I observe, that
Parson, and Priests, and Parish Priests, Page 12.
are words used by this Author, when he expresses his Dislike, (in which he
symbolizeth with the Herd of Fanatics);
but Pastors or Ministers, where he approves: yet we love the good old Words
never the worse. But he would have us beholden to them that they publish not a
Continuation of White's lewd Century of Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers: To
suppose at least, that all the present Nonconformists, if made their
Assistants, would preach more knowingly and zealously; otherwise what would the
Supply avail us? And then farewell altogether to his former Fears and Jealousies
of the Weakness, Rashness, Injudiciousness, and Imprudence of some of his
earnest and profitabe Preachers, whose Openings and Holdings-forth are like to
forfeit the Reputation and Esteem of Wise and Conscientious, gained by their
Nonconformity and Silence.

[They find, Page 10.
that some Places of many years past have had no Ministers at all.] Nor are
they like to have from them for the future; for they are not wont to fish in
such Waters. Cities and Corporations call for them. Page 69.


They are not able to confute the People in many Places, who tell them that
their public Priests are so defective in their necessary Qualifications for
their Office, Page 10.
as that they hold it unlawful to hold such for true Ministers, and to
encourage them by their Presence, or to commit the Care of their Souls to such.

[ They are not able.] To their great grief we must believe they speak it, and
to assure us of their diligent Endeavors this way Well, let them comfort
themselves; where there is but a willing Mind, it is accepted according to what
a Man has. -- How, alas! should they be able to confute the People, when
themselves have first learned them thus to censure their Preachers, and
communicated that fowr Leaven of Prejudice to them? -- Yet, to do Mr. Baxter
right, he has given the People a Distinction of some use here to be remembered:
Five Disput. p. 130, 131.
[Observe this necessary Distinction, says he: It is one thing to ask, Who is
to take himself for a called and true Minister, and to do the Work as expecting
Acceptance and Reward from God? And it it is another thing to ask, Whom are the
People (or Churches) to take for a true Minister, and submit to, as expecting
the Acceptance and Blessing of God in that Submission, from his
Administrations? Or it is one thing, to have a Call, which will before God
justify his Ministration; and another thing, to have a Call, which will before
God justify the Peoples Submission, and will justify in Foro Ecclesiae both him
and them. And so it is one thing to be a Minister, whom God and Conscience will
justify and own as to himself; and another thing, to be a Minister to the
Church, whom they must own, and God will own, and bless only to their Good. --
In the first Sense, none but truly sanctified Men can be Ministers; but in the
latter, an unsanctified Man may be a Minister. -- As there is a difference
among Members, between the Visible and Mystical, so is there betwixt Pastors:
Some have a Title, that in Foro Ecclesiae, or Ecclesia Judice, will hold good,
that have none that is good in Foro Dei. In one word, the Church is bound to
take many a Man as a true Minister to them, and to receive the Ordinances from
him in Faith, and expectation of a Blessing upon Promise, who yet before God is
a sinful Invader, or Usurper of the Ministry, and shall be condemned for it. As
in worldly Possessions, many a Man has a good Title before Men, and at the Bar
of Men, so that no Man may disturb his Possession, nor take it from him without
the Guilt of Theft, when yet he may have no good right at the Bar of God, to
justify him in his Retension. So it is here. It is too common a Case in Civil
Governments, the Ignorance of which causes many to be disobedient. This in a
Book dedic^ted to his Namesake R.
A Man, that invadeth the Sovereignty without a Title, may be no King as to
Himself before God, and yet may be truly a King as to the People;
that is, He stands guilty before God of Usurpation, and (till he repent, and
get a better Title,) shall be answerable for all his Administrations, as
unwarrantable; and yet, when he has settled himself in the possession of the
Place, and exercise of the Sovereignty, he may be under an Obligation to do
Justice to the People, and defend them; and the People may be under an
Obligation to obey him, and honor him, and to receive the Fruits of his
Government as a Blessing.]

But let us hear further, what kind of Thoughts possess the Nonconformists
Minds.

Nonconformists Sentiments.
[They think, Page 10, 11. [ Of the Power of Magistr. and Bishops, to confine
and silence.]
that the Magistrate has the Power of the Temples and Tithes, and Public
Maintenance, and Liberty; but that he has not the Power of Ordination or
Degradation.] To say nothing of that affected word, Temples, so often used by
him, (perhaps, that the Churches might with the greater color be reserved for
themselves.) If the Magistrate have the Power of Liberty, as is here
acknowledged, what can they plead,
to justify themselves, for not obeying his Commands, touching the Restraint of
Number in their private Meetings, and keeping of them to their Five Miles
distance? To this latter Instance indeed he says afterward: [We have been
hainously accused for coming within Five Miles of any City, Corporation, and
Place, Page 69.
where we lately preached; when Christ said, If they persecute you in one City,
flee to another.] Strongly argued! Therefore they must always have some City to
fly unto; or therefore they must keep in or near that City or Corporation,
where they reckon on themselves persecuted. -- But this suits well, does it
not, with owning the Magistrate to have the Power of their Liberty in his hand,
and at his disposal? And the Pretense for their Disobedience makes it still the
worse; when, to arrogate unto themselves the Privilege of Saints, they tacitly
proclaim the King a Persecutor.

But then, if the Magistrate have not the Power of Ordination or Degradation,
sure the Bishops have. Ordination has been allowed them by those, that would
otherwise diminish their Power; and when they have alleged some Testimonies for
the exaltation of Presbyters, were yet forced to add, excepta Ordinatione. And
Degradation, as it is here used for Silencing, one would think should as easily
be granted to them. The matter among us is beyond dispute and controversy. But
this Author seems to testify against the Power of Degradation and Silencing, in
any Person whosoever, for so his words are: [All this is utterly impertinent to
them, Page 47.

whose Consciences never allowed them to forbear their Ministry, in formal
Obedience to any Man's Prohibition, but only when they had not Power (that is
here, Ability,) or Opportunity to execise it.] They are such, it seems, whom no
Man may forbid: And tho their Ordination and Commission be confessedly from
Men, yet will not their Consciences allow of any Man's Prohibition. --

Page 25.
Again, [The Nonconformists hold, that the Ministerial Office is not to be taken
up on Trial, or for a time, but durante Vita cum capacitate; and that it is no
less than, 1. Horrid Sacrilege, 2. Perfidious Covenant Breaking, 3.
Disobedience to God, 4. Cruelty to Souls; and, 5. Unthankfulness for great
Mercies:


If any of us shall desert our undertaken Offices, (yea, tho a silencing
Diocesan should forbid us the exercise of it unjustly. Therefore preach and
officiate, while we can we must.]

Durante Vita cum Capacitate, might be explained unto a tolerable Sense, if the
Moral Capacity were here intended: And so, [ When we can] restrained to quod
jure possumus. And so when he mentions, a silencing Diocesan forbidding the
Exercise of the Ministry unjustly; one would think he might allow him sometimes
to do it justly also, at least before Men, and in Foro Ecclesiae: And if
justly, then the Party is judicially incapacitated for the exercise of his
Ministry, by one that sent and ordained him. He that gave him the Faculty,
suspends it. And his Obedience or Submission here is no Desertion of his Office
at all, for the exercise of which he wants Commission. Who ever accused a
disbanded Soldier, or a cashiered Officer, for deserting his Colors or
Command? So that he might have forborne all his Tragical Aggravations of the
Matter. -- But he pleads an exemption, it seems, from all humane Prohibitions.
And accordingly in his Title Page he gives us this strutting Description and
Account of Himself: [One that is consecrated to the Sacred Ministry, and is
resolved not to be a wilful Deserter of it, in trust that any Undertakers can
justify him for such Desertion at the Judgment of God, till he know better how
those can come off themselves, who are unfaithful Pastors, or unjust Silencers
of others:] That is, we may suppose, till Doomsday.

Dr. William Gouge long since resolved this Case, with much more Ingenuity and
Clearness:

(1.) Difference must be made, says he, between Times of Percution, when
Infidels, or Idolaters, or the open Enemies of Christ, Whole Armor of God, p.
570, 571.
bear Rule, who seek utterly to suppress the Truth of the Gospel, and root out
the Professors of it; and Times of Peace, when Christian Magistrates, who
defend the Gospel, and seek the Progress thereof, govern the Church. The
Inhibition of Infidels and Idolaters, made simply against Preaching the Gospel,
because they would have it utterly suppressed, is in this Case no sufficient
Inhibition to bind the Conscience, being directly and apparently contrary to
God's Word: But when Christian Magistrates inhibit Ministers to preach, it is
because they think them unfit and unmeet, either for some notorious Crimes, or
some erroneous Opinions, to exercise their Ministerial Functions. In these
Cases such as are inhibited ought not to preach; neither are particular and
private Men to judge of the Cause of the Inhibition, whether it be just or
unjust;
but as they who are appointed by the present Government to ordain Ministers,
are to judge of their Fitness thereunto, so likewise of their Unfitness. And
(2.) Difference must be made again between the Kinds of Ministers that are
inhibited to preach: Some were ordained immediately by Christ, and particularly
commanded by him to preach the Gospel; all the World therefore could not
silence such: and if they were inhibited, yet ought they not to be silent, if
not forcibly restrained. And this was the Apostles Case, (and the like may be
said of the Prophets, who were extraordinarily sent and appointed by God
himself.) But others (as all in our Days) are ordained by the hands of Men,
even of the Governors of the Church. Now as they have Power to ordain
Ministers, when they judge them fit for that Place; so have they power also to
deprive Ministers, when they judge them unfit: And therefore Obedience must be
yielded to their Inhibition.] Thus He.

And why should not this sober Resolution of his be still allowed by them? --
That noted Passage of Mr. Calvin, in his Epistle to Farellus, Edit. Genesis in
Fol. p. 122.
deserves a Remembrance here. Consilium interea Fratribus non possum aliud
dare, nisi ut Collegam tuum coram Magistratu moneant, ut se patiatur in ordinem
redigi. Quod si pervicaciter recusare institerit, denuncient, sibi non esse
loco Fratris, qui communem Disciplinam contumacia sua perturbat. Semper hoc in
Ecelesia valuit,
quod veteribus Synodis fuit decretum, ut qui subjici communis Disciplinae
legibus noluerit, munere abdicetur. Neque hic quaerenda est hominum authoritas,
cum Spiritus S. de talibus pronunciaverit, Ecclesiam non habere morem
contendendi: Valere ergo eum jubeant, qui communis Societatis jura respuit.
This I could be content to leave to Mr. B. himself to construe; but when I
consider, that some of his injudicious Teachers may need a plainer Admonition,
I will for their sakes also english it. -- In the mean while, I cannot give
other Counsel to the Brethren, but that they admonish your Colleague (or
Assistant) before the Magistrate, that he would suffer himself to be reduced
into Order. But if he shall obstinately go on to refuse, let them denounce (or
signify) that he is not in the place of a Brother to them, who disturbs the
common Discipline by his Contumacy. This Practice has ever obtained in the
Church,
which has been decreed by ancient Synods, that whoever will not be subject to
the Laws of common Discipline, should be outed from his Office or Function;
(that is, in our Author's Phrase degraded and silenced.) Nor needs the
Authority of Men to be enquired for here, when the Holy Ghost has pronounced
of such, that the Church has not the Custom of contending. Let them therefore
command him to be packing, who refuses the Laws of common Society.] And this
indeed, if we advise upon it, is no more than what is adjudged necessary in
every well-ordered Community; according to that Oath, which all, when come to
Age, were to take at Athens, as Stoboeus records it. -- I will always prudently
obey the Magistracy set over me, Stob. Sermon 43. de Repub.
and observe the appointed Laws and Decrees. And if any one shall attempt to
disannul those Laws, or refuse to obey them, I will not yield unto it, but both
with my self, (so for as I can,) and with the help of others, revenge it.]

But it is time that we return to our Dissenting Brethrens Thoughts, who are
given to differ much from the rest of Mankind.

[They think, [ Of ejected Ministers and their Successors.]
that some of the Nonconformists were true Pastors of their several Flocks,
before they were silenced, and cast out. They think, that the ejecting them
from the Temples and Tithes, did not degrade them, or make them no true Pastors
to their Flocks. They think, page 11.
that the Magistrates putting another Parish-Minister in possession of the
Temple and Tithes, did not dissolve the foresaid Relation of the former. They
think yet, that Prudence requires Minister and People to consent to such a
dissolution of their Relations, where they cannot hold it without greater hurt
than benefit; yea, and to consent that the imposed Minister be their Pastor,
when he is fit himself, and the Worship performed by him, fit for them to join
in.]

[The Magistrates putting into possession of the Temples and Tithes,] is
Language we are not used to. It Is the Bishop with us, that gives us the
Institution, and Mandate for Induction, which is executed also by the Clergy.
But it is a pretty World indeed, when nothing must be done without the
Nonconformists leave: and Obedience to Authority,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical, cannot oblige unto, or effect as much, as it is
here acknowledged, Prudence requires Minister and People to do. -- These are
the Nonconformists avowed Principles, or this Author wrongs them. Let us learn
from him next, what Use and Improvement they make of them.

Page 14.
The Nonconformists will hold distinct Church Assemblies from the Parish Church,
-- when the ejected Minister, in Foro Conscientiae and Ecclesi^ ^ere sic
dictae, retains still his ancient Relation to his Flock, and part of them
schismatically separate from him, and join with an Intruder publicly, that
never had a lawful Call; and the other half separate not from their ancient
Pastor. It is possible the Intruder, tho he has the Temple, may be the
Schismatic. Ask Dr. Wild, and Dr. Gunning, whether they thought not so
fourteen years ago?] And of this again he tells us, that their Churches are
gathered, as 'Dr. Wild's and Dr. Gunning's were fifteen years ago. Where, I
know not for what reason, Page 54.
he advances a Year of his former account.

But factious Disputers, says he, see but on one side. You thought not that
your self were all this while proving your selves Schismatics. Page 41, 45.
I undertake to prove, that Pastors and People are the constitutive Essentials
of a true Church; that Dr. Seaman, Mr. Calamy, Dr. Manton, Mr. Gouge, Dr.
Bates, Dr. Jacomb, and abundance more such, with the People subject to them as
Pastors, were true Churches: Prove you, if you can, that on Aug. 24. 1662. they
were degraded, or their true Churches dissolved, [Who but he would dream of the
Dissolution of Churches, upon the Death of their Incumbents or Pastors, which
is yet more than a Deprivation, a Remove beyond the possibility of Return,
etc.] on any reason, which any Churches for 600 years after Christ would own.
If not, you seem your self to accuse their Successors of Schism, for drawing
away part of the People from them, (merely by the advantage of having the
Temples and Tithes) and so gathering Churches out of true Churches. So ordinary
is it for self-esteeming Men to talk to their own Reproach and Condemnation.]
Again; Page 41.


[What Law tieth us to be such Schismatics, as to renounce Communion with all
other Churches, except Parochial and Conformists?] [Whose Conscience should
sooner accuse him of Schism, a Conformist, that will hold Communion with none
but his own Party, but separateth from all other Churches in the Land? or Ours,
that resolve to hold Communion seasonably with all true Christian Churches
among us, that teach not Heresy, nor preach down Holiness, Love, or Peace, and
deny us not their Communion unless we will sin. Let the Impartial judge, Page 42.
which of us is the Schismatic and Separatist.] He is mightily transported
with the evidence of this Charge, and therefore we have it over and over. --
[As far as I can discern, this Dust of Schism, Page 43.
which you would cast into other Men's eyes, obliges you to wink hard, lest it
be blown back into your own.] Again, [Is it not as easy for us to say, that you
have needlessly, and sinfully, and scandalously taken our Places, (I mean, as to
the Church-relation, and not as to the Temples and Tithes,) and drawn some of
our People to Separation from those that were before true Churches. We say not
so; but put not your selves on the hard Task of disproving it, if you are
wise.] That is plainly,
at the least, we think so, and would have the People to believe so of you, and
that you are not able to disprove it, and will hazard your Reputation for
Wisdom by attempting it; tho yet we would escape the Odium of down right
affirming it. And yet so much is said by this Author this way, that I cannot
excuse his [ We say not so] from a direct and known Falsehood.
For thus he proceeds to harp still on the same String: Page 60.
[Do you draw Churches to your selves out of our Churches that were before you,
and then charge your Action on us?] [Why come you not to the private Churches
among you, that have all this while been kept up? E. Gr. in London; Why may not
Dr. Manton, Dr. Annesley, Dr. Jacomb, and abundance such, as fairly charge
those that go only to the Temples, for separating from them? They say, they are
as true Churches as you. If their not hearing you is Separation, why is not
your not hearing of them so? Big words, when Men are got into the Saddle, make
not their Cause good.] And yet again, [Are you Separatists for not hearing
them? If not, why are they such for not hearing you?] -- Now this way of
Questioning, Page 70.
by his own Confession, is but another manner of Saying: For so he takes up his
Antagonist; [Nor should you by a Question, says he, have vented such a
Falsehood? Page 62.


It is enough to expose these things without a more particular Refutation of
them, that we may take notice of the Spirit of the Men. They, alas! are not for
big Words, and yet in their low,
calamitous, and persecuted Estate, can swagger after this high and mighty
rate. They are the Ecclesia vere sic dicta, the true Churches, we have only the
Temples and Tithes: We are Schismatics and Separatists from them, (the Sons of
yesterday,) and gather Churches out of their true Churches. -- And sure they
conceit, we have as bad Memories as Judgments, when they report themselves in
the same condition now, with the honest and loyal-hearted Sons of the Church of
England fourteen or fifteen years ago, kept out against all Law and Conscience
from their Cures and Livings. -- Mr. Baxter, I perceive, has not profited, as
he might have done, by Dr. Pierce's good Admonitions and Instructions, given
him above twelve years since, which duly considered, would certainly have
superseded all this idle Cant and Expostulation. I will only be his Monitor in
a Point or two, and so leave him to con his Lesson better, if he be not now too
old, or too proud to learn.

I shall desire to know of you, says the Doctor, who are the Schismatics and
Separatists, Appendix to Mr. Baxter, (...). 29. p. 211.
and so the Breakers of Charity, and Peace, and brotherly Union? We, who
continue and persevere in the good old Way of the Church of England, in which
we were born and baptized, and to which we have vowed a due Conformity and
Obedience; or You, and your darling Presbyterians, who have departed from our
Assemblies, and separated your selves from our Communion, receded meanly from
your Subscriptions, and bound your selves by an Oath to extirpate your Fathers,
who were over you in the Lord, whom you had solemnly promised reverently to
obey?] And again, [You cannot charge any sort of Men for having separated from
you, Ibid. p. 214, etc.
without incurring the same Charge for having separated from us. When Mr.
Caudry wrote against Independency and gave it the Title of a great Schism, I
could not but smile at the Retortion which Dr. Owen very speedily and fitly
made him. Nay, it is publicly declared, by a great Body of Congregationals,
Prefat. p. 13.
That they did not break from the Presbyterians, but the Presbyterians rather
from them. You are so far from agreeing one with another, that you can never
expect to be at Unity with your selves, unless by being reconciled to the
Church of England, whose Calamities have obscured, but not destroyed her. The
Sin of Schism is contracted, Of Schism, chap. 11. page 178, 179.
says the judicious Dr. Hammond, either by some irregularity of Actions
contrary to the standing Rule and Canons of this Church, or by disobedience to
some Commands of Ecclesiastical Superiors. And then, by whom it is contracted,
I need not tell you. But blessed be God, (as he goes on) the Church of England
is not invisible; it is still preserved in Bishops and Presbyters rightly
ordained, and Multitudes rightly baptized, none of which have fallen off from
their Profession. To your preposterous Demands then, Why we separate from you,
and refuse to go to your Communion? The first and shortest Answer is this: That
we are passively separated, because you actively are Separatists. We,
by remaining as we were, are parted from you; and you, by your violent
departure, have made our Difference unavoidable. We are divided by Necessity,
and you by Choice: We from you, our Dividers; but you from us, and between your
selves: You (like Demas) having forsaken us, and embraced this present World;
it is our Lot, (as it was Paul's) to be unavoidably forsaken. When the Times
are changed by some, and others are changed by the Times, you must at least
excuse (if not commend) us, that we meddle not with those that are given to
change. Prove. 24.21.
For you to go from us, and then to chide us for being parted, is the greatest
Injustice to be imagined, because it requires us to verify the two Extremes of
a Contradiction, etc.

Had these things, offered formerly to our Author's consideration, been
digested by him, he had certainly been antidoted, in a great measure, against
those odd Prejudices, which do now so exceedingly swell him.

[We are told of Schism from the Church of England, Page 35.
when I would give him all the Money in my Purse, to make me understand what
the Church of England is.] I know not well here which to admire at more, [ Of
the Church of England, and of Schism from the Church of England.]
the Query it self, or the Manner of propounding it; both for certain are
extreme idle and extravagant. Had this been said in the Times of Deformation,
when the Face and Appearance of our Church had been obscured by the thick and
black Clouds of Persecution, (or by one born and bred up altogether in those
times) there might have been some pretense perhaps for it: But since the Return
of the Stream, and Tide of things into their ancient Channel, to make this
Enquiry, is little other than groping for the Sun at Midday. He may publish
himself an Episcopal Protestant, and one of the greatest Adversaries to the
Papists, as long and as loudly as he please: Here is an evident Discovery,
whose Friend he is, and what Side he takes to. -- Had he lived in King David's
or Solomon's time, or any other religious Prince's, on record in the holy
Scriptures, he might have bid as fair to make him understand what the Church of
the Jews was. -- But who can ever hope to make him understand against his Will?
He could have easily enough resolved himself unto a tolerable Satisfaction, had
he not designed to become troublesome. -- [I confess easily, says he, that many
Churches, Page 37.
united under one King, and living in one Kingdom, and having thereby special
Opportunity for Synods, and Correspondence, and Concord, (he might have added,
observing the same Liturgy, agreeing in the same Articles and Profession of
Faith, and guided by the same Laws and Canons in their Government and Worship;)
may be called one Church, by a Denomination, (1.) accidental, (2.) humane, not
used in Scripture; (he should have excepted the Old Testament.) And we will not
be so quarrelsom, as to avoid that Language, where Men will needs use it.] Time
was, when a National Church was no such slight matter in the esteem of his
Brethren. -- [But it is the thing it self, says he, and not the Name that we
enquire of, What is that one essential constitutive Head, which makes the
Churches of England to be all one Church, in a proper political sense, as a
Governed Society? None question the Civil Head; none question the need of
Agreement among all these Churches: But the question is only of the one
Ecclesiastic constitutive Head.] Are not our Ecclesiastical Governors as
unquestionably known as the Civil? It Is difficult therefore to know what he
would be at, unless he would have us declare some one Pope over us.

[Tell us what you mean by our Schism from the Church of England, says he;
Page 38.
we divide not our selves from the King or Kingdom, or from the particular
Churches, as concordant in any necessary thing.] If you divide your selves from
the Bishops or Governors of the Church, and oppose and confront those
Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
which are the standing Rules and Measures of the Churches Concord in Doctrine,
Discipline, and Worship, and what things are necessary thereunto, you are
guilty of this Schism; and so far you divide your selves from the King and
Kingdom too, as that Government, and those Constitutions, are adopted into the
Laws of both.

Page 39.
[But perhaps, it is our Disobedience to the Church, that is our Schism from it.
But every one that makes himself an Ecclesiastical Governor over other Pastors
and Churches, is not therefore their rightful Lord. The King we know, and his
Officers we know; but we know not all that call themselves our Lords and
Masters. Not but that Obedience is the easiest Course of Life to a quiet humble
Mind, (as yours, I doubt, is not); but Fidelity to our King commands the
disowning of Usurpers.] The Intimation here is too foul and seditious, that our
Lord Bishops are such; none of the King's Officers, but Usurpers;
such whom the King owns not, but they make themselves Ecclesiastical
Governors. The self-obtruding Prelacy, as he elsewhere has it. -- [The King we
know, Page 114.
and his Officers we know; but -- ] This Rhetoric was learned of an evil
Spirit, Acts 19.15. -- But O the Tenderness and Loyalty of a Presbyterianiz'd
Conscience! [Fidelity to their King commands them the disowning of Usurpers.]
Just as formerly, Fidelity to King Charles the First, made them down with the
Bishops, and raise and maintain a War, under pretense of evil Counselors
cleaving to Him, etc. -- Or rather, as Fidelity to King Charles the Second,
made R. B. to disown R. C. Qui dicit quae non debet, necesse est, ut, quae non
velit, aliquando audiat.

[Where the Parish-Minister is faithful, and the Parish small enough, and near
enough to assemble in one Place, Page 12.
and the People satisfied with the Liturgy; I suppose, the Soberest of the
Nonconformists, (for they are not all of a Mind,) will gather no Church out of
that Parish.] They were mad certainly, should they endeavor what they have no
more hopes of, and cast their Nets where they are like to catch nothing. But
this yet is the Wisdom only of the soberest of them; and we are left to
suppose, that they are not all thus far resolved to be sober and discreet.

[He that had rather Ten thousand Persons stayed idly at home, Page 13.
or went to Sports or Drinking in Stepney Parish, or Giles Cripplegate, or
Sepulchers, or Martin's in the Fields, or Clement-Danes, etc. (how shie he is
of naming Saint!) than a N. C. should preach to them, I will not foul my Paper
by calling him as he deserves, tho he pretend, that gathering a Church out of
a Church is the thing that he opposes.] -- These, it seems, are the Godly
Party, who would flock to the N. C. in those great Parishes, (for otherwise to
what purpose does he here mention them?) Such, viz. as would otherwise stay
idly at home, or betake themselves to Sports or Drinking. And yet, as the N. C.
and his Preaching possibly may be, not much to be preferred to either. And, if
you call the Man that says so, by no other Name than he deserves, you need not
fear the fouling of your Paper by it; tho that be a thing too, I perceive, you
are not always so squeamish at.

[What if any Number of Persons, as good as you, Page 14, 15.
should think that the Liturgy is guilty of all the Disorders and Defects which
once were charged on it, and of some Doctrinal Corruptions since? And what if
they think, that the Parish Churches are void of Christ's true Discipline, and
are under an Alien, one which they judge unlawful? What if they yet say, that
your Churches may be true Churches?]

Truly we should look upon them as Men of crazy Judgments, and exorbitant
Understandings, and watch over them, and beware of them, (with so much the more
diligence for their Number sake) as Enemies, that would undoubtedly, upon the
first opportunity offered, down with that which they charge with so much Guilt,
and eject those whom they adjudg Aliens, and Unlawful; to advance, as they
sometimes speak, a pure Worship, and the Scepter of Christ in their own hands.

Page 15.
-- [And if withal you say, that you refuse them, and they refuse not you; You
will not give them the Lord's Supper, unless they take it kneeling, (which I
think they may do, but they think otherwise.) You will not baptize their
Children, without the transient Image of the Cross, as a dedicating Sign. -- ]
This is wholly levelled at the Law, requiring those things in common from them
and us, which has also as charitably provided for the explication of them, so
far as might satisfy the most tender Consciences, were not some Men ambitious
of keeping up Scruples, by putting such Notions into their Heads, of
sacramental and dedicating Signs, which otherwise they would never think of;
and when they hear, understand as little but the Bugbear Sound only. And if
after all this, People will be contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the
Churches of Christ. They may be all admitted, if they please, upon the same
equal terms, as their Christian Neighbors are.

Ibid.
[But in this last Case, I suppose, the most of the N. C. that live in
Country-Parishes, which have good Ministers of their own, will not call
themselves a distinct Church (totally) but will hold their Meetings, as
Chappel-Meetings are held.] This Notion of Chapels he is much taken with. [
'Chappels subordinate to the Parish Church,] Which we also should like the
better, Page 27, 30.
were we once well secured of that Subordination. But this, I conceive, is
chiefly designed to wind themselves by degrrees into the established Church.
[Suppose your selves, says he, as Chappel-Curates, under the Parish-Ministers,
Page 91.
and so in Concord perform your Work.] This were something indeed, could we
reconcile it with what he observes in another place. Page 71.
-- [I doubt the Separation is in this, that the tolerated Minister will not be
your Curate. But remember, that some are Presbyterians, and therefore for
Parity of Ministers; and I, and many others, are so much for Episcopacy, (it
must be then surely in your selves) that we would not have Prelatical
Jurisdiction given to those Parish Priests, who themselves are against
Presbyters, (Elegant! Priests against Presbyters,) 'and for Prelacy.] Very
good! Let us be then as we are.

[Perhaps some N C. own Administrations may be as defective as the Liturgy.]
How wary we are! Page 16. Page 17.
-- Some N. C. may be as defective, -- perhaps, -- Yet they prefer their own
Manner of worshipping God, as better in their Opinion than the Liturgy, and
therefore to be chosen, when they may choose.] Quisque sibi suffenus.
But let the People note well, That is not always better in it self, which the
N. C. in their own Opinion prefer as such.

-- [They are driven from the Parish-Ministry against their Wills, Ibid.
and had far rather hold their ancient Stations.] That is, the Temples and
Tithes; for otherwise, as we have heard already from him, the Church-Relation
still continues. -- [They will thankfully return to them, whenever they have
leave.] Namely, upon their own Terms and Conditions; and so we easily believe
them. -- [And do earnestly pray, that these Seemings and Shows of Separation
may cease, the occasion of them being taken away.] That is, either the Law, or
their Prejudice and Obstinacy. This different Sense of the Occasion divides us
in our Prayers; we are for the latter, they for the former Acceptance. Page 20.
-- But he does ingenuously acknowledge, after all, Seemings and Shows of
Separation in their Practice. Oh! that they were but more tender in avoiding
this appearance of Evil!

And how great the Evils are justly to be feared, [ The great Evils of
gathering into distinct and separate Churches]
by their gathering into distinct and separate Churches, he is very sensible;
for he gives us a good account of them in six Particulars, worthy to be thought
upon; and therefore I will repeat them here after him.

1. The exasperating the Minds of Persons, Page 19, 20.
for Number or Quality considerable; and so alienating them from their
Brethren, and hindering their Good.

2. And thereby weakening the Protestant Interest, in a time which requires our
greatest Concord.

3. And setting of Parties against Parties, and Churches against Churches, and
turning Religion into Contentions, and mutual Oppositions.

4. And the countenancing of unlawful Separations, which will all shelter
themselves under such Examples: And the Dividers will not see the different
Principles on which we go, whilst our Practice seems to be the same.

5. And so it may be injurious to future Ages, by seeming to give them
Presidents for their unlawful Separations.

6. And it is not the least evil Consequent, That we shall cherish, not only
the Error of those, that think worse of the Parish-Worship and Assemblies than
there is cause; but we shall also accidentally nourish their Pride, who will
think themselves an holier People, because they erroneously censure the Persons
and Practices of others.]

God keep these Considerations warm upon their Hearts! And then, no doubt, they
will find these evil Effects or Consequences much more in Number, Weight and
Certainty, than any Benefits to be balanced against them.


But may any one besides Mr. B. be allowed to say thus much? How angry is he for
another reporting in a few other words, what himself has confessed in the
fourth Particular before recited; see with what a passionate Preface he quotes
them: [But my expectation of Modesty, I see, Page 53.
by the following words, needs a Pardon. Consider, I beseech you, how like
Independent Apes, your new Congregations will make you look. -- ]

In the Author himself the Words are thus: [Consider, I beseech you, Tolerat.
not to be abused, p. 20.
and see before hand, how like to Independent Apes, ( pardon the Expression)
your new Congregations will make you look.] But instead of pardoning the
Expression, such is his good Nature, he lays on unmercifully for it.
Page 53.
[That is to say, Come N. C. if you will not be beaten from your Master's Work,
we will try whether we can scoff and scorn you out of it: If that will not do,
we will pretend Christ's Name and Authority forbidding you. For as Christ, Mat.
4. so you, must encounter a threefold Temptation. But we take pleasure in
Infirmities, and can bear to be made as the Offscouring of all things,
remembering who was clothed with Purple, and then mocked, as being like a
King.] All this Vent but on the warning of them against that Symbolizing with
the Independents, which he himself also reckons up, as a great Evil attending
their withdrawing into separate Churches. So that if we make any Sense of what
he says here, to ape or imitate the Independents or Separatists, is to be made
in his Opinion, the Offscouring of all things, etc. Were it not seasonable
therefore to immind him upon this of his own words elsewhere to that Author:
Page 29.
[You understand neither the Men you talk of, nor their Cause They take not the
Independent Assemblies to be the Tents of Enemies: they leave Terms of Enmity
among Brethren, to those that have Enmity in their Hearts.] And yet, alas! how
unpardonable a Crime is it to suppose and represent them, as Imitators of these
dear Brethren! It were well if Mr. B. did not take pleasure in such Infirmities
as these are.

Page 20. [ On which side the Cure of our Di^is. chiefly lies.]
[The prime great Obligation for the Cure of all this, does lie upon some of
the Conforming Side.] How prone are we to excuse our selves, and shift off Duty
and Obligation to other Men! [It were easy for them not to silence Christ's
Ministers, that are as wise and as good as themselves.] The Aim is here
manifestly against the Law and Bishops; and the silenced Ministers are all
voiced up for the Ministers of Christ, and as wise and good as the best of them
that silence them. -- This we call Mortification, Self-denial, Humility, and
Modesty.

[It were easy for them, not to punish a godly Person so heavily as as an
Excommunication comes to, Ibid. and p. 2^.
for the Weakness of scrupling a Sacrament Gesture; and not to punish their
Children with being unchristned, or themselves with Excommunication, who think
the dedicating Image of the Cross unlawful, or think it their own Duty to enter
their own Children into Covenant with God, rather than Godfathers, that have
no propriety in them, and they are sure never intend to take them for their
own, or use them as they covenant to do.] It were easy for you, Sir, not to
slander the Government with such like Imputations. It were easy for you to make
a fairer Construction,
both of our Constitutions and Usages. When did you know any godly Person
excommunicated for mere Weakness and Thoughts? It were easy for you to forbear
that invidious Phrase, the dedicating Image of the Cross, and such like, which
you too frequently abound with, when our Liturgy has no such Scarecrow word in
it. It were easy for you not to have said, you are sure of what you know
nothing of, viz. the Intentions of Godfathers at the Font, etc.

But after all this, speak out the N. C. for your selves: Is here all you are
offended at? Will it fully satisfy you,
if the Bishops silence not the Ministers of Christ, that are as wise and as
good as themselves? And, if you shall not be excommunicated for the weakness of
scrupling a Sacrament-Gesture, or thinking the Sign of the Cross unlawful, nor
your Children unchristned upon this Score, (tho in truth they are all
christened, before signed,) and you your selves permitted to enter your own
Children into Covenant with God? Will you submit heartily to all the rest, if
kneeling at the Communion, the Cross at Baptism, and Godfathers be remitted to
you? Subscribe honestly, and declare you will stand to it. -- But alas! it is in
vain, I fear, to talk of Condescensions. We have been too much fooled already
with these Pretenses, to be confident that nothing else sticks with you. You
are a craving Generation; and the Condescension of your Governors in two or
three Points may but open your Mouths wider to ask more. They will gain, in all
probability, as little as the last King of blessed memory did, by all his
gracious Condescensions; and the Issue is like to be their own Ruin, as it was
his; the only difference this, that their condition will be the less pitied,
for loving Danger, and despising the Warnings given them of it.

If on such occasions true godly Christians are cast out of their
Parish Church, whether they err or not, Page 21.
all Ministers are neither obliged nor allowed to desert them, and so to add
Cruelty and Affliction to the Afflicted. ] In the Case of Excommunications,
Sir, it would better become you to say to those in Authority, as you do well in
another place: [We leave your own Works to your own Wisdom; (...)ag. 65.
other Men's Actions are not ours.] But yet remember, there are those among the
Conformists, that have compassion for the Afflicted, no less than you: And upon
this Supposal too, you are to congregate none but our Excommunicates, and those
among them who are truly godly Christians, and those cast out of their
Parish-Churches, on such occasions as before were specified: And then, I
conjecture, your Meetings will not be much thronged.

Page 21.
[They that think they answer all, by saying, those Peoples Scruples are but
Errors, do but (1.) show their Self-esteem, who can call that Error, which they
have said so little to prove to be so (in some of their Instances). (2) And he
talks neither like a Pastor, nor a Christian, nor a Man, that thinks all
that err should be cast out off the Church.]


He is yet to seek, I believe, for that Pastor, Christian, or Man, that so
talks. -- But is it Self-esteem at this time of day in the Christian Church,
to call these Peoples Scruples Errors? And has there not enough been said by
our Judicious Writers, Whitgift, Andrews, Morton, Hooker, Paybody, Sanderson,
and others, (to name none who are now living,) to prove them so? What will some
Men think enough? -- But how should we have heard of it, if we had called them
false Conceits, paultry Principles, and Perverseness, as we find some of the
like Principles, that have no less to be said for them, deservedly censured in
this Book? By name, Page 96, 97.
The Unlawfulness of all Book-prayers, or all imposed: Placing Religion in
being cross to the rest of the Congregation, in not standing up at the Creed
and Hymns, etc. But, I beseech you, Sir, are you the only Man that may speak
sharply against the Humors and Weakness of Religious People? Page 126.
Or are you the sole Demonstrator of those Mistakes which you inveigh against?
Or have you the Monopoly of Names and Censures? Abate but a little of that
great and ungrounded Esteem you have of your self, and you will soon perceive
it, not to be Self-esteem in others, to call those often baffled Scruples,
Errors at least, if no worse. The truth is, you would be well advised, to spend
that time (I will not say, as some have done, in your Greek Grammar, but) in
practical Meditations, wherein lies your chiefest excellency, that you waste in
these crude Scriblings, which you have scarce the Patience your self to read
over, and correct, before you send to the Press.

[As the Weakness of the People enclineth them to causeless Separations and
Disjunctions; Page 23.
so the doleful Pride and Selfishness of the carnal Part of the Clergy, has in
most Ages made them too impatient with the peoples Weakness, and make such a
Noise and Stir in the World, if a few do but draw from their Communion, as if
all that disowned them, disowned Christ; and all, because Pride would make
every Man a God to the World.] For Instance sake, when the Assembly at
Westminster were so exasperated at the Five Dissenters, and the City-Ministers
exclaimed so zealously, both from Press and Pulpit, against the Independents;
who were then the carnal Part of the Clergy? Who, by these measures, guilty of
doleful Pride and Selfishness? Which, wherever found, deserve a Condemnation.

[If there be any such conformable Clergymen, Page 25, 26.
as first will do all they can to silence and eject us, and forbid us to preach
the Gospel of Salvation; and then will do all they can, to hinder our
Restoration, and to keep us silent: And lastly, when his Majesty's Prudence
and Clemency gives us Liberty to preach, when they can no longer hinder us by
Force, would stroke us into Silence, and Neglect of our Office, by a few such
silly and confident Reasonings, as this Author uses. -- I will not offend the
Readers ears, by giving them the Name that I think they deserve, but wish them
to read, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. and to tell them, (by what Names or Titles soever
they be distinguished,) that I, that am a dying Man, would be loath to stand in
their Case before God; and that, if they and I were well agreed, that there is
indeed a God, a Christ, a Heaven, and a Hell, I think, we should be easilier
agreed in all the rest of our Differences. Some Teachers need these plain
Admonitions.

You of the Conformable Clergy, now look to your selves; here is a Siquis you
are nearly concerned in. If there be any such among you,
as do all you can, in your respective Places, (1.) To silence and eject the N.
C. who will not submit to the common Orders of Public Discipline, but revile
them; and forbid them upon this account to preach the Gospel of Salvation, who
have sometimes preached Sedition, Rebellion, or Schism, instead of it; and,
it is to be feared, upon an opportunity may do so again. And then, (2.) upon the
same Score, do hinder their Restoration, without they change, or renounce
their former Principles, which they refuse to do, and keep them silent still,
continuing in the same Grounds, for which they were at first legally silenced.
And then, (3.) persuade them, by Presbyterian Motives and Reasonings,
heretofore avouched openly by themselves, which was the rebuked Author's Scope
and Drift) not to take the Liberty of running into Separations. Whosoever you
are, I say, and by what Names or Titles soever distinguished, (whether
Archbishops, or Bishops, Priests or Deacons,) you deserve a Name too ugly and
abominable to be mentioned; and were it not for fouling of Paper, or offending
the Readers ears, you should hear it too. However, I will give it you, tho not
in words at length, yet in Figures, which sure you have Learning enough to
uncipher, if you have but Grace to use it. Pray, peruse that Text, The same
Text we may find in the Papers delivered from the N. C. Commissioners, 1661. p.
108. with many other Passages of like nature with this Treatise.
1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and
have persecuted us, [even us the Apostles], and they please not God, and are
contrary to all Men; forbidding us, [even us Apostles] to speak to the
Gentiles, (to whom Christ himself has sent us for their Conversion) that they
might be saved: To fill up their Sins always, for the Wrath of God is come upon
them to the uttermost. Which Text is so exceeding pat and proper to the present
Case between you and us, that, lest you should not have your Bibles by you, I
have taken care to prefix a good part of the Words (to leave you the more
without excuse) in my very Title Page. And in short, that you may from hence be
able to spell your own Name, it amounts to this: Ye are very Jews, persecuting
Jews,
such as crucified Christ Jesus, slew their own Prophets, and now forbid and
restrain us the Apostles of Christ, sent forth to save such Heathens as your
Followers are: Nay, I fear, you are not so good as those Jews, for there was
some Religion yet in them, but you are a Pack of Atheists or Infidels. -- That
is the English of what follows: [If they and I were well agreed, that there is
a God, a Christ, an Heaven, and an Hell. -- And to a like purpose elsewhere:
Page 57.
Alas! what thoughts have those Men of Souls, of Sin, of Holiness, of
Repentance, and of their own Sufficiency and Labors!] Go ye now, and chew upon
this in private*

Sometimes he parallels the N. C. Ministers Case, with the Loyal Clergy,
ejected without and against Law in the Times of Rebellion; but here, and in
other Places, he rises higher, and represents them to us, as the very Apostles,
sent immediately by Christ, persecuted and silenced by us, as so many cursed
Jews or Heathens: For which, he likewise tells us, the Day of our Desolation is
approaching, and Wrath from God coming upon us to the uttermost.

Such is the Truth and Modesty of the Man, that will yet presume no higher,
page 118.
than to lay himself at the Conformists Feet, and (under the sweet and
affectionate Appellation of Fathers and Brethren) humbly beseech and petition
them.

But, to do him right, I must also tell you, that he is not always thus
transported, and in his Altitudes. In his lucid Intervals he is far more
discreet and moderate, and in an obliging manner acts the Advocate for us,
against the more Fanatic Objectors. Thus in his Cure of Church-Divisions:

Cure of Church Divis. p. 259, 260.
[ Object. It is one thing to persecute for particular Opinions and Interests,
as almost all Parties have sometimes done; and another thing, to persecute for
Godliness it self.

Ans. I confess, it is, and the difference between these two is very great.
But, I pray you, consider; First, they are very few, perhaps none at all, that
you separate from, that ever persecuted you any way at all, nor can you prove,
that ever they so much as allowed of it. Secondly, That they, whom you and I do
suffer by, do not believe that they persecute us for Godliness, but think, that
here the Case is more defensible than yours was; for you had no just Authority
over us. When the Anabaptists did pull down the Ministers,
they pulled down the Magistrates too;] And when the Presbyterians, and other
Nonconformists, outed the Bishops, they rebelled against the King too. [And
therefore it was a Persecution of Equals without Authority: But those that we
Ministers suffer by now, are our lawful Rulers, (pray, remember that, no
Usurpers,) who have made-Laws to subscribe, and say, and swear, and do the
things which we do not. And therefore they think, that we suffer but for a
different Opinion, joined with Disobedience. It Is not all Men whom they forbid
to preach, but only those who dissent, and do not obey them: It Is not all Men
that are godly, whom they imprison, but those that meet to worship God, in a
Way and Manner differing from theirs, and forbidden by them. So that how can
you say, that this is not for differing Opinions?

Object. But we forbid them not to hold their own Church Communion: Tho we
separate from them, we never denied them the Liberty of their Consciences.

Ans. Some of your Judgment denied many of them much of that Liberty, which
consists in worshipping of God in their own way, when you were in Power. But,
suppose they had not, it is but another Way of Incharitableness; the Vice
expressed seems to be the same, if you condemn them as unfit for Christian
Communion, and therefore you exclude them from yours; and you take their
Communion among themselves, to be but a Profanation of holy things, which
makes them the more impious, and you the more odious: And you tolerate it in
them, as you tolerate Men's Folly and Madness, or Leprosy, or Plague, because
you cannot cure it. And, I pray you, judge, if there be any more Christian Love
in this kind of Dealing, than there is in that which you call Persecution.] We
are beholden to him for this kind Apology.

But can any, amongst the most bitter Separatists, call us worse than he has
done, by Interpretation at least, in the Section we have perused before? Who
would ever think, that he had elsewhere said of the Learned, zealous, high
Conformists, and that in this very Treatise, that, Page 119.
[They are not, by any sober Man, to be accused of doing, either they knew not
what, or what they did not suppose was good, and would countervail all that it
should cost to procure it]? If such are not to be accused by any sober Man, we
may appeal to him as Witness, that he must needs be mad with Passion and
Prejudice, that rails upon them in the manner even now expressed. O! that he
were once so happy, as to reconcile the Differences, and cure the Divisions,
between Himself and sober Mr. Baxter.

Page 28. [ Presbyterian Resolutions.]
1. I believe the Presbyterians will join with the Independents, not as a Sect,
as you call them, but in all that they think good and lawful.] It Is not long
since the Presbyterians called them a Sect too, and their Way Schism, Letter of
L^n. Mini^^. to the Assembly, Jan. 1. 1645.
a Schism, the Toleration whereof they judged repugnant utterly to their Solemn
League and Covenant. And they agree now, it is like, just as they did before,
that is, against the present Establishment.

2. That they will exercise their Ministry, as they are by Covenant engaged,
for Christ and Men's Souls.

['As they are by Covenant engaged,] That just now mentioned, a Testimonial of
the taking whereof was required from every one that addressed himself to the
Presbytery for Ordination. See their Form of C^rch-Government, p 20
And of which Mr. Case said, The Waters of this Covenant have been a notable
Purgation to the Rebels. Quarrel of the Covenant, Sermon. 2. page 65, 66.
-- It has been a Shibboleth to discover them, and a Sword in the hand of the
Angel of the Covenant, to chase or slay them. The mighty Armies of Malignants
have not been able to stand before it: The Walls of Jericho have fallen flat
before it. The Dagon of the Bishops Service Book brake its Neck before this Ark
of the Covenant. Prelacy and Prerogative have bowed down, and given up the
Ghost at its Feet. -- And again: Ibid. p. 62.
I am humbly confident, that the same Shores shall not bound this Covenant,
which bound the two covenanting Nations; but, as it is said of the Gospel, so
will it be verified of this Gospel Covenant: The sound thereof will go into all
the Earth, and the Words of it to the ends of the World, Romans 10.18.

3. They will worship God with the Sect of the Diocesan Prelatists in the
Parish-Churches also, Page 29.
as far as will stand with the due exercise of their proper Ministry.] That is,
till, according to their Covenant, they can root them out; which that they may
effect the more successfully, the Independents now are not a Sect, but
Brotherhood, -- No; it is the Sect of the Diocesan Prelatists. -- Divine Mr.
Herbert, in his Poem of the British Church, (who very well understood what was
meant by it) gives her this deserved Commendation above all others, that she
sits in the Place of Virtue, betweeen Extremes on either hand: The Mean thy
Praise and Glory is. But here is one that rudely and insolently thrusts her
out, to step himself into her Room; and justles her, first to one Extreme, and
then to another, before to Church-Tyranny, and now to Schism.

O the Confidence of this Adviser in his own Understanding, Page 29.
that dare say, [ Mr. B's supercilious Contempt of his Adversaries.]
he is sure the Presbyterians have no reason to engage in a way of Public
Worship, contra-distinct to the Parochial Congregations!] Leaving the Adviser
to his own Vindication, I will only take occasion here to note out some of the
passionate Exclamations, and scornful Vilifications of the Answerer, that we
may see at one view, how able he is at this sort of Rhetoric. ['O the
Confidence of this Adviser in his own Understanding!] This is one of the
modester Sort. Page 25.
[Such silly and confident Reasonings, as this Author uses.] That we had
before. [Alas! poor England! whose Teachers talk confidently at this rate.]
Alas! Page 44.
for the People, that cannot try Sense from Nonsense! Page 61. Page 60.
with what Stuff will such Men carry them away?] [Some Men can triumph in such
Reasonings for themselves, as would make another sick to read them.] ['He will
bring us into Vtopia, Morus invented it.] And again: Page 48, 50.
[If we must follow you into Vtopia or Moria.] Here is a childish Clench, and
somewhat else; (...), Mat. 5.22. -- [Such Confidence upon such insignificant
Reasonings, Page 57.
is a great dishonor to the Wit and Humility of the Author. Page 61.
] [His next Section is as mere delusion as any of the rest.] ['What does this
Man, but talk confusedly?] [Look up, Man, without Blushing.] [Sir, villify not
the Wits of those Clergymen, Page 62.
that chiefly contributed to our -- ] [ Honor their Understandings more.] [His
pitiful Objection is but a contemptible sporting of himself at the Game he is
best skilled at, objecting nothing, Page 48.
that he may seem to answer it with something.] ['O for Modesty!] [With full
Sail of Self-conceitedness, he next comes upon us. Page 54. Page 43.
] [His next has no bounds, and grieveth me to read it. O Posterity, how will
you know what to believe!] [He adds old Speeches against Toleration, Page 62.
wherein we lament his want of common Sense or Modesty.] etc. -- What a
Fountain of Virulency is there within, Page 65
which sends forth so many Streams of contemptuous and provoking Language,
against a learned, charitable, moderate, meek, and ingenuous Writer?

Is the exercising of a Worship and Discipline, [ Of N.C. boasted Reasons.]
more agreeable to God's Word than yours, (we are ready to give you the Proof,
when we have leave,) no reason. -- Had we had leave to have confuted the silly
Reasonings of Mr. Fulwood, and some other such Pamphleteers, Page 30.
produced against the N.C. we had long ago showed you Cause to repress such
Self-esteem. -- ] [He knows, Page 31. Page 32.
that we must not give him our Reasons against Conformity. He cannot but know,
that many that conform not in all the Matters of Subscriptions, Declarations,
Oaths, Discipline, etc. (not meddling with other Men's Consciences) do think it
would be in them a Compositi^n of such heinous Crimes as they forbear to name
them for fear of seeming to be accusers of others, and to be unpeaceable. And
if he think that such Toys as Mr Fulwood, Mr Stilemans, and Mr Hinkleys etc.
should satisfy them, he thinks Contemptibly of their understandings; And he
that upon such poor Temptations as these, will yield to what their Consciences
fear, can scarce tell what he may yield to before he dies. Let him procure us
Leave but to publish our Reasons against Conformity; and then let him tell us
that we were better Conform when he has Answered them. It is easy to talk,
when none must Confute him, and to brave it out against one whose Tongue is
tied.] Again -- [The Love of Peace, Page 43.
and the fear of frighting any further from Parish-Communion than I desire, do
oblige me to forbear so much as to describe or name the additional Conformity,
and that Sin which N. C. fear and fly from, which makes it harder for us that
desire it, to draw many good People to Communion with Conformists than it was
of Old. But, when both Law and Love of Peace and Concord forbid us so much as
to name the causes, it is disingenuous for the Culpable to take that advantage
against us, and to force us to do that which they themselves cannot bear.]


Good man! How scrupulous and careful he is to do nothing without Leave! Not to
Print a Book without a License, or Imprimatur, from Authority! How he fears and
trembles to be an accuser of the Conformists, or frighten others from their
Communion, or seem unpeaceable! How powerful is the sense of the Law, and the
love of Concord in him, so that he dare not so much as name the Composition of
those heinous Crimes which the N. C. Conscience dreads in the point of
Conformity! -- And yet, notwithstanding this profession of Tenderness and
Conscience, and civility in the case, we have them over and over named and
pointed to. -- [It is no less, (as we heard before) than (1) Horrid Sacrilege,
Page 25.
(2) Perfidious Covenant Breaking, (3) Disobedience to God (4) Cruelty to
Souls, and (5) Unthankfulness for great Mercies, if any of us shall desert our
undertaken offices.] And again, elss where -- [What if a tolerated Presbyterian
should read the Common Prayer in his Church; Page 71.
and use all your Ceremonies, though he fear Perjury and Lying, and Violating
his Baptismal Vow?] Have we not here enough of that Composition of Crimes which
you N. C. fear? -- But, if there be not, you suppose us in another place to
know well enough without your telling. [We confess that we do not actually obey
the Civil unquestionable Power in every particular about God's Worship, Page 39.
which has been commanded us. I need not tell you why.] -- O but the
Additional Conformity! that you dread so much as to point at. What then is the
meaning of [' Doctrinal Corruptions] p. 15. and ['The New Doctrine about
Infants brought into the New Rubric.] p 45. I appeal to the Masters of
Ingenuity* whether this be not the worst and most emphatical way of hinting and
exposing to the People, when you pretend a thing so Enormous, that you fear the
very naming of it. -- But then, what must we say of this, after you have named
it over and over? -- after your Reasons publicly given in your Due Account,
as you call it, to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1661. -- After the Survey
of the Grand Case of the present Ministry, 1663 -- After many Other unlicensed
Pamphlets and Sermons? -- This, Sir, is Unpardonable.

Yet we cannot blame your Policy, who would be thought still to have somewhat
more to say for your selves than has hitherto been offered. This we are
sufficiently assured of, that No man,
heartily reconciled to the Ancient Establishments of the Church of England
since the Reformation, would boggle, as you do, at the present Conformity;
there being Nothing new required, but what was wholly occasioned by the
insincerity of some in their former Conformities, and the villainy of others in
Covenanting against, [ex malis moribus bonae leges.] Pref: to Cure of Chapter Divis.
and casting down the former Establishments. And let me freely tell you Sir,
(what you have, said your self sometime to other Separatists) [Read but the
writings against the Separatists of those times, and you may learn, that our
Light is not greater but less than theirs, and that we see not farther into
that cause than they did, and the Change of times does not change the Truth,
nor will warrant us to change our Religion.]

-- [He that says our Preaching is Evil, Page 32.
may tempt men to think that the Gospel, which we Preach, is Evil; or that
Infidelity, Atheism, Sensuality and Wickedness which we preach against, is good
or harmless. -- If you turn to them that Calumniate us of Preaching Error or
Sedition, the Law is open. Our Writings and Doctrine are easily tried. If we
say Evil, bear Witness of the Evil.]

Blame us not then for using, upon occasion, this Liberty and Freedom,
which you invite us to, and stand in some need of, whilst you remain so
securely Confident of your own Innocencies. -- Too much Evil has been said and
Printed -- And some Witness has been born of it too, in the Rebels Plea, the
Evangelium Armatum, the Bishop of Worcesters Letter etc. -- And somewhat is
added farther for the satisfaction of your desires here, in these Reflections,
which I have not yet done with.

[The Presbyterians distinguish between a Parish Church that imposes nothing
on the Ministers or people that God forbids, and one that does. Page 34.
-- And between a Parish Church that is reformable in that which notoriously
needs Reformation, and one that Solemnly covenanteth against Reformation.]
The intimation here is, that our Parish-Churches impose on the Ministers or
People, what God forbids,
and do solemnly Covenant against Reformation even in that which notoriously
needs it. -- And this he often glanceth at. -- [For my self, I have long been
of Opinion, which one day you will pardon, that Perjury, Perfidiousness, and
Persecution, Page 74.
Proud contending who shall be greatest, and Covenanting never in certain
points to obey Christ against the World and the Flesh, is not the way of God.]
And again, speaking to some of the Conformists, Page 132.
whom he calls Godly and sober. [Plain dealing is not the Sign of Enmity but
Love. I must tell you, that we cannot but think that you need Repentance, Great
Repentance for Sinning more, and that by Public, Deliberate, chosen,
Covenanted, ministerial Sin, Protesting against Repentance.] This is plain
enough, and the Charge high and home. Covenanting, Solemnly Covenanting against
Reformation; and that not for a time only, but for ever; nor in some one thing
but several. ['Never in certain points to obey Christ against the World and
Flesh, and this Ministerially, Publicly, Deliberately, upon Choice, and this
besides other horrid Sins of Perjury, Perfideousness, Persecution, and Proud
contending who shall be greatest, adding that unto all, which makes them most
unpardonable, ['Protesting against Repentance.] There had need be good proof
given of this Accusation, whereof yet none is offered, or we must record the
Accuser for a shameless Slanderer, and admonish him, in his own words, to
['Repent of such Calumnies, and not study to aggravate his fault by Excuses.
Page 64.
-- And, after all this, we must still believe, that he loves us and spares us,
and is extremly loath to say what evil he knows by us, Page, 43. Page 76. Page 32.
unwilling to frighten others from our Parish-communions, and loath to provoke
us more then needs, or to meddle with our Consciences. Is not here a
Compositian of heinous crimes, sufficient enough to scare men from our
Communion? Is not here enough to brand us for a sort of the most flagitiously
wicked wretches under Heaven? For who can lay on greater loads of aggravation?
And that Preaching, which can reconcile such Immoralities as these, with the
attributes of Godly and Sober, dishonours Christianity, and debauches the World.

[He, that is fallen under such Drunken Readers, as I was bred under in my
youth, [of Drunken Readers] Page 44.
that were Drunk many times ofter then they Preached (I am ready to prove it,
for they never Preached, but were Drunk-oft) This poor man and his Family must
venture their Souls on this sottish Drunkards conduct, because it is a True
Church. What a trick has the Devil found, to bind men to constancy in his
service, so it be done in a True Church?]

Bating the spitefulness of the Reflection, and subtilty of the Demonstration,
['Many times oftener Drunk than they Preached, for they never Preached.] The
Church of England, Sir has better provided for all her Children in the
necessaries to Salvation, than to leave them barely to the private Discretion
or conduct of the Best, much less of sottish Drunkards. And, if any such there
be, it were a greater charity to the Public to complain of them to those,
unto whom it belongs to admonish, suspend and remove them, than propagate idle
stories as the manner is, from hand to hand, to the prejudice even of the
innocent. But as there are more ways of Preaching in a true sense, than that
which is vulgarly cried up for such; so there are more ways also of being
drunk, than those two common ones, by Wine and strong Drink, Isa. 29.9. We
could easily tell you of Men drunk with Passion, and Self-conceit, and Error,
and a Spirit of Giddiness. Mr. B. can tell you at another time, That certainly
Pride is a greater Sin than Whoredom or Drunkenness, etc. Gild. Salvian. p. 179.
And Dr. Pierce has formerly recommended this useful Remark to your
Consideration: [Many are no Drunkards, Ans. to Mr. B. chap. 6.. 13. p, 152.
who are yet more scandalous than if they were. The Devil himself is no
Drunkard, but he is proud, and envious, and hypocritical, rebellious,
sacrilegious, and many other ways worse than a common Drunkard: His frequenting
the Church, and transforming himself into an Angel of Light, appearing like a
Saint, and putting on Godliness for a Disguise, does make him much more
scandalous, (in the true importance of the word) than he could possibly be, if
he could be drunk. And although a Drunkard is so detestable a thing, as not to
deserve a Toleration in the meanest of the People, much less Impunity or
Connivance in any Priest; yet I would not have him punished more for his
Judgment than his Life, (as I can prove many have been:) because a Drunkard may
be Orthodox, and a dry Man may be an Heretic; a Drunkard may be loyal to God's
Anointed, whilst one, who never was drunk, may be a Rebel. Nor can I think it
praiseworthy, Ad Rempublicam perdendam, aut Ecclesiam, sobrium accedere.]

-- [Tho we differ not at all from the Doctrine of the Church of England, Page
45. [ Of the N. C. difference from the Doctrine of the Church of England.]
till the new Doctrine about Infants was brought into the new Rubric, yet it
is not in minutioribus, that we differ from the Conformists: Gather from it
what you can. God knows, we think, the Matters in difference, very far from
things indifferent.]

-- [We differ not at all from the Doctrine of the Church of England.] What,
not at all from Artic. XX, where it is declared, That the Church has Power to
decree Rites and Ceremonies. See the XXXIX Articles.
Not at all from Artic. XXXIII, where it is declared, That that Person, who, by
open Denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from the Unity of the
Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the
Faithful, as an Heathen and Publican, until he be openly reconciled by Penance,
and received into the Church by a Judge that has Authority thereto? Not at all
from Artic. XXXIV, where it is declared, That whosoever, through his private
Judgment, wittingly and purposely, does openly break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be
ordained and approved by common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, that
others may fear to do the like, as he that offends against the common Order
of the Church, and hurts the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the
Consciences of weak Brethren?] Not at all from Artic. XXXVI, where it is
declared, That the Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and
ordaining of Priests and Deacons, -- does contain all things necessary to such
a Consecration and Ordaining; neither has it any thing, which is of it self
superstitious or ungodly?] And are not these, part of the professed Doctrine of
the Church of England? But why chatechize I you thus far, when you have before
professed your Ignorance, what is meant by the Church of England? How then can
you tell, what the Doctrine of that Church is, and whether or no, or in what
you agree and differ with it?

-- [Till the new Doctrine about Infants was brought into the new Rubric.
] If you differ not at all from the old Doctrine of the old Rubric, as you
would seem to tell us, there needs no question about the new; for let us view
them well together.

The Old Rubric thus: That no Man shall think, that any Detriment shall come
to Children, by deferring of their Confirmation: he shall know for a Truth,
that it is certain by God's Word, that Children, being baptized, have all
things necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

The New more shortly, thus: It is certain by God's Word, that Children which
are baptized, dying before they commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved.

Where indeed the Preface of the former is omitted, but nothing is taught for a
Truth, certain by God's Word, but what was so acknowledged before: For the
Omission of that one Clause, [ have all things necessary to their Salvation,]
is sufficiently included in, [ are undoubtedly saved]: and the inserting that
other, [ dying before they commit actual Sin] tends rather to restrain, than to
enlarge the Proposition, as the impartial Observer will easily judge.

And yet, forsooth, this new Doctrine, as he slanders it, sticks much with
them, who avouch themselves not to differ at all from the Doctrine of the
Church of England, till that new Rubric which contains it, was introduced. And
here is the Sum of his Doctrinal Corruptions, in the Plural Number, Page 15.
which we had mention of before. And he has yet another Fling at it before the
end. [I read in the Rubric, of something about Infants certain by the Word of
God; Page 75.
but I never read, in what Chapter or Verse it was.] Now must he not evidently
affirm as much of the Old, if he agree unto it, as he would be thought to do?
Is it not there as express, He shall know for a Truth, that it is certain by
the Word of God? Is not that Fanatic Exception, every whit as pertinent and
agreeable there? ['But I never heard in what Chapter or Verse it was] What need
of this, I pray, to either? What Chapter or Verse? As if Scripture Sense and
Consequences were not as truly the Word of God, as Scripture-Words, and express
Assertions? That which is there dianoetice, as well as that which is there
axiomatice, as some love to speak. Or as if Holy Scripture were not, before
Chapter and Verse were determined in it. -- But this is the doughty way of
arguing, which the Presbyterians have furnished the other Sects withal against
themselves: What Chapter and Verse says so and so? And this great Rebuker of
other Sectaries, seems mightily taken himself with it. Page 75.
[What Chapter and Verse says, that only Subscribers, Swearers, Declarers, and
Conformers, are the Church of Christ; and those that fear an Oath and
Conformity, are none of it?] This, one would think, were matter enough for many
Verses.

['Yet it is not in minutioribus, that we differ from the Conformists. Page 45.
] So it appears. [God knows, we think the Matters in difference very far from
things indifferent: Gather from it what you can.
] We must gather from it then, That they are not minute or small Matters, upon
which you are rejected; and that the Church and you are not like to agree,
until either she renounce her Doctrine, or you alter your Judgment about it. --
We can therefore the more easily believe you, when you say:

-- [We have almost twelve years ago cried out, Page 65. [ Mr. B 's confessed
Vnmannerliness to the Bishops.]
even to Vnmannerliness, that, if possibly, we might have been heard, to the
Reverend Prelates. -- O drive not godly People from your Communion for
nothing!] Vnmannerliness with a Witness! But can any thing be of less weight
than nothing? Elsewhere you have it: Page 72.
[Do you excommunicate, and drive from your several Parishes, the Members of
Christ, for not eating with your Spoon?] And can there be any thing almost more
minute or indifferent than that? But elsewhere you are still more irreverent,
and in your own word, unmannerly, (male morati): Page 60.
[Do you silence us, and depose us from the Ministry, and forbid Baptism, and
the Lord's Supper, to all that have not as wide a Swallow as your selves?] And
yet all this while you meddle not with our Consciences. It were obvious to
retort, that their Swallow was wide enough, who could let down the Covenant,
Bishops and their Lands together: and may claim Kindred with those on Record,
for straining at Gnats, and swallowing Camels.

Page 55. [ Some Taste what the N.C. would be at upon Toleration] Page 124.
Why may not we in the allowed Places exercise our Ministry, in baptizing the
Children of any of your Flocks that shall desire it, or giving them the
Sacrament? I yet understand not, unless for avoiding your Envy and
Displeasure.] Again, [What harm will it do you, if a N. C. preach by you? if
many follow him, if some prefer him before you? Yea, further, Brethren, what if
the Nonconformable Ministers do give the Sacrament to some, as you do to
others? What if they call themselves a Church, or exercise Discipline, (which
without need I would not have them do) what harm will this be to you or others?]


Were they once permitted, we may perceive how they would be still hitching
forward, and encroaching step by step. For I note these Passages only as a
Specimen of those Liberties, which they design to take from their Toleration.
And yet we must believe him: [We never desired to play the Bishops in other
Men's Diocesses. Page 55.
] What! not in the Bishop of Worcester's? not in the Bishop of London's? etc --
But to the Questions, briefly: Why may we not do so and so? Or, What harm will
it do to you or others? We may answer, as the Presbyterians themselves
sometimes did their Independent Brethren: Letter against Tolerat. p. 4, 5.
[The whole Church of England in short time will be swallowed up with
Distraction and Confusion: -- And the Mischiefs in the Church, will have their
proportionable Influence upon the Commonwealth. -- The Kingdom will be woefully
weakened by Scandals and Divisions. -- And it is much to be doubted, lest the
Power of the Magistracy be even utterly overthrown, considering the Principles
and Practices of some, together with their Compliance with other Sectaries,
sufficiently known to be Anti-magistratical.]

(...)ag. 56.
Baxter has told you, that Bishop Usher professed his Judgment to him, that
even Bishops in Council, tho they are the Governors of the Flocks, Of
Ecclesiast. (...)nods.]
yet meet not for Government of one another by Vote, or of other Bishops, but
for Concord. And Grotius, de Imper. sum. Pot. has showed you, that Canons are
not Laws, but Agreements.] Add to this: [Be sure to keep out both the Tyranny
of Major Votes, and of the proud, magisterial Self-arrogations of any
Individuals, Page 113.
that think others must stoop to them. -- Voting is not for Government, but for
Concord.]

Whatever Archbishop Usher professed to Mr. Baxter, or Mr. Baxter has here
told us from himself, he has spoken somewhat further and better in another
place: (...)e Disput. 12, 13.
[The Use of Synods or Councils is, says he, directly, (1.) For Information
and Edification of the Pastors themselves, by the Collations of their Reasons
and mutual Advice: (2) For the Union and Communion of the said Pastors, and of
the particular Churches by them, that they may agree in one. -- But then, these
direct Ends of Synods presupposed, indirectly they may truly be said to be for
Government. -- For Unity sake it becomes our Duty to submit to their just
A^reements;
and so the forming of such Agreements or Canons is consequently a part of
Government. -- Synods, as Synods, are directly for Unity and Concord, -- by
consequence, after a sort, regimental.] And for Grotius, whom he refers to, he
has sufficiently told us, that it was none of his meaning to destroy or take
away the directive, declarative, suasory, and constitutive Regiment of the
Church in Councils, De Imper. Sum Pot. chapter 4.. 10.
which he plainly asserts; but only that Imperium, which is proper and peculiar
to the higher Powers, and to be derived from their Authority. To this purpose
he instanceth: (1.) In the Observation of the Lord's Day; and, (2.) In the
Choice of Deacons. [In both, says he, we see something defined, and
constituted or appointed, by common Consent, which none could oppose without
heavy Guilt: For somewhat certainly ought to be determined, and nothing could
be so, one or other, it may be, disagreeing, unless either the lesser Part
should yield unto the greater, or the greater to the less; which latter, seeing
it is manifestly unjust, it follows, that the former was necessary. This Right
therefore of Constituting and Determining, is natural to the Church.] Thus that
learned Man. But we have no such word from him, as the Tyranny of Major Votes,
Page 113.
which once believed, we shall presently conclude the most August of all
Assemblies, Tyrannical. -- Nor can there be any way possible to keep out the
Magisterial Self-Arrogations of Particulars, where many are concerned, if the
Majority of Votes must not carry it. As for what he annexeth: [When it is once
thought, that the Major Vote must carry it, an Ithacian Synod will tyrannize,
and every weak self-conceited Man, that has nothing of Sense to say against
you, will charge the learned, judicious, grave Divines with Insolency, if they
will not be governed by Ten, that are unlearned, or injudicious
Self-esteemers.] He might have learned from Grotius, Chap. 8.. 2.
That no ones Right is to be denied for the possibility or danger of his
abusing it: For otherwise no Right at all will be certain unto any. And our
only Solace in this Case is in the Divine Providence.

-- We that have conferred with all the People of our Parishes, Page 57, 58. [
The N C. vying with their Successors.]
when we were permitted, found the Multitudes were almost as ignorant as
Heathens: And yet our excellent Successors, that do no such thing, (as to any
two of them that ever I knew or heard of) but see their Faces in the Church, (
Ingenuous!) can prove all our Teaching needless, to those poor ignorant Souls.
Is this Humility, and Ministerial Fidelity?] Ye are they that applaud and
justify your selves, and sound the Trumpet loud in your own commendation. We
should be glad enough of your Help, could we be secured of your Integrity and
Honesty. But till then we must say, with him in Valerius Maximus, Non opus esse
eo Cive Reipub. qui parere nesciret. Lib. 6. c. 3. 4.
The Church of Christ needs not Paterns of Disobedience, which, by how much
their Place and Office, Parts and Abilities, Devotion and Holiness, are reputed
greater than others, by so much the more effectually insinuate and recommend
Disorder and Confusion to the People. S^ b. Sermon. 43.
-- Or, as Chilo, one of the seven wise Men: Optimam esse Rempub. quae maxim
Leges, minime autem Rhetores audiat. -- As for your admired Teachers, they are
known to love and frequent those Places most, which themselves cannot but judge
to have least need of their Instruction. And you may please to take notice, how
justly you your self have charged them home with Hypocrisy in this matter. Page
93, 94.
-- [Bestow the greater half of your Labor in private, in skilful exhorting
People from House to House. If you did not so before you were silenced, repent
betimes: if you did, you have found the Benefit of it, (more ways, it is like,
than one.) This is that which few Nonconformists do; and in this you may best
live as their true Assistants, (and sometimes Underminers too). Brethren, let
me ask you, as before God, why has no more of this been done, while you were
silenced?
Is it not too much Hypocrisy, to cry out against them that forbid us
Preaching, which is one half of our Duty, and in the mean time, wilfully to
neglect that Part which none forbid us? This Way the Papists have done their
Work.] Mark that Argument! [And it is very considerable, that most that come to
your Chappel-Meetings, are such as you take for the least needy, as being
already turned unto God; but from house to house, you may speak with the more
ignorant. -- And Sincerity enclineth Men to that Way of Duty, which has least
Ostentation.] But that is not the common Way of the Presbyterians.

Page 61. [ How far Land. Minist. formerly against Tolerat. Page 67.
Look up, Man, without Blushing, and tell the World, whether ever the
Presbyterians maintained it a Sin to tolerate Presbyterians. -- It is strange
that any Party, who think themselves only or chiefly fit for Legal Possession,
should yet think themselves intolerable.] I no where find the Presbyterians apt
to think meanly of themselves; nor does the Author you thus challenge, as far
as I discern, intimate any such thing: but wholly reflects upon their present
Conjunction and Union with such,
whom themselves have sometimes reported intolerable. Consult a while the
Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, Testim. to the Truth of Jesus Christ,
and Sol. League, 1647.
and Solemn League and Covenant, subscribed by the London- Ministers; and there
you will find, among the abominable Errors, damnable Heresies, and horrid
Blasphemies, not to be tolerated.

More particularly, we abominate these infamous and pernicious Errors, of late
published:


That no Man shall ever perish in Hell for Adam's Sin. Page 8.


That Christ was given to undergo a shameful Death, voluntarily, on the Cross,
to satisfy for the Sin of Adam,
Page 9.
and for the Sins of All Mankind.

That, as the Death of Christ was extended to All; so likewise the Benefits
thereof were, both by the Father and the Son, intended for All. Ibid.


That, if God command the Gospel to be preached unto all, Page 10.
and Christ died only for some; then God commands a Lie to be preached to the
most Part of Men.

That if God should deprive Men of all Ability and Power to repent and believe,
and then should be still moving and persuading, Page 11.
still entreating and beseeching them to (repent and) believe, with that
Patheticalness of Affection, wherein he expresses himself in Scripture,
even to them that perish, as well as to those that are saved; this would seem
very hard, yea, somewhat harder than Injustice it self: But this is not so.

[How could our Answerer have escaped here with his, O for Modesty! Tie Men's
feet, and reproach them for not going? page 54.]

That neither Paul nor James exclude or separate faithful Actions,
or Acts of Faith, from Faith, or the Condition of our Justification, Page 15.
etc.

That an enforced Uniformity of Religion, throughout a Nation or Civil State,
confounds the Civil and Religious,
Page 22.
denies the Principles of Christianity and Civility, and that Jesus Christ is
come in the Flesh.

That little can be done, unless Liberty of Conscience be allowed, for every
Man, and Sort of Men, to worship God in that Way,
Ibid.
and perform Christ's Ordinances in that Manner, as shall appear to them most
agreeable to God^s Word, and no Man punished or discountenanced by Authority
for the same

These (say they) are some of those many horrid and prodigious Opinions, which
do in these unhappy Days swarm amongst us which, Page 23.
not without Grief and Horror of Spirit, we here recite, that by this small
Taste of their Wormwood and Gall, all the World may the better judge of the
deadly Bitterness of the rest, and the more freely justify the Fervor of our
Indignation against them all. -- Hoping, that as God has stirred up the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, to publish their Ordinance concerning the Growth and
Spreading of Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies; settin^ apart a Day of Public
Humiliation, to seek God's Assistance for the suppressing and preventing of the
same: so in his rich Mercy to England, he will at length find out some
effectual Means, by Authority of Parliament, Page 24.

for the utter Abolition and Extirpation of them all out of this distressed
Church. -- Furthermore, we are abundantly convinced, that the Presbyterian
Government, Ibid.
(truly so called) by Presbyteries and Synods,
in a due Line of Subordination of the Lesser to the Greater, with prosperous
Success exercised in the best Reformed Churches, is that Government, which is
most agreeable to the Mind of Jesus Christ revealed in the Scripture,
concerning which the Reverend Assembly of Divines have long since drawn up and
presented to both Honorable Houses of Parliament their humble Advice; which we
conclude so agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, that we can readily submit
thereunto our selves, and shall think the Church of England not a little
blessed of God, when, Page 25.
by the countenance of Supreme Authority, the Presbyterial Government and
Discipline shall be sincerely embraced, and duly exercised, in all the Parts of
this Kingdom. -- And then, we with our Brethren, are confident, this Government
will make the Churches of Christ among us,
terrible as an Army with Banners, and like a strong and fenced City, against
which the Adversaries shall despair to prevail, but by making a Breach in this
Wall. -- Wherefore we sadly lament England's general Backwardness to embrace,
yea, Forwardness to oppose this Government, and therein her own Mercy, whilst
so many of all sorts set themselves against the Lord, Page 31.
and his Christ. -- It is clearly evident to us, that Schisms, Divisions,
Heresies, and all profane Looseness, are manifest Works of the Flesh, so sinful
and damnable in their Nature, that they which do such things, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God: And that the Children of Light should be so far from having
any fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, as that they ought to
reprove them,
to avoid such as practice them, to abstain from all appearance of Evil, and to
hate the very Garment spotted with the Flesh. -- That the Civil Magistrates
have sufficient Warrant from the Holy Scriptures, not only to punish Seditions,
Treasons, Murders, Adulteries, and other Offenses against Righteousness and
Sobriety in the second Table; but also to inflict Punishment upon Offenders,
for professed Atheism, false Doctrines, Idolatries, Blasphemies,
Sabbath-Profanations, and other Transgressions against true Piety and Religion
in the first Table of the Decalogue. -- That a public and general Toleration
will prove an hideous and complexive Evil, Page 32.
of most dangerous and mischievous Consequence, if ever (which God forbid,) it
shall be consented to by Authority. -- All the Reformed Churches shall be
ashamed to own us; they shall all cry out against us, Page 33.
Is this England, that covenanted and swore to the most High God, such a
Reformation, and Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism,
Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the
Power of Godliness? And after so long Travel, has she now brought forth an
hideous Monster of Toleration, -- a detestable Toleration?

Therefore, upon all these Considerations, we the Ministers of Jesus Christ do
hereby testify to all our Flocks, to all the Kingdom, and to all the Reformed
Churches, as our great dislike of Prelacy, Erastianism, Brownism and
Independency: so our utter Abhorrencie of Antiscripturism, Popery, Arianism,
Socinianism, Arminianism, Antinomianism, Anabaptism, Libertinism, and Familism,
with all such like, now too rife among us; And that we Detest the
forementioned Toleration so much pursued and endeavored in This Kingdom,
accounting it unlawful and pernicious. -- This was subscribed December. 14. 1647,
by no less than 52 Ministers, and among them some of Those, whom Mr. B.
undertakes to prove true Pastors.

These now he may call, if he pleases, old speeches, but such they are, as
convince the Presbyterians of a great change at this Day from their first and
avowed Principles. What shall we think now of his,
I have met with Few Presbyterian Ministers in England?] whither are they fled?
Sacril: Des. Page 5.
or what are they transformed into? -- What of That? I see not, what great hurt
it would do, for Anabaptists, Separatists etc. That cannot join with the Parish
Churches, to have leave to meet among themselves, Page 23.
and worship God together in peace.?] -- What of the blending Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Page 29.
Independent and Erastian together?

But the Truth is,
This Answerer is not a competent Advocate for the Presbyterians, being
manifestly a Deserter of them and their Principles. If Scots, says he, or any
Presbyterians do otherwise, that is nothing to me, who am no more bound to
their opinion than yours. Page 41.
] He differs from many (of them, as well as us) 'In several Doctrines of
moment, Ep. Ded: to Sts. Rest.
as himself has told the World. -- He is for a Church in the Idea and Notion,
like to Plato's famed Commonwealth; and can hardly subscribe to any form of
Ecclesiastical polity, which obtains actually in Christendom. -- In a word. He
is (as Dr. Abraham Clifford [To whose Methodus Evangelica, printed after his
Death. 1676, Mr B. with Dr. M. prefixed a Preface.] Sacril. Def;: Page 74.
sometimes said in Discourse of him, being pressed with his judgment) Suae
potestatis Litera. So that others deal by him, just as he by them, accounting
themselves no more bound to his opinion than he to theirs. And yet none so
ready to speak in the Name of N. C. as he.

When you say that a Toleration may reduce the common sort to an indifferency
in Religion. I Answer, get your friends together then, that have brought it to
that pass, that it must be thus or worse, and bring them to weep over their
Sins before God, that if a miserable Nation may not be saved from the Fire that
you have kindled, your Souls yet, if possible, may be saved*] That clause, 'it
must be so or worse.] Sounds like a threatening, and takes so much from the
Grace and Clemency of the Rings Toleration, as it adds to the necessity of it,
with reflection upon which, it may be,
he before phrased it so warily. 'When his Majesty's Prudence and Clemency
gives us liberty to Preach. Page 25.
] -- But I observe here the Necessity of a Toleration, or somewhat worse, is
charged wholly upon the Establishments; and those Establishments are made the
Sins of the Conforming party, who, he says, have kindled the Fire in this
miserable Nation; and the possibility of whose salvation is to be questioned.
-- O the meek and humble Mr. Baxter!

[Who the Chief causes of our Divitions.] Page 82.
It is our Divisions, that will let in Popery: No doubt of it, if it ever be
done. Come and speedily debate the case with us; who have been the great causes
of Protestants division, Conformists or Non-Conformists? But I am ashamed to
say that it needs a debate.] That is, It Is as clear as the Sun shines,
that the Conformists, and not the N. C. have been the great causes of
Protestants Divisions: Those who obediently kept Close to the Laws of Order and
Uniformity, and not they who first opposed those Laws, and then divided from
their Brethren, and among themselves. He would say as much, it is like, were he
to determine the Case of our Civil Wars, on whose side the Rebellion and
Injustice lay. The Cavaliers and Conformists must bear the blame of all. -- And
yet it is worth our while to note, how he elsewhere seems to contradict
himself, or afford at least ground enough to evince, that he needed not to have
blushed for saying, 'that it needs a debate.

Page 113. and 114.
[Nothing, says he, has more plagued the Church than the Pride and arrogance
of some of the Pastors, that think they are wronged, if they may not rule.
Think not that this Spirit is only in Papists or Diocesans. Pride is the heart
of the Old man, and born in all; and doleful experience tells, how it
surviveth in too many Anti-prelatical Ministers, of humbling Principles, and
unhumbled Souls.
Do we not know, that the Pride of some among our selves (N.C. sure enough)
that must be all, and do all, till they have undone all, is the very thing that
has silenced so many Ministers, and brought us to the state that we are now
in?] Magna est veritas, et praevalebit. -- They are Non-Conformists again, Page
97.
of whom he says in another place. [The Ministers that have bred and cherished
these Principles.
(viz: the unlawfulness of prescribed Forms of Prayer, of Repetitions, of
Responses, of standing up at the Creed and all the Hymns of Praise etc.) 'Have
been our subverters and are our shame.] To Them again he speaks yet farther
after This fashion. Page 105.
-- [Wo to those few Teachers, that make up their designs by cherishing these
Distempers! One would think, that their warning had been fair. But -- si nati
sint ad bis perdendum Angliam -- The Lord have mercy on us!
] It Is easy Latin. Yet I will English it here for the People's sake. ['If they
are born to destroy England twice.] And then the supposition is plain, that
they have destroyed it once already.

[The Conformable N.C. or Mr B's Character of himself] Page 100.
[I prescribe to no man, and Toleration so far takes off public impositions,
as that none can now say, this Form is imposed on me, and therefore unlawful.
But though I will not bind my self [pray, have a care of that] I here tell the
World, that if my strength, and Toleration, and a call should ever more give me
opportunity for the freer exercise of mine Office,
I would sometimes pray freely without Forms, and sometimes use some part of
the Common Liturgy, and sometimes use the Reformed Liturgy which in 1660 was
agreed on by the commissioned Non Confirmists, [who yet had no Commission to
make a new Liturgie] though being done in extreme haste, it should be renewed
and perfected, [a Liturgy and no Liturgy,
Reformed and needing Reformation] I would ordinarily pronounce the Creed, as
the Faith which the Church assembleth in the Profession of; And ordinarily
recite the Lords Prayer and Decalogue, and read two Chapters and the Psalms:
And they, that would not join in This way of Worship, should freely go choose
them a Teacher more agreeable to their opinions: for I would not serve the
humors of any in their dividing Errors.] It Is enough for him, that he has his
own. Let every one else do what is good in their own Eyes also. -- Here we have
at large the Lively Portraiture of the most conformable Nonconformist drawn by
himself, as to his Worshipping postures; The View of whom (notwithstanding the
powerful bias of his phantastic and affected singularity) may satisfy our
people, how well they are provided already in the substantials of their
public Devotion.

We have seen the Man. Now see his address by way of Humble Petition, as he
calls it, to the Conformist.

[ Fathers and Brethren, [His humble petition to the Conformists.]
though I presume to Counsel the N. C. as my Equals, I will will presume no
higher with you, than to lay my self at your feet, and humbly a second time to
become your Petitioner, for the Souls of men, for the Gospel, the Church, and
the Interest of Christ.] [And a man might hope, that one that should become a
Petitioner to you, Page 118.
that your selves would not destroy that Church, might find acceptance and
prevail.] Truly, to deny so just and reasonable a Petition, as this is, That
the Fathers of the Church would not themselves destroy the Church; and that to
a man humbly prostrating himself at their Feet, and earnestly begging of it at
their hands for God^s sake, for the Gospel's sake, in mere Compassion to the
Souls of men, and for the pure interest of Christ, without any self ends at all
in it, must needs reflect upon them as persons, of whom the worst that can be
imagined is too good to be spoken; And indeed for such as they are to give an
occasion for such an importunate address, presupposes them none of the best
Christians or Ministers. --

[But Satan has got so great advantage, that the Wisest man living is
incapable of speaking rightly to you without offense.] This methinks, ibid.
is but a course Complement on the heels of the other, and suits odly with the
demure pretenses of so profound a Reverence and Humility. For it sounds Thus.
[ The Devil is so great with you, that the Wisest man on Earth (Mr Baxter
himself) can not speak to you without offense.] For of himself it is, that he
speaks it a little afterward. [To these Reverend persons I have formerly
spoken to their great offense. p. 119.]

ibid.
[He, that can draw men into great disgraceful Sins, has thereby raised a
Bulwark to defend his work. To be silent and comply is to be Cruel to the
Sinner and himself. And who can do it that believes Death and Judgment? To
call men to Repentance is utterly to loose them, by implying that they have
sinned. O little did I once think that Repentance had been so hard a work etc.]

Quae dicis aliis, dic Tibi, ipse ut audias. 'It is not in my thoughs to
Confound all Conformists.] No, no, you have told us before, Page 119.
'The Presbyterians do not love Confusion.] p. 33.

'I know there are many sorts of you.]

ibid.
I. There are some Learned zealous High Conformists, who think they have done
good service to God etc.] If they are Learned and zealous together, having a
zeal according unto knowledge, certainly they are the most honest and
considerable sort you can name. -- But these it seems, you altogether despair
of, and think good to pass them by, as having formerly spoken to their great
offense.] And well may they be offended at any who should persuade them to
destroy the Church of England, that they might not destroy the Church of
Christ. You your self would be offended too, another time, Ep* ded: to Sts Rest.
at those, who would Cure and Reform the Church by cutting of her Throat.

II. I would there were no Minister so pitifully dark, young and raw, and so
much out of love and relish with things spiritual, Page 119.
through the prevalencie of a stronger appetite, as that their incapacity
convinces me, that I am not to expect much regard from them, as knowing with
what Ears they hear.] The first sort were offended. This second sort is
incapable, by their injudiciousness and carnality, of these spiritual things
which are to be propounded. Venture non habet aures.

ibid.
III. There are also some, called Latitudinarians, who love not Fopperies or
Violence, but are men of reason and sober conversation.] Well, the first
Learned and Zealous, but not, it seems, men of Reason and Sobriety. The Second
neither Learned nor Spiritualized enough. What hinders but this Third sort
should be for the turn? especially being of so moderate a Temper, like your
self, neither for Fopperies nor Violence. Why, there is yet Conscience wanting
in them. -- Though they are not so tender and scrupulous as the N. C. but can
break over greater rubs.] That is, They are men of too wide a swallow, Page 120.
as you somewhere phrase it. -- Where then will you resolve to fix?

IV. 'There are other Godly, Sober, unwilling Conformists, who, by the Benefit
of subscribing in their own sense, have stretched themselves to do what they
have done: ibid.
who conform on the Terms of Mr. Sprint, submitting to what would else be Evil,
only to obtain the liberty of Preaching (far be it from me to put in any
selfish ends) who are unwilling Conformists, as the Westminster Assembly were
that after took down Prelacy.

These, These are the hopeful men. The other are too learned and zealous,
or too ignorant and carnal, or too reasonable and generous, And all of them
too resolved and hearty in their Conformity to be wrought upon. But these are
Godly and Sober, and, which is the principal, unwilling Conformists, whose
Conformity is their burden, who have stretched themselves to do what they have
done, men formed in the very same mould as the Westminster Assembly was that
after took down Prelacy: And therefore it may well be hoped, that these will in
time lend their helping hand to a second Lift, and take down Prelacy again.

'To all of them, that yet have ears to hear, ibid.
I humbly present These following Requests.] That is, To all, who are not yet
past Grace and hardened, but especially to you, our Dearest Brethren of all the
Conformists, the Godly, Sober, unwilling ones, that offer violence to your own
minds, and Conform against Conscience, that subscribe, say and swear with a
mental Reservation, in your own and not in the Churches sense, that for the
sake of Preaching do that, which otherwise you look upon as Evil and
Abominable, the Genuine Offspring of the Westminster Assembly, that
notwithstanding all their former Subscriptions, Oaths and Declarations, when
opportunity served, gave themselves a Dispensation, and took down Prelacy.

We take not you, whom I now write to, to be consenting to this work, Page 134.
(of silencing the N. C.) though your Silence and Non-resistance has bred such
thoughts of you in People, as we would fain have you cure by the contrary
means.] That is, by speaking out now in our behalf, and Resisting Authority;
for these are the contray to Silence and Non-resistance.

'If we had expected, Page 135.
that heretofore you had petitioned our Rulers for the Liberty of our Ministry,
it had been no unreasonable expectation. -- 'If you had but humbly acquainted
our Rulers. -- That your judgment was, that our Ministry was more necessary
than our personal Conformity; (1) You know not but you might have been heard.
Page 136.
Civil Governors are never so Cruel in matters of Religion as the Ruling and
exasperating Clergy are. This the Abstract of Prynn's Antipathie of English
Lordly Prelacie etc. 1641.
(2) Or, at least, you might have had the greater peace of conscience in all
the Confusions that have follow^d, and said, It is not long of us. And (3) you
would have acquitted your selves in the judgment of all your hearers [who are
presumed to be of the same leaven] and they would have been the less prejudiced
against your Ministry.] -- But what should they have moved for? That is the
next point to be observed.

'Had you petitioned, and prevailed, for These Two things, you had healed all
our Breaches.

Qui dabat olim Imperium, fasces, legiones, omnia, nunc se

Continet atque duas tantum res anxius optat. Juven. sat. 10.


First; That the Door of Entrance might not have been barred by any other
Subscriptions, Professions, or Oaths, than what were used in the Churches of
Christ, till the Exaltation of the Papacy, (for 600 years) besides the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, (which are a Noli me tangere,) and the Subscribing of
the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the XXXIX Articles, according to the
Thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth.] Which makes a plausible Sound.

Secondly; That those (so subscribing) who dare not use the Liturgy and
Ceremonies, might have leave to preach in the Churches which use them, page 137.
under Laws, which shall restrain them from all unpeaceable Opposition to what
they dare not use, or to the Government of the Church.] Mark it! These should
have been the Heads of your Petition for us. -- Well, but is this all? No, you
should have remembered the good People somewhat too.

Ibid.
-- Only let not the People who scruple Conformity, be therefore denied
Church Communion and Sacraments.

Let us now a little view the Particulars. And first, for the Ministers.

That the Door of Entrance be not barred by any other Subscriptions,
Professions, or Oaths, than what were used in the Churches of Christ, for 600
Years, or till the Exaltation of the Papacy.] We will not now dispute about
that Calculation. -- But this taken by it self, might possibly exclude the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and Subscribing the Doctrine of the XXXIX
Articles too; for before the Exaltation of the Papacy, there was no occasion of
disclaiming it, or declaring against it, as there we do in sundry of those
Articles. Here therefore comes in the Exceptions. -- 'Besides the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy:] Understand it, So far as they can stretch themselves
to take them in their own Sense. -- And the Subscribing of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in the XXXIX Articles, according to the Thirteenth of Queen
Elizabeth.] The former gives the color of Good Subjects; this latter of good
Church of England Men. -- But observe it carefully; It Is not all the 39
Articles, which yet are the Doctrine of the Church of England; they are but for
some of them only, called by them the Doctrine of the Church of England, as
distinguished wholly from all Matters of Discipline or Government, as they
sometimes explain themselves. And therefore they add that other Phrase,
['According to the Thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth,] to unriddle their meaning to
some, and at the same time conceal it from the Vulgar.

Anno 13 Eliz. chapter 12.
Let as consider briefly the Words of that Statute, -- Declare his Assent, and
subscribe to all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the Confession of
the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in a
Book imprinted, entitled, Articles: Whereupon it was agreed, by the
Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, etc. Now this, it seems, they
construe thus, or to this effect: Only to those of all the Articles, which
concern the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the
Sacraments. But the Words of the Statute run gramatically thus: To all the
Articles of Religion, which only concern, (viz. all which Articles of Religion
only concern) the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of
the Sacraments.] And that this was the Intendment of the Law, appears from what
follows there: That the Person thus assenting and subscribing, shall bring from
the Bishop, or Guardian of Spiritualties, in Writing, under his Seal Authentic,
a Testimonial of such Assent and Subscription, -- and openly on some Sunday,
read both the said Testimonial, and the said Articles. That is certainly, all
the 39 Articles, the Book of Articles; and what he is to read openly, he is
supposed to have first assented and subscribed to. And again, in the same
Statute, there follows a Penalty for maintaining or affirming any Doctrine
directly contrary or repugnant to any of the said Articles. -- But if we
explain it by current Practice, there can be no manner of doubt left about it.
--

We have seen briefly, what they could swear and subscribe to; let us mind
next, what they most stick at. And one would guess, by those words, [ till the
Exultation of the Papacy,] they should stick at nothing but what had some known
tendency thereunto. But the matter is otherwise, the Door of Entrance is not to
be barred by any other Subscriptions, Professions, or Oaths, besides these by
Name here excepted. By a Review then of what else is enjoined by Law, we must
conclude, what they cannot yield unto.

First, then, They cannot declare their unfeigned Assent and Consent to the
Liturgy and Ceremonies, with the Form or Manner of making, ordaining, and
consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

2 dly; They cannot declare, that it is not lawful, upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take up Arms against the King; and that they do abhor that
traitorous Position, of taking Arms by his Authority, against his Person, or
against those that are commissionated by him.

3 dly; They cannot declare, that they do hold there lies no Obligation upon
them, nor any other Person, from the Oath commonly called, the Solemn League
and Covenant, to endeavor any Change or Alteration of Government, either in
Church or State; and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed
upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom.

4 thly; They cannot take the Oath of true and Canonical Obedience to the
Bishop, in all things lawful and honest; and so in like manner, that against
Simony, and that for Residence on Vicarages without a Dispensation: For neither
of these are in their Exception.

All these Bars therefore to the Door of their Entrance must be removed: And it
concerns Authority to consider well, what Judgment they proclaim themselves of,
both as to Church and State; and what Propositions they yet E. gr. No Bishops
no common Liturgy or Ceremonies. It is lawful on some pretense to take up Arms
against the King, and by his Authority to war against his Person, and those
commissioned by him -- The solemn Leag. and Coven. still obliges to endeavor
the alteration of the Government, etc (...)e. The Foun(...)ation-Princi(...)les
of the good (...)d Cause of (...)ction and Rebellion.
maintain, who profess they cannot do these things; and what their Practice
upon them in time is like to be, that is, ( ubi adsunt vires) when ever they
are able. Which is more certainly to be gathered from the Observation of what
it has been in Times already past, than such bare Words as are given for the
present. To whom therefore that of Salvian is but too applicable: Parum est,
quod nudis assertionibus dicitis; ipsi actibus vestris contra vos testes estis.

But then an Admission upon this their own limited Subscription will not serve,
unless those who dare not use the Liturgy and Ceremonies, may have leave to
preach in the Churches which use them: A proper Expedient, by degrees to worm
out the Use of both. Nor is the Salvo added, [Under Laws, which shall restrain
them from all unpeaceable Opposition to what they dare not use, or to the
Government of the Church,] extensive enough to prevent the Mischief: For we
must needs conclude, that those who dare not use the Liturgy and Ceremonies,
dislike the Government, and believe these things highly sinful: For so we are
told, [It is Sin, and no small or tolerable Sin, which their Consciences fear.]
And what they so believe, they will certainly upon all opportunities, directly
or indirectly, bear witness, and caution against, and labor to withdraw others
from. How indeed shall they be faithful in their Office upon their own
Principles, if they should do otherwise? [To 'be silent, and comply, is to be
cruel to the Sinner and h^mself. And who can do it, that believes Death and
Judgment?] So we had it even now. -- [How guilty are those Ministers of the
Blood of ^ouls, that will not tell Men of their Sin and Danger?] So elsewhere.
Next for the people.

It is to be desired, [only that all who scruple Conformity, (in any point) be
not therefore denied Church Communion and Sacraments.] Every one, it is to be
supposed, in that way and manner as the Teachers they shall adhere to,
administer in. -- The short is, that they be tied to nothing.

But the godly, sober, unwilling Conformists have it seems, been sadly
neglective of their Duty, in petitioning against the Laws for these things
hitherto: If they are at length penitent, and resolve to do any thing for the
Cause hereafter, it will be some amends. -- And that they would do this, is the
last Request our Author has to make.

(...)g. 137.
-- And having mentioned this, what if I added yet this Clause to my present
Petition to you? That you will yet petition for us, or rather for the Church of
Christ, that upon the foresaid Terms we may be, if possible, taken into the
established Ministry; if not, yet tolerated as Lecturers under you, in such
Churches where the Ministers desire us, not taking any of their Maintenance
from them, but trusting God for our daily Bread.] Fain would they be on their
own Terms in the Established Church, if so it may then be called; and when they
are in, do their best to shake other Establishments out of it. But if this may
not be granted them, Lecturers under some Conformists, yet this under is a
scurvy word, they like it not; [' No Prelacy in Parish Priests, Page 71.
] as we heard before. However, under some of their Brethren Conformists, that
desire them to carry on the Work as Assistants, would be perhaps no great
Burden especially, [not taking any part of their Maintenance, but trusting God
for daily Bread,] as if others did not trust God for that too. How this
Proviso, against taking any part of their Maintenance, can be secured, I know
not; for a great deal of that, in such populous Places as they most affect,
depends upon the Peoples Contributions: And, where it does not, yet they
conceive some Right in themselves still to it; and how that Thought may work in
Time, who can tell? It begins already.

-- I think it had savoured of no excess of Charity, Page 134, 135.
and Ministerial Ingenuity, if he had said: Brethren, you must perform your
undertaken Ministry; and we, and the Peoples Souls, have need of all your Help;
and the Maintenance is given for the Work, therefore you that work with us,
shall have part of the Church-Maintenance with us,
at least, a fifth part, as was allowed to the Ejected by the Parliament, (for
those Times are an excellent Pattern for our Imitation,) because the People
cannot maintain you, and it is hard to serve God without Anxiety, while your
Families are in Want. This had better beseemed our Brethren. But we crave and
expect no such thing from you.] Only these are broad Signs, and speak it loud
enough, that they are both uncharitable and unjust, if they deny part of the
Maintenance to you, who do the Work whereunto it belongs. -- And what will the
People think and say of them?

-- By this means you shall have no need to fear our injuring of your Wealth
and Reputation. Page 137.
] q. d. We have thought it requisite to suggest this unto you, because, the
truth is, we look upon you as somewhat more worldly-minded than our selves, and
so your Covetousness of retaining your own, which most of you find little
enough, may keep you from doing us that Service, which otherwise we might hope
for from you. Alas! you are utterly mistaken in us, if you shall once imagine,
that we regard our selves. It Is the Church of Christ only we are sollicitous
for; nor do we seek yours, but you. -- 'Have we served God twelve Years, Page
73.
without one Bit of the Levite's Portion? And cannot we do so till we die? --
It suffices us to tell you, that we preach not for Riches, and we will not
cease through Poverty. Talk at this rate to one another.] Worldly Wretches as
ye are!

Page 137.
-- And now (for the Close) as God will judge, so let the World judge, and let
Posterity judge, whether we [ Pharisees!] are unworthy, in comparison of the
present Ministers of England, to be permitted to preach Christ's Gospel, on
these self-denying and abasing Terms.] You should rather have said,
self-assuming, self-arrogating, self-exalting, but Church-denying,
King-abasing, Law-disowning, Prelacy-deposing Terms. -- And so let the
Impartial judge upon the Premises. -- And, when they have determined this, if
you please, let them resolve themselves further, Q. 1. Q. 2.
Where the Petition against Establishments is like to stop; and whether the
Plea of Conscience be not as equal for tolerating all the dividing and
subdividing Sects, as for any one of them? It being acknowledged, that all the
contending Parties, from the Papist to the Quaker, are ready to give themselves
the Commendation of being Lovers of the Truth and Peace. Page 6.


But what pious and prudent Indulgences Authority may judge meet upon occ^sion
to grant unto some Particulars of the truly humble, quiet, and peaceable
Dissenters, upon the satisfaction given them by such Deportment, is not for us
to advise or determine.

Mr. Baxter's free Account, how the Papists work their Ends among unsettled
Professors.
THese Papists, seeing the Temper of our unsettled Professors, do creep in among
them, and use their utmost Skill to unsettle them more, In his Letter to an
unsettled young Man before his Quakers Catechism, 1657.
and bring them into Dislike of their Teachers, without which they have no hope
of succeeding. Their first Ways are, by reproaching the settled Government of
the Church and by drawing Men t^ Separation and Anabaptism, and then persuading
them, that these are glorious Truths of God, which their former Teachers are
unable to receive; and that they are but a blind, self seeking, proud Sort of
Men, that would enthrall all Men to their Judgments, when they are in utter
D^^kness themselves. When they have gotten them out thus far, once to despise
their Guides, then do they proceed further with them, and persuade them, that
they which were blind in the Points of Baptism and Church-O^der, are so in
other things as well as that; and that this Light, which they have seen
already, is but a Spark;
and that these being Days of glorious Discoveries there are yet more and
greater Matters to be revealed. Hereupon they put an handsome Dress upon many of
the grossest Points of Popery, and recommend these as the new and rare
Discoveries. But this they do not in the Name and Garb of Papists, [Mark that!]
but as the Popish Jew at Newcastle, they turn Anabaptists, [and God knows what
besides,] and then rise a Step higher, and lead others after them; so that the
silly People shall never know that it is Papists that are their Leaders. Yea,
they will cry out of the Pope, and call all that differ from them
Antichristian, purposely to divert Suspicions,
and blind Men's eyes. Thus these Papists have begotten this present Sect of
Quakers, [and who can tell how many o^ her Sects?] first, pretending to strange
Revelations, Visions, and Trances, such as are commonly mentioned in the Lives
of their Saints, in their Legends. And so you have here and there a Papist,
lurking to be the chief Speaker among them; and these have fashioned many
others to their turns, to supply their rooms, who yet know not their own
Fathers. -- If you ask me,
How I know that they are Papists who thus seduce them? I answer: (1.) Because
they do the Papists Work, and maintain their Cause, as far as yet they dare
venture to bring it forth. -- (2.) It is known by certain Proof, that it is the
Papists that do seduce and lead them. Many of themselves have confessed such
things. And their present Industry among us is well known, (which that they may
proceed in with less Impediment,) they are the zealous Defenders of Universal
Toleration, or Liberty for propagating Soul-poysoning Doctrines, for all the
Torments of the Inquisition in other Countries.

Mr. Baxter's Citation of Mr. Rich. Hooker, at the end of his Cure of
Church-Divisions, set right with the Original, by the Addition of a few Words,
that follow in that Learned Author, craftily omitted by him.
Mr. Hooker's (...)p. Ded. to (...)ccles. Pol.
I Deny not, but that our Antagonists in these Controversies may, peradventure,
have met with some not unlike to Ithacius, who mightily bending himself by all
means against the Heresy of Priscillian, (the hatred of which one Evil was all
the Virtue he had, [Yet that, it seems, was a Virtue. Note that.]
) became so wise in the end, that every Man, careful of virtuous Conversation,
studious of the Scripture, and given to any Abstinence in Diet, was set down in
his Calendar for a suspected Priscillianist, for whom it should be expedient to
prove the Soundness of their Faith, by a more licentious and loose Behavior.
[The truth yet was on their side. Note that too.]
Such Proctors and Patrons the Truth might spare. Yet is not their Grossness so
intolerable, as on the contrary side, the scurrilous, and more than Satirical
Immodesty of Martinism: The first published Schedules whereof being brought to
the hands of a grave and very honorable Knight, with signification given, that
the Book would refresh his Spirits, he took it, saw what the Title was, read
over an unsavory Sentence or two, and delivered back the Libel, with this
Answer: I am sorry you are of the Mind to be solaced with these Sports, and
sorrier you have herein thought my Affection your own. [Here Mr. Baxter leaves
off; but it follows immediately in the Author thus:] But as these Sores on all
hands lie open; so the deepest Wounds of the Church of God have been more
softly and closely given.
] Which Words reflect upon Baxterianism, as remarkably as the foregoing do upon
Ithacianism on the one hand, and Martinism on the other.

[Fair warning and Advice long since given by Archbishop Laud, in his Sermon
on Psalm 122.3, 4, 5. Preached Febr. 6th. 1625.]
ONe thing more I will be bold to speak, Lauds seven Sermons. Page 130. [
Historice-prophetice.
out of a like Duty to the Church of England and the House of David. They,
whoever they be, that would overthrow seeds Ecclesiae, seats of Ecclesiastical
Government, will not spare if ever they get Power, to have a pluck at the
Throne of David. And there is not a man, that is for Parity, all fellows in the
Church, but he is not for Monarchy in the State. And certainly either he is but
half-headed to his own Principles, or he can be but half-hearted to the House
of David.

[ Idem. Sermon on Ephesians. 4.3. Preached March. 17th, 1628.] Now the Breakers of
the Bond of Peace, both in Church and Commonwealth, p. 278.279.
are Pride and Disobedience. For these two cry one to another, that is,
Pride to Disobedience, Come, let us break the Bond. And this is very
observable, and with reference to his Bond of Peace too. You shall never see a
Disobedient man but he is Proud. For he would Obey if he did not think himself
fitter to Govern. Nor shall you ever see a Proud man stoop to bind up any
thing. But if you see him stoop, take heed of him, it is doubtless to break the
Bond of Peace. The Reason's plain, If he stoop to bind up, he knows he shall be
but one of the bundle, which his Pride cannot endure. But if he stoop to loose
the bond, then he may be free, and show his Virtue, as he calls it, that is,
may hope to run foremost in the head of a Faction. Fond men, that can be thus
bewitched with pride against themselves! For when they are bound up, though but
as one of the Bundle; yet therein, under God, they are strong and safe. But
when the Bond is broken, and they perhaps, as they wish, in the Head, headlong
they run upon their own ruin --

Now to keep unity, I have made bold to direct you one way already; And here is
another. p. 281.282.
It Is necessary that the Governors have a good and quick eye to discover the
cunning of them that would break the Unity first, and the whole Body after. You
shall give a guess at them by This:
they speak as much for Unity as any men, but yet, if you mark them, you shall
still find them busy about the knot that binds up Unity in ^eace. Somewhat
there is that wrings them there. They will pretend perhaps, it is very good
there should be Vinculum, a Bond to bind men to obedience, O God forbid else:
but they would not have the knot too hard. Take heed, their aim is, They would
have a little more liberty that have too much ready. Or perhaps they will pretend*
they would not untie the knot; no, there may be danger in that, but they would
only Turn it to the other side, because this way it lies uneasily. But this is
but a shift neither. For turn the knot which way you will, all binding to
obedience will be grievous to some. It may be they will protest, that though they
should untie it, yet they would not leave it loose. They would perhaps tie it
otherwise, but they would be sure to knit it as fast. Trust not this pretext
neither, out of qu^stion their meaning is to tie up unity in a Bow-knot, which
they may sl^p at one end (...) they li^t. Indeed, whatsoever they pretend, if
they be curious about the knot I pray look to their Fingers, and to the Bond of
Peace too.

[Mr Baxter's calm and Sober Resolution, How far we are bound to obey Men's
Precepts about Religion.
(...)ive Disputations, of Ch: (...)overnment (...)nd worship. (...)g. 483.
[1. We must obey both magistrates and pasto^s in all things lawful, which
belong to their Offices to command. 2. I belongs not to their Office to make
God a New Worship, but to command the mode and circumstances of Worship
belongs to their Office; for guiding them wherein God has given them General
Rules. 3. We must not take the Lawful Commands of our Governors to be
un^awful. 4. If we do through Weakness or Perverseness take lawful things to be
unlawful, that will not excuse our Disobedience.
Our Error is our Sin and one sin will not excuse another. 5. Many things that
are mis-commanded must be obeyed. -- The Reasons of this are obvious and clear.
Even because it is the Office of Governors to determine of such circumstances.
(...)d. p. 461. etc.
It is the Pastors Office to guide and oversee the Flock -- And therefore,
when he determines these, he is but in his own way, and does but his own work;
and therefore he is therein the judge, if the case be controvertible.
If none shall obey a Magistrate or Pastor in the works of their own Office, as
long as they think, he did them not the best way, all Government then would be
presently overthrown, and obedience denied. We are sure that God has commanded
us to obey them that are over us in the Lord. (1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.7, 17.
etc.) And therefore a certain duty may not be forborne upon uncertain
conjectures, or upon every miscarriage in them that we owe it to.
This would un-Church all Churches (as they are Political Societies.
) For if Pastors be taken down and the work of Pastors, the Church is taken
down; And if Government and Obedience, be taken down, then Pastors and their
work is taken down, which will be the fruit of This Disorder. -- 6. As an
Erroneus judgment will not excuse us from obedience to our Governors, so much
less will a doubtfulness excuse us.
7. As such a doub^ing erring judgment cannot obey in (plenary) faith, so much
less can he disobey in faith. For it is a known Command of God, that we obey
them that have the Rule over us; But they have no Word of God against the Act
of Obedience now in question.
-- 8. In doubtful cases it is our duty to use God^s Means for our information:
and one means is to consult with our Teachers, and hear their words with
teachableness and meekness. 9. It being their office to teach us, it must be
our duty to believe them with an humane Faith, in cases where we have no
evidence to the contrary. And the Duty of Obeying them being certain, and the
sinfulness of the thing commanded, being uncertain, unknown and only suspected,
we must go on the surer side; [that is, It is our Duty to Obey our Teachers,
notwithstanding such doubts] 10. Yet must we in great and doubtful cases not
take up with the Suspected judgment of a single Pastor, but apply our selves to
the Unanimous Pastors of other Churches.
11. Christians should not be over-busie in prying into the work of their
Governors,
nor too forward to suspect their Determinations.
But when they know* that it is their Rulers work to guide them, by determining
of due Circumstances of Worship* they should without causless Scruples readily
obey, till they see just reason to stop them in their Obedience. Page 485.


And now I entreat all humble Christians, readily to obey both Magistrates and
Pastors in all lawful things, and to consider to that end these Reasons
following.

1. If you will not obey in lawful things, you deny Authority, or overthrow
Government it self, which is a Great Ordinance of God, established in the fifth
Commandment with promise. And as that Commandment,
respecting Societies and common Good, is greater than the following Commands,
as they respect the private Good of our Neighbors, or are but p^rticular means
to that public Good, whose foundation is laid in the fifth Commandment: So
according^y the Sin against this fifth Commandment,
must be greater than against the rest.

In disobeying the lawful Commands of our Superiors, we disobey Christ, who
^^leth by them as his Officers,
even as the disobeying a Justice of Peace, or Judge is a disobeying of the
Soveragin Power, yea, in some Cases when their Sentence is unjust. Some of the
Ancient Doctors thought, that the fifth Commandment was the last of the first
Table of the Decalogue;
and that the Honoring of Gov^rnours is part of our Honor to God, they being
mentioned there as his Officers, with whom he himself is honored or
dishonored, obeyed or disobeyed: For it is God^s Authority, that the
Magistrate, Parent, and Pastor is endued with, and empowred by, to rule those
that are put under them.

3. What Confusion will be brought to the Church, if Pastors be not obeyed in
things lawful? etc.


4. Disobedience in matters of Circumstance will exclude and overthrow the
Substance of the Worship it self.
God commands us to pray: If one part of the Church will not join with a
stinted Form of Prayer, and the other part will not join without it, both
Parties cannot be pleased: and so one part must cast off Prayer it self, or
separate from the rest. God commands the Reading, and Preaching, and hearing
of Sripture, and singing of Psalms; but he has left it to Man, to make or
choose the best Translation of Scripture, or Version of the Psalms: Now if the
Pastor appoint one Version and Translation, and the Church join in the use of
it, if any Members will scruple joining in the Translation or Version, they
must needs forbear the whole Duty of Hearing the Scripture, and Singing Psalms
in the Congregation. If they pretend a scruple against the appointed Time or
Place of Worship, they will thereby cast off the Worship it self. For if they
avoid our Time or Place, they cannot meet, nor worship with us.

5. And when they are thus carried to separate from the Congregation upon such
Grounds as these, they will be no where fixed, but may be still subdividing,
and separating one from another, till they are resolved into Individuals, and
have no such thing as a Church among them. For they can have no assurance or
probability, that some of themselves will not dissent from the rest in one
Circumstance or other, as they did from their Pastors, and the Church that they
were of before.

6. By this means, the Wicked, that are disobedient to their Teachers, and
reject the Worship of God,
will be hardened in their sin, and taught by Professors to defend their
Ungodliness; For the very same course that you take, will serve their turns.
They need not deny any Duty in the Substance, but deny the Circumstance, and so
put off the Substance of the Duty. If a wicked man will not hear the Word
preached,
he may say, [I am not against Preaching, but I am Unsatisfied of the
Lawfulness of your Time and Place: I am in Judgment against coming to your
Steeple-house, or against the Lords day.] If he will not be personally
instructed or admonished, etc. he may say, [I am for Discipline, I know it is my
Duty to be instructed; but I am not satisfied that I am bound to come to you
when you send for me, or to appear at such a place as you appoint: The Word of
God names no Time or Place, and you shall not deprive me of my Liberty,
etc. By This device it is, that the Rebellion of unruly People is defended.

Page 487.
7. By this Disobedience in things lawful, the Members of the Church will be
involved in Contentions,
and so engaged in bitter Incharitableness, and Censures, Persecutions, and
Reproaches of one another: which Scandalous courses will nourish Vice,
dishonor God, rejoice the Enemies, grieve the Godly that are peaceable and
judicious, and wound the Consciences of the Contenders. We see the Beginnings
of such Fires are small;
but whither they will tend, and what will be the End of them, we see not.

8. By this means also, Magistrates will be provoked to take Men of tender
Consciences, for factious, unruly, and unreasonable Men, and to turn their
Enemies, and use Violence against them, when they see them so self-conceited,
and refusing Obedience in lawful Circumstances.

9. By this means also the Conversion and establishment of Souls will be much
hindered, Page 488.

and People possessed with Prejudices against the Church and Ordinances, when
they take us to be but humorous People, and see us in such Contentions among
our selves.

10. It will seem to the wisest to savor of no small measure of Pride. --
Humble Men would sooner suspect themselves, and quarrel with their own
Distempers, and submit to those that are wiser then themselves,
and that are set over them for their Guidance by the Lord. There may more
dangerous Pride be manifested in these matters, then in Apparel, and such lower
Trifles.

11. Consider also, that yielding in things lawful the Scripture recommendeth
to us. How far yielded Paul, when he Circumcised Timothy?
Act. 16.3. And when he took the Men, and purified himself with them? etc Act.
21.26, 27. And this for almost seven Days? 1 Cor. 9.19, 20. Study this Example,
Read also Romans 14 and 15. Chap. -- and 1 Cor. 8.13, etc. and Matthew. 12.1.2, to
9. Page 489.
You find that hunger justified the Disciples of Christ for plucking and
rubbing the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Days. And Hunger justified David, and
those that were with him, for entering into the House of God, and Eating the
Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, nor for them which were with
him, but only for the Priests: And the Priests in the Temple were blameless for
profaning the Sabbath Day.

Now if things, before Accidentally Evil, may by this much necessity become
lawful and a Duty, then may the Commands of Magistrates or Pastors,
and the Unity of the Church, and the avoiding of Contention and offense, and
other Evils, be also sufficient to warrant us in obeying, even in inconvenient
Circumstantials of the Wroship of God, that otherwise could not be justified.

Lastly, Consider, How much God has expressed himself in his Word to be
pleased in the Obedience of Believers, not only to Christ immediately, but also
to him in his Officers. 1 Samuel 15.22. Col. 3.20, 22. 1 These. 5.12, 13. Heb.
13.7, 17, 24. 1 Timothy 5.17. -- As the General Commission to a Parent, Page 490.
or Master, or Magistrate, to govern their inferior Relations, does authorize
them to many Particular Acts belonging to their Office that were never named in
their Commission:
So your General Command to obey them obliges you to obey them in the said
Particulars.

If a Child shall ask a Parent [where does God's Word allow you to command me
to learn this Catechism, or read this Divine's Writings, or repeat this Sermon,
or write it? etc.
] Does not the Question deserve to be answered with the Rod? The general
Commission for the Parents to Govern their Children is sufficient, etc.

Reader, I have been at the pains to transcribe all this from the End of a
Tedious Volumn of pro and con Disputations, where it was like to be read but of
very few, as matter of General Instruction, fit to be Communicated to the whole
World. And it would go a great way certainly to end our Controversies and
Divisions,
if People were but once resolved, who are their Governors both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, to whom all this Obedience is, upon so many weighty grounds
both of Scripture and Reason,
due? The Question is not we see of the necessity of Government on the one
hand, and Obedience on the other (and the people do but deceive themselves to
expect an Ease by any Turn or Change as to their duty) but,
who should Govern? or, whom we are to own for our Masters and Teachers? --
Apply but all this Discourse to the King as Supreme, and our lawful Governors
under him both in Church and State,
and the Product of it will be Blessed Conformity to their oderly Appointments
about the Circumstantials of Religion, for the well securing the substance of
both, to us, and our posterity. -- And whatever opinion be now suggested by any
against the Bishops of our Church, as Usurpers, Mr. Baxters words,
in one of these Disputations, are these -- [ We have had, and have Men of that
judgment, Disput. 1. Page 5.
that have been excellent instruments of the Churches good, and so eminent for
God's Graces and gifts, that their Names will be precious, whilst Christ has
in England a Reformed Church. -- Moreover, who knows not, that Most of the
Godly able Ministers of England, since the Reformation did judge Episcopacy,
some of them, lawful, and some of them, most Fit? (For the Nonconformists were
but few) And that even before this late Trouble and War, the most, even almost
all of those that were of the late Assembly at Westminster, and most through
the Land, did subscribe and conform to Episcopal Government [even the English
Prelacie ] as a thing not contrary to the Word of God. So that it is evident,
That it is very Consistent with a Godly Life to judge Episcopacie [even, that
of the Church of England] lawful and fit, or else we should not have had so
many Hundred Learned and Godly Men of that mind] -- I will not comment any
farther upon the particulars; but add this only for a close, that it may be
worth the while, for Every one to lay his hand upon his Heart,
and impartially examine, who they were that first brake these useful Rules,
and set that perverse Copy of Disobedience to Rulers and Teachers, which has
now so strangely overrun and poisoned the whole Nation? And then to move the
Question,
Why for the time to come, this should not be as Good and wholesome Doctrine
under King Charles the Second, as it was reputed under R. the Protector?

FINIS.
A Short Index of the Contents of this Book.
A Letter to the Bookseller, and therein a Character of Mr B. from a professed
Friend. A most serious Preface, out of Mr B. subservient to many good purposes.
The Protestation of the writer of these Reflections to the World. The Author of
Sacrilegious Deserttions known and described by the intrinsic Characters of his
Book. Of N. C. Ministers Abilites, Of the Names Presbyterian and
Nonconformist, whereby they are called, and the name Episcopal Protestant,
whereby some of them would be called. Confess^d to be not all of one mind. Of
their Candor and Charity toward Conformists. Some of their sentiments and
opinions. Viz. Of the power of Magistrates, and Bishops, to Confine and
Silence. Of Ejected Ministers, and their Successors. Of the Church of England,
and Schism from the same. Of the great Evils of gathering into distinct and
separate Churches. On which side the Cure of our Divisions chiefly lies.
Presbyterian Resolutions upon Toleration. Mr B's Supercilious contempt of his
Adversaries, and Boasted Reasons for N. C. -- Of Drunken Readers. Of N. C.
differing from the Doctrine of the Church of England, and what they call the
new Doctrine of the new Rubric Some farther taste what they would be at upon
Toleration. Of Ecclesiastical Synods. N. C. Vying with their Excellent
Successors, as they ironically call them. How far London-Ministers testified
formerly against Toleration. Who the chief Causes of our Divisions. Mr B's
Picture drawn by his own hand. His humble Petition, as he styles it, to the
Conformists, in order to a Petition for the N. C. and the materials proposed
for that Petition. The Conclusion.
FINIS

