A NEW PROGNOSTICATION For the Year of our Lord God 1665.

Being the first after Leap-Year.

Wherein are contained the Moveable Feasts, with the Change of the Moon, her
Full and Quarters: with the true disposition of the weather, in every Quarter
of the Moon. And a true Description of the Eclipses of this Year.

Together with Notes of Husbandry and Gardening, for every Month. Also with
some Physical Observations. With the Names and times of all the Fairs in
Scotland: with an addition of several new Fairs, never before printed.

Set forth at ABERDENE, by Philomathes.

Printed by Robert Sanders, Printer to the Town of Glasgow, for the Year 1665.

CHRONOLOGY 1665.
SInce that the Julian Period first began. 6378 Since that of naught the Lord
created man. 5614 Since Noah entered the Ark, to shun the flood. 3958 Since God
to Abraham made a promise good. 3592 Since Israel from Egypt land did flee.
3162 Since in Canaan he made Chams son to die. 3122 Since Solomon the Temple
finished. 2675 Since it destroyed, Sedecias captive led. 2255 Since Trinovant
of old, now London, builded. 2772 Since Games Olympic were first at Elea used.
2440 Since Romulus did build his stately Roma. 2417 Since Nabonassar: hence is
that ancient Era. 2411 Since Fergus first, our Royal stemm's Progenitor. 1994
Since died Alexander, a worlds terror. 1988 Since Emmanuel of blessed Virgin
born. 1665 Since for man's sin he suffered death and scorn. 1632 Since Julian
year at first was constitute. 1709 Since Hyegra, or flight of Mahomet. 1074
Since Cesars force the Britains overthrew. 1717 Since then the ravenous Roman
Eagle flew. 1241 Since Christian Faith professed within this Nation. 1455 Since
Picts extinguished: and Edin Scots possession. 827 Since Guns, these mortal
engines first were found. 285 Since Printing made the World with Books abound.
222 Since Protestants, by Luther first so named. 136 Since Loyola the Jesuits
Order framed. 125 Since Bishop Turnbul built Glasgow College fair. 210 Since
learned Strange did make its great repair. 33 Since Gregory helped the Calendar
forlorn. 83 Since Charles the first, to grief and sorrow born. 65 Since English
Crown did learned James head surround. 63 Since Charles with cares, as well as
gold, was crowned. 40 Since he made truly great and glorious. 17 Since a new
star conveyed a King to u^ 35 Since hence constrained to flee, perplexed with
care. 14 Since that his loss his patience did repair. 5
Common or vulgar Notes this Year 1665.
THe Golden Number. 1^ The Cycle of the Sun. 22 Dominical Letter. A The Epact.
23 Fastens Even. Feb. 7 Easter, or Pasch. March 26 Ascension day. May 4
Whitsunday. May 14
The Eclipses of this Year 1665.
NO less then five times this Year will the Luminaries be eclipsed, three
times the Sun, and two times the Moon. But because the Eclipses of the Moon
will only be visible to us, we shall not speak much of those of the Sun, for
they shall not be seen in our Horizon.

The first Eclipse is of the Sun on friday the 6. of Januarie, at 7. a clock in
the morning. It shall not be seen by us: but in Arabia the Happy it will be
conspicuous.

The second is a visible Eclipse of the Moon, on saturday the 21. of January,
13 minutes past 6. in the morning: but will be better seen at the Gulf of
Florida, or Nova Hispania.

The third Eclipse is of the Sun the 2. of July afternoon, and shall be seen in
the Province of Mexicana, near the Equator.

The fourth is a very small eclipse of the Moon, upon saturday the 16. of July,
about 21. minutes after midnight, and shall be seen in our Horizon.

The fifth and last, is a great Eclipse of the Sun, on the 26. day of December,
about 9. a clock in the morning. It is to be seen by the people in the Southern
parts of Africa.

The exact time of the Suns entrance into the four cardinal points this Year
1665.
day ho. min. The Sun enters Aries, March 9 Postmeridiem. Cancer, June 10 15
Libra, September 12 6 5 Capricorn, December. 10 17 48

The exact day, hour and minut of the New Moon, her Full and Quarters: the
daily disposition of the weather: with the whole known Fairs in Scotland for
the Year 1665.
xxxj. January begins on Sunday.
New Moon the 6. day, 15. min. past 7. in the morning. This quarter is subject
to wind and frost.
First quarter the 14. day, 42. min. past 10. in the morning. Much snow, and
little frost.
Full Moon the 21. day, 29. min. past 6. in the morning. Fair Sun with winds.
Last quarter the 28. day, 30. min. past midnight. Boystrous and stormy weather.

The first Fair in the Year is S. Naughlans, at the Kirk of Beth^lny, in Gerry,
upon the 7. day. S. Mungo in Glasgow the 13. day a Fair. And at Dunkel and
Kilwinning the 21. day.

In this month cut down timber (and it shall not cleave, nor be eaten with
worms) in the last quarter of the Moon: set or sow kernels and bay-trees,
primet and box: set quicksets, rose trees, peaches, philbird, and plum trees,
if the frost be not hard, prune and lop them before full Moon: sow and set
beans and pease, and dung land. In the last quarter geld cattle, and fallow
land for wheat and rye, trench gardens with dung, and remove bees. And for your
own health, keep your body warm: let good and wholesome diet be your Physician,
etc.

Old Janus bids thee keep thy body warm:
With Kitchin-Physick thy diseases charm.
xxviij. February begins a wednsday
New Mood the 5. day, 42. min. past 4. in the morning. Seasonable, fair and
white.
First quarter the 12. day, 2. min. past midnight. Frost and hailstones.
Full Moon the 19. day, 33. min. past 4. after noon. Slabby and dark.
Last quarter the 26. day, 42. min. past 3. after noon. Dry, threatening the
brave Mariners.

At Abernethy and Forres in Murrayland, called S. Brides day, 1. On Candlemasse
day in Bamff, Dunkell, Dingwall the 2. day. Valentines day at Linlithgow the
14. day, and at Forfar the 15. day, holding 8. days. Ashwednesday Fair
begins on Fastens-even. A Fair in Lanerk on Fastens-even day.

Sow all sorts of pease, and other pulse: sow mustard seed, cast up dicks, set
and plant vines, hops, goose-berries, and any fruit that grows upon bushes:
prune and trim all sorts of fruit trees from moss, canker, and all superfluous
branches: graft in the latter end of the month: sow onions in cold stiff land
Take heed of cold, forbear phlegmatic meats, etc.

Of cold beware: with vennison and fish,
Do not in any case maintain thy dish.
xxxj. March begins on Wednesday.
New Moon the 6. day, 41. min. past 8. at night. Driving snow and wind.
First quarter the 14. day, 12. min. past 10. in the morning. Blustering wind
and rain.
Full Moon the 21. day, 7. min. past 2. in the morning. Glad weather for geese
and dukes.
Last quarter the 28. day, 2. min. past 11. at night. Some sharp hail showers.

S. Monence in Aberd. Dumfer. Abercherder, and S. Marnock Kirk the 1. day, at
Pettenweem 3. S. Duthos in Tain of Rosse the 9. day, in Auchtertuil the 10.
day, S. Causnan the 11. day, S. Patrick in Dumbarton, and at the Kirk of
Strageeth the 16. day, in S. Johnstoun the 19. day, Cuthbert in Langton of the
Mers the 20. Lady day in West-weems, Bamff, and Auchtermuchty the 25. day:
Palm Sunday at the Kirk of Forrig, and in S. Johnstoun: and Skyrethursday fair
is upon thursday before Good Friday, at Cowper of Angus; Otherwise Monks Cowper.

In the new of the Moon graft pears, wardens, apple trees: begin to sow oats,
barley, parsneips, onions, carrots, cucumbers, and all kind of pot herbs: slip
artichoks and sage, geld lambs, let blood according to strength and necessity,
the sign and weather being fit: but above all, see that your Physician be
skilled in the stars, or else he may as soon kill as cure; for remember, what
cannot be cured in the Spring by fit Medicines, must be endured all the Year
long.

More health is gotten by observing diet,
Then pleasure taken by excess and riot.
xxx. April begins on Saturday.
New Moon the 5. day, at 12. a clock at night. Wet and unkindly cold.
First quarter the 12. day, 30 min. past 5. after noon. Fair with some wind.
Full moon the 19. day, 45. min. past 11. in the morning. High winds from the
North-east.
Last quarter the 27. day, 25. min. past 3. in the morning. April showers, but
fair withal.

Easter day is the 26. of March this Year 1665. The first tuesday after Easter
there is a Fair in Corstorphine, and on the first wednesday after Easter, there
is a race to be run for a Cup at the value of five hundred Merks price. S.
Donald Fair at the Kirk of Achtheles the 17. day, Mark Evangelist in Dysert the
23. day: Beltan day the first the 26. day: a Fair at Leavn the 29. day, and in
Kilreny the 30. day.

Whiles in March, and whiles in April.

Skirethursday before Pasch, in Glasgow, Dumbarton, Cowper of Angus, Elgin of
Murray: Paschmunday in Cowper of Fife, Lanerk and Irwing: Lowsunday after Pasch
in Killimore, and all the week after at the Senzie of S. Andrews.

Sow barley, hemp and flax: pole hops, set and sow all kind of garden herbs:
open hives, and let bees labor for their living: let Tanners now provide
themselves with bark, and all good Huswives look to their Dairies: bleed and
purge with advice: those that are troubled with aches, or the gout, let them go
to the bath.

It is now good to hunt, to ride, to run,
So that extremes therein thou ever shun.
xxxj. May begins on Monday.
New moon the 4. day, 18. min. past midnight. Pleasant tair weather.
First quarter the 11. day, 3. min. past 11. at night. Hail and wind enough.
Full moon the 18. day, 28. min. past 10. at night. Good dry weather.
Last quarter the 26. day, 19. min. past 9. at night. High Southerly winds.

The first day of May, called S. Philip, a Fair in the Grange within the
Sheriffdom of Linlithgow.

Holy-crosse day the second Beltan, in Monrosse, Kinrocher, and in Peebles the
3. day, at Bamff the 16. day, and in Sterling a Fair 10. days before Whitsunday.

Whiles in May, and whiles in June.

Whitsonmonday in Glasgow, Dumbarton, Lanerk, and Jedburgh, Whitson-tuesday,
called Pardon day, in the Chanry of Ross, and at the Kirk of Ninians above
Kiready. Trinitymonday in Edinburgh and Brichin 8. days, in S. Andrews one
day; in Brunti-land one day. A Fair in the Burgh of Linlithgow, the first
tuesday after Whitsunday. Trinity thursday in Falkland.

Sow barley in all light lands, and bearing grounds; and likewise hemp and
flax, and all manner of fine seeds and herbs: Take lambs from their dams, leave
lopping of trees, rise early, walk the fields, especially by running streams.
Sage and sweet butter is now an excellent breakfast: sage and clarified whay,
as also scurvy-grasse ale, and wormwood beer, are wholesome drink to be drunk
fasting.

Be bold to use such Physical intentions,
As are prescriv'd by Artists true inventions.
xxx. June begins on Thursday.
New moon the 3. day, 25. min. past 10. in the morning. Beware ye Sailors.
First quarter the 10. day, 5. min. past 4. in the morning. Fair warm drops.
Full moon the 16. day, 34. min. past midnight. Un wholesome days.
Last quarter the 25. day, 39. min. past 1. after noon. Happy days indeed.

A Fair in Kinross the first tuesday of June. A Fair in Stramiglo and Aberdour
the 6. day, and at Enerkeithing the same 6. day. A weekly Market in Forfar,
beginning the 8. of June, of neat, sheep, horse, and other, etc. containing
till the first of October. The 10. day a fair in Forgondeny, S. Barnabie in
Lawder and Dysert the 11. day, S. Margaret in Abernethie, Ceres in Fife the 13.
day. Midsummer on S. John's day in S. Johnstoun five days, in Air four days,
in Wigton, Bamff, and Athelston the 14. day: in Auchtertuil the 15. day, S.
Margaret in Dumfermling, and at Moffat the 18. day, in which place there is a
weeklie market every friday, Earlstoun the 19. day, Midsummer day in Forres the
24. day: in Alathie, in Angus, called S. Emagold the 25. day: S. Peter's day at
Forfar the 26. day, holding four days. As also in Faulkland, Bruntiland,
Bamff, and Kelso the 26. day, in Peebles the 29. day: S. Serif fair the last
tuesday of this mouth, S. John Baptist day a fair in Frazerburgh the 24. of
June.

Shear sheep, bring home fuel, weed corn, and gardens, set rose-mary,
coronations and gilly flowers: sow lettice and radish seed, three or four days
after the full; for then they will not run to seed: make nay, carry land, lime.
marle, and manure of what kind soever benefiting your land: cut neither hedge
nor tree: in this and the two next months, beware of great thirst use thin and
light diet, moderate exercise, and chaste thoughts.

The careful Husband which intends (...) ^hrive,
Now like the Be, brings honey to the hive.
xxxj. July begins on Saturday.
New moon the 2. day, at 7. a clock at night. Reasonable fair.
First quarter the 9. day, 53. min. past 9. in the morning. Unkind days.
Full moon the 16. day, 37. min. past noon. Wind and wet.
Last quarter the 25. day, 3. min. past 4. in the morning. Some evil thunder.

Culros the first day, Abernethie and Auchtermuchtie the 2. day, S. Martin of
Bulzion the 4. day, S. Thomas the 5. day. S. Palladius in Forden in the Merns
the 6. day, S. Andrew in Glasgow the 7. day, Kilwinning the 12. day; the 13. S.
Margaret in Killimure, six days at the Kirk of Forrig, the third tuesday of
this month: Moffat the 18. day: a fair in Sterling the 20. day: Mary Magdalen
in Linlithgow, Pettenweem and Pathhead the 22. day, in Airth the 24. day, S.
Christina in Corstorphine a fair the same 24. day. S. James in Forfare, Cowper
of Fife, Lanerk, Roxburgh, Kinghorn, and in Musselburgh the 25. day. The last
thursday of July a fair at Whithorn two days.

Make your hay and house it while it is fair weather: pull hemp that is ripe,
gather garden beans, get rue and wormwood, and gaul to strew on your flowers,
to destroy moths and fleas, fence corpses, use moderat diet, take heed of great
thirst, take no Physic, bleed not upon violent occasions; and when ye do
intend to let blood, bid your Doctor fortify your ascendant well (by electing
a fit time) that no malevolent be there, etc. or else stand to your hazard if
you do it.

Now meddle not with wine, nor Venus to yes,
Lest thou deprive thy self of future joys.
xxxj. August begins on Tuesday.
New Moon the first day, 43. min. past 2. in the morning. Rain and great winds.
First quarter the (...), at six in the after noon. Good f^^ Cobblers.
Full moon the 15. day. 18. min. past 4. after noon. Hot and good weather.
Last quarter the 23. day, 28. min. past 4. after noon. Dark misty weather.
New moon the 30. day, 22. min. past ten in the morning. Rain, and after fair
weather.

Lambmasday in Atturfe three days long, and in Melrois, Ennerkething, S.
Andrews, and in Dumbarton the first day. Laurance fair in Rane, the first
tuesday and thursday after in Falkland. S. Lawrens in Seilkirk, Auchtermuchty
and in Forres and Carnwath the 10. day, in Rane, two days before Kilmahug, and
at the burn of Campsie: Lady day in Dundie and Bamff, in Merns the 15. day:
Bartholomew Apostle in Linlithgow, Kinkarn of Neil, and in Clackmannan and
Peebles the 24. day: S. Zephirinus in Corstorphine the 26. day a fair.
Samarevis day in Forres 27. and S. John's day in S. Johnstoun the 29. day.

Follow closse your own corn harvest, sow winter herbs in the new of the Moon,
gather garden seeds, cut down barley and oats, gather summer fruits: refrain
from sleeping in the day time, especially after meat, avoid riot and excess.

Use slender diet, cooling drinks embrace,
If long on earth thou meanest to have place.
xxx. September begins on Friday.
First quarter the 5. day, 30. min. past 7. at night. Very good weather.
Full mon the 14. day, 49. min. past 8. in the morning. Tempestuous days.
Last quarter the 22. day, 20. min. past 3. in the morning. Good tidings from
south.
New moon the 28. day, at 7. a clock at night. Rain, and very great winds.

S. Giles in Elgin the first day, in Moffat the 2. day, in Skirline the 4. day.
Latter Lady day in Sterling, Dundie and Bamff ^he 8. day. Rude day in Carill,
Jedburgh, Dumfermling, Dumfreis and Athelston the 24. day, in Auchtertuil and
Salane the 11. day. A fair at Forfar the 15. day, holding eight days. Matthew
Apostle in L^^^^ithgow the 21. day, a fair at Leven the 27. day: S. Michael in
Haddington, Leslie, Air, S. Andrews, Crief and Kirkubright; and at the Kirk of
Forrig the 29. day* Saint Jerome in Bamff the last day.

In the beginning of this month, and end of the former, gather hops when they
wax brown, the weather being fair, and no dew on the ground: kill bees, make
vernice; set all slips of flowers between the two Lady days, put swine to
mast: remove trees every new Moon, from September till February, especially in
the new of the Moon; the weather fair and warm, wind south or west. Use Physic
moderately: forbear fruits too pleasant or rotten: shun riot and excess of
diets.

If thou intend to live another Year,
Cheer up thy self, but naughty fruits forbear.
xxxj. October begins on Sunday.
First quarter the 5. day, 6. min. past 9. at night. Cold and durty winds.
Full moon the 14, day, 27. min. past one after midnight. Not as I would.
Last quarter the 21. day, 42. min. past noon. Fair weather indeed.
New moon the 28. day, at five a clock in the morning. Cold and dry.

The 1. 2. and 3. a fair in Salt Preston: S. Francis in Abernethie the 4. day:
Dionise in Peebles, Earlstoun, Kirtintintilloch, Aiton, Auchtermuchtie, Ceres
in Fife, and in Killimure and Moffat the 9. day: Dalkeith and Tillibol the 10.
day, at Enerkeithing the 12. day, Fenduck at Dunning the 13. day, in
Forgondenny the 15. day: S. Luke in Lawder Kinross and Rugland the 18. day
(Rugland has got two new fairs, but I know them not.) S. Irenea in
Corstorphine the 20. day a fair. Marie Salaemine in Sterling and Kelso the 22.
day, a fair at Forfar the 24. day, holding eight days: in Linlighgow 24. in
Kilrenie and Stramiglo 25. Fowls fair in Pasley and Falkirk the 26. Simon and
Jude in Dysert, Falkirk, Cockanic and Kirkliston the 28. day, in Alloway the
29. The last thursday of this month, a fair in Whithorn holding two days.

Sow wheat and rye, the sooner the better, for fear of rain: set accorns and
nuts: gather winter fruit, the weather dry, in the after noon, and in the wain
of the moon: refuse not a needful Physic from the learned, but especially
from these who can tell you what your disease is, and that only by viewing the
face of heaven, of which you will be assured both in the kind, cause and cure:
but of such Physicians there are few to be found here. --

With good advice such Physic may thou take,
As can thy body sound and healthful make.
xxx. Nove^ber begins on Wednesday.
First quarter the 4. day, 25. min. past 4. after noon. Very pleasant weather.
Full moon the 12. day, 37. min. past 5. after noon. Frost, sleet and wind.
Last quarter the 19. day, 6. min. past 9. at night. Raw unwholesome weather.
New moon the 26. day, 49. min. past 5. at night. High winds.

Hallowday in Edinburgh eight days, in Falkland, Dumblane, Fordyce the first
day, in Alythie the 2. day, in Kilwinning the 3. day. S. Leonard in Lanerk, in
Forres the 6. day. S. Matthew in Dumbar, Melrois, Martinskirk, Strabogie,
Cowper of Fife, Hamilton, Culross, Kilmahug the 11. day. S. Clement in Dundie
the 13. day. Margaretmesse in Dumfermling the 16. day. S. Machharmuch in Taken
and Auchtertuil the 22. day, Bruntiland the 23. S. Andrew in S. Johnstoun,
Peebles, and Chirnside the 30. day.

Make malt, kill hogs, trench gardens with dung, set crab^ree stocks, sow wheat
and rye in exceeding hot sandy grounds: cut down timber for ploughs, carts 5
and other employments or Husbandry: use wholesome meat and drink, with good
exercise to preserve health.

New Wine is now good for Old Men esteemed,
And Meats well Spiced, worthy diet deemed.
xxxj. December begins on Friday.
First quarter the 4. day, 1. min. past 2. after noon. Fair, frost, and some
snow.
Full moon the 12. day, 36. min. past 8. in the morning. Wind and fleet, then
rain.
Last quarter the 19. day, 7. min. past 5. in the morning Great storms, with
whistling snow.
New moon the 26. day, 15. min. past 9. in the morning. Fair, I warrant you.

Saint Nicolas in Aberdene the 7. day. Lady day in Westweems the 8. day. S.
Dunstane in Bamff, and at the Kirk of Diere the 14. day. S. Cuthbert in the
Grange, within the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow the 17. day. S. Thomas in Glasgow
the 15. day. S. John's day in Bamff, in Forres the 27. day.

In this and the next month, cut down timber. In the last quarter of the moon,
uncover the roots of fruit trees: set beans and pease. Cover all the best
flowers and herbs from frosts, with old rotten horse dung. Look well to your
cattle: water and keep moist your meadows, let horses blood, and drink good
wine and strong drink: keep thy body warm clad, thy house warm and dry: cast
all care from you, and relieve those that are in want with thy charity. Thus I
have ended these Observations which are set down for thine advantage, make good
use of them, and give God the glory.

Warm clothes, good fare, prepare ye must,
But use ye not excess in last.
Some new merry Lines all in fives.
Five special good things in Winter season.
Wholsome diet for the belly.
Warm clothing for the back.
Ale and spice for the stomach.
A good fire to sit by.
And a soft bed to lie upon.
There are five sorts of people ill to trust.
Trust not a Parasite with thy dinner.
Trust not a Thief with thy money.
Trust not a Drunkard in thy celler.
Trust not a Ranter with thy wife.
Nor trust not a Whore with thy secrets.
There are five strange Wonders in the world.
To see a Drunkard not thirsty.
To see a Prodigal turn thrifty.
To see an Informer refuse a bribe.
To see in Usurer throw away money.
And to see a Whore turn honest.
Five things are not agreeable with the other.
A queasie stomach, and hard fare.
A thirsty man, and a little pot.
A weak horse, and a heavy load.
A lusty soldier, and a fearful coward.
A scolding wife, and a fighting husband.
Five good properties in a Maid.
To be seen, and not heard.
To be civil, and not coy.
To be loving, and not wanton.
To answer when she is spoken to.
And to go handsome, and not be proud.
Five sorts of People not to be pitied.
They that will want meat, rather then work to get it.
They that will lie still while a cart runs over them.
They that will not be ruled by their friends.
They that spend their means wastfully.
and they that fall in a pit that they dug for others.
Five couple well met.
A young man, and a handsome maid.
Hot meat, and a good stomach.
A wanton child, and a dainty rod.
A drunken man, and a fair pair of stocks.
A lusty thief, and a strong pair of gallows.
Five excellent Medicines to cure a hungry stomach.
A good Cawdle in the morning next the heart.
(...) good Dinner of hot meat at noon.
(...) pottle of Muld Sack toward three of the clock.
(...) Shoulder of Muton and a Capon for supper.
And a warm she-bed-fellow to lie withal at night.
There are five foolish fashions in great request.
Great bunches of small ribbens on men's cod-pieces.
^omen to carry their coats above their knees.
Young fellows to powder their hair.
^^nches to wear black-bags, that have never a smock to put on.
Painted Whores to ride in coaches, while civil Gentle-women go a foot.
Five sounds brings good news to Scotland.
The sound of Bells for joy of Peace.
The sound of a Messenger that brings good news from beyond sea.
The sound of a trumpet in token of victory.
The sound of Music, if it revive the senses.
And the sound of Market-folks, if victuals be good cheap.
There are five things pleasant to behold.
A plentiful Harvest.
A full Market of all sorts of provision.
To see our friends prosper in the world.
To see true Religion flourish in our Land.
And to see Justice executed upon offenders.
Five kind of venomous stings.
The sting of Asps, that can never be cured.
The sting of Vipers, that poisons where it comes.
The sting of a Scorpion, that infects the body.
The sting of the Devil, that infects the soul.
And the sting of a Scold, that will never be at quiet.
Five Wishes to conclude with.
Would all Knaves would turn to be honest men.
Would all Scolds would learn to be quiet.
Would Poor Men were better paid for their labor.
Would money were more plentiful.
And would all that sees my Books would buy them.
Come along, my kind Customers, buy every one,
And then will my Books all the sooner be gone.
FINIS.

