AN ACCOUNT Of all those as have been taken into CUSTODY Since the DISCOVERY of
The New Conspiracy.
MR. Keeling, who made the first Discovery of the Plot, in the Messengers
Custody at Whitehall. Col. Rumsey at Whitehall. L. Howard of Escrick in the
Messengers Hands at Whitehall. L. Brandon Gerrord in the Tower. L. Essex who
cut his own Throat in the Tower. Col. Sidney, Maj. Wildman, Mr. Trenchard, Mr.
Hampdem, In the Tower. Maj. Bremond, Mr. Booth, L. Lovelace upon Bail. Sir Jo.
Burlace, On Bail. Mr. Forbus, On Bail. Sir H. Inglesby in Custody. Lee,
Lewis, Wood, in Custody. Sir Robert Payton Acquitted. Captain Blague Acquitted.
His Man in the Gatehouse. Simpson, Wade's Man, in the Gatehouse. Gibbons, the
D. of Monmoths Footman, in the Gatehouse. Aron Smith in Newgate. Mr. West in
Newgate. Bourn in Newgate.
Four that have received Sentence of Death, and are since Executed.
Lord Russel. Captain Walcot. Rowse. Hone.
Of those mentioned in the First Proclamation, who bave made their Escapes.
Rumbold. Goodenough. Wade. Tomson. Nelthorp made his Escape at Scarborough.
Of the last Proclamation none taken.
The Duke of Monmoth. Lord Gray of Wark. Sir Thomas Armstrong. Mr. Ferguson.
THose that consider the public Transactions of the former Age, will not much
wonder at the Secret Machinations, and private Contrivances of this, Especially
having so many wide-mouthed Beagles of the old Pack still unhang'd amongst us,
who, hot upon the Scent of Royal Blood, would start the same Game up again.

That there was a Conspiracy against the Kings Person, and of his Royal
Brother, the Duke of York, is Evident by their own Testimony, having every Man
Condemned one another, and himself out of his own Mouth. Every one having
Confessed himself Guilty, either of the Conspiracy against the King, or
carrying on the Insurrection. But before they could come to any head, it
pleased God to confound their Devices and scatter the Kings Enemies; some of
the Principal Ringleaders, as Shaftsbury, whose Rotten Memory Stinks in the
Nostrils of all good Men, After his Flight from Justice here, has left so many
Entangl'd in his Damned Rebellious Conspiracies, that they and their Posterities
are bound to Curse him, as dull unthinking Animals, not considering the Serpent
at the bottom of it, and since the whole is Endangered by the Infected party,
Heaven Instruct our Dread Sovereign to heal this desperate Wound, and Cut the
Rotten off to save the Sound. And it is hoped that Justice which brought all
their Villanys to Light, will in due time at last bring all such Bloody
Conspirators to Condign Shame, and Punishment.

LONDON, Printed for J. Smith. 1683.


