AN ACCOUNT OF Last Thursdays Sea ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN THE DVTCH and FRENCH
Fleets NEAR THE Coast of BREAST, WITH THE Total Routing of the FRENCH FLEET.
AN Hambrough Merchant coming into Dover to take in fresh Water, being homeward
bound, brings this following Account, as by the particulars of a Letter sent to
Esquire P -- an Eminent and Worthy Merchant in London.

This Hambrough Merchant, came by the two Fleets when they were actually
Engaged; the occasion how this Grand Engagement happened to fall out, was as
follows: Thirty six Sail of Stout Dutch Ships lying some Leagues off of
Breast, to secure the Dutch Smyrna Fleet from the French Capers, as well as to
Watch the Motions of the late King James, who was at Breast with sixteen Sail of
French Men of War (from thirty to seventy Guns each, as Fire Ships,) with many
small Craft to carry Land Forces, Ammunition, and four Cart Loads of Money and
Plate, etc. with a design to Succor Ireland, for the Romish Interest. On
Tuesday last, the Dutch Smyrna Fleet past by the Dutch Men of War, under their
Safe guard, and are come into the Channel to pursue their Course safely for
Holland. And on Wednesday, in the Afternoon (as it is thought) or at least on
Thursday Morning, the French Fleet put to Sea from the Port of Breast, (the Wind
favoring them) for the Coast of Ireland directly; but so it fell out, that the
Wind tacking about, by which the Dutch Fleet (who lay ready waiting their
motions) was driven directly upon them, and the French Fleet could not make any
part but the English Coasts; a most desperate Fight ensued. And when this
Hambrough Merchant came away, he left them hotly Engaged, and since (as it is
generally reported) the King this day received an Express, that the French
Fleet are totally Routed, a great many of their Men of War sunk, and others
taken with a great number of their small Craft Men, that had their Land
Soldiers on Board; among which was the Marshal Luxemberg, and many others of
their greatest and best Officers. And its general said about the Town, that the
late King James, with many of the English Nobility, are made their Prisoners of
War. You may expect in our next, a more full and particular Account, of this
Great, Glorious, and most Happy Engagement; happy not only to these Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, but happy to the Confederate Princes, and
States of Europe, who are at present Engaged in a Common, and no less Just War,
with the Common Enemy of Christianity and Mankind, the most Unchristian King.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wier, at the Swan in Bishopsgate street. 1689.


