The Bloody ALMANAC: Fore-shewing, The strange Revolutions, and remarkable
Contingencies, that will happen this Year, 1652. Wherein is contained, Diverse
Monthly Astrological Predictions; Impartially demonstrating, the King of Scots
new Game in France, Together with His Desires to Foreign Princes; And
Prophetical Observations thereupon. ALSO, A Description os the great Eclipse
of the Sun, on the 29. of March next; with the Calculation thereof, concerning
the landing of an English Army in France; the time and manner of a great Battle
to be fought; the engagement of the Scotch King; with the event and Success
thereof. With other Notes of great concernment, touching the strange
Lightnings, and Apparitions that will be seen in the Air this Year: Presageing
wonderful things in relation to England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the late
Kings Family.

Published according to Order.



London, Printed by R. Wood for G. Horton, 1651.

To the People of England.
Indeared, and cordial Contrymen;
GIve me leave, I beseech you, to present you with a Glass, wherein it
demonstrated the true Revolution of the year; the mutation and state of
Weather; the several and great Eclipses that will be visible both in the Sun
and Moon: As also Monthly Predictions of most notable Concurrences;
fore-shewing, the New-game and Design of the King of Scots, (for the disturbing
of the peace and tranquillity of this Commonweal) and the event and success
thereof: Together with a Description of his Actions, Counsels, and Results. But
at famous Lepington says; How can Charles the Gracious be better drawn to the
Life, than by the description of Tarquin the proud? And how can the
unparalle'ld Founders of a freeborn people be better portraicted, than by the
deciphering of Regal Tyranny; For, indeed, a Tyrant is to all men hateful; for
he builds the whole body of his State upon the columns of fear. But I shall
endeavor to moderate my Pen; desiring thee ( Courteous Reader) not to be too
sudden in thy censure; for believe me, it will admit of second thought.

G. H.

The Bloody Almanac; demonstrating the Wonders of our Times; as also,
foretelling the strange Revolutions that will happen this Year, 1652.
Januaries Monthly Predictions, 1652.
THis Month produces various Intelligence from Scotland, Ireland, and
Denmark; great treacheries are contriving; some plot discovered, and an eminent
person both in the Court of Judicature and Army questioned: The Mountains swell
high; they are yet in strong travel: but upon their final Results, a new
Representative appears; be it a blessing to this Nation. Gracious and pious
things are acting for our good: and those who have oppressed the poor are now
called to the Bar of Justice. Look to it Excise-men; your lofty Plumes are now
decaying. The Air inclines to snow at the beginning of the Month: Thick
Clouds, or a frosty season from the 14. to the 23. The rest temperate. Take
notice, that this month is a time seasonable for the Husbandman to cut
timber, prune superfluous branches from fruit trees, uncover their roots,
drench their weak and sick cattle, and be careful to preserve them from cold.

Monthly Predictions upon February.
THe necessity of the Scot is much to be deplored, many of their houses are
become stables; it is great pity, but there is no remedy. Deliberate Consultations
begin near this time; businesses long in agitation seem to approach unto
conclusion. I hope our sober Governor of Scotland acquaints us with some happy
successes of his Forces, or surely we may expect comfortable Letters from our
honest friends in Ireland. An appearance of Massives and they intending us
good, and portending somewhat from Holland, perhaps an Hogen Ambassador, or
aliquid tale. The Heavens are willing, and the influences of the Stars
propitious for reconciling Ecclesiastical differences; but the men whom it most
concerns are most unwilling, and are resolved to continue the greatest enemies,
the Soldiers, Army, or State may expect. Some eminent persons guilty of
disaffection unto this Government, now are questioned or condemned for their
Treasons, or their private actions much inquired into; Be they Priests or Legal
Men, let them suffer according to merit. Generally near this time, Men revile
both the Law and the Ministry; I fear our Governors are much scandalized and
their present actions misapprehended. Some may prove headless near these
times. Little petty actions in Scotland. Motion of some part of our forces
Northward. I cannot see but our Army or Forces in Scotland and Ireland, (as
the seasons permits) do good service, and are victorious. Set, cut, and lay
Quick sets and Roses; sow Beans, Pease and Oats, especially the Land being
cold and stiff: furnish your Gardens with sallads for summer.

Monthly Predictions upon March.
All Europe may now see that the English Nation are upon high Designs, both
for action and Council; their active Governors are wary and watchful for
safety of England. Our Fleets are preparing, our Army or some Brigades in
perfect readiness prepared for Northern or VVestern Motion. For some not very
pleasing intelligence comes from the Scots, or concerning that treacherous
people. Cardinal differences, or very great thwarting Disputations begin to
take place, I fear betwixt the Soldier and Magistracy. Mars is and will be
rampant: Unjust Treasurers must account. Many must now think upon giving
satisfaction for vast sums of the Commonwealths. This Month to the admiration
of the whole world, is two great Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, which promises
much Eclipse of worldly glory to the Princes of the world: great mutations,
sickness is like speedily to follow: mortality amongst men, and death of
Cattle. I desire the Countreyman to beware of a Rot.

For satisfaction to the Reader, I have calculated an Eclipse, that happened 300.
years ago, where you may see what followed then; and so judge of this worth
your observation. The said Calculation follows in the two last pages of this
part.

Monthly Predictions upon April.
The Lord divert the cross influences of the Stars from falling upon us
English, either by divisions amongst our Counselors themselves, or the
intemperate results of others, whether Officer or Officers of War, or Men
officiating in the name of Ministers. We have good, we have petty news from
Ireland. We are nothing astonished at various news which would make us believe
an Invasion from a Scots King is expected; and he providing in several Kingdoms
Men and Arms against our Commonwealth. Oh English, fear no such Bug-bears; He
fights against providence, who draws his Sword against this Commonwealth.
Without future troubles we can or shall not be; without a King hereafter, both
Malignant and Priest ridden zealots must be. Now we may hourly expect very
comfortable Letters from our friends in Ireland, as also from several other
parts of the world; and a general willingness to quietness seems possess the
English Commonwealth, who begin to be sensible that no Dominion upon earth is
perpetual. If not before this, the Portugal has writ to make his peace with
our State, he may near this time smart for his folly. Our Senators or interval
Governors officiate nobly and honorably. English valor and Soldiery becomes
terrible unto France, where War must now approach. Nothing of good comes from
Scotland.

Monthly Predictions upon May.
THis Month enters with great difference of Judgments amongst our grand
^atriots: the Soldier seems ill pleased, and the cross influence of Heaven
may be feared to stir up Men's courages to act some new and unpleasing Actions
in Ireland, Scotland and France; Deus avertat. Oppressions and delays even
sads the spirits of our best affected Friends. They are but Men, and they have
been suparlatively passive. Down goes some Clergymen, either by the folly of
their own Troasons against the State, or their own ill guided passions. The
Scots are still pelting at our Soldiers; some ragged companions they muster
and martial to our annoyance. Many stubborn Citizens of London repine at the
present times; some of them may repent this Months actions or consultations.
Again the Scot pretends friendship, but I fear his Treason. Were it a time of
War, much murder, many slaughters would appear; now in a serene time strange
Robberies, Pyracies, and some eminent offenders questioned, sentenced and put
to death. Bless us oh God from intestine Insurrections. France smarts with
Divisions, and great bloodshed seems near hand there. A Fever, the Sword, or
a most violent one takes an eminent Man out of the World about this Month.

Monthly Predictions upon June.
MAny in Authority are at a stand, either they fear they must, or else realy do
depart from their sweet Commands: si violandum jus, regnandi causa violandum.
Nothing but everlasting envy and horrid exclamations attends the persons of
some former Grandees, and perpetual Monuments of Bribery, and self-ended
designs are the rewards of the common people to some entrusted great ones. But
if the Heavens deceive us not, a general information from many parts, or many
impoverished Counties, or from many men whipped and stripped unjustly out of their
livelihoods, is making ready to inform the whole Nation how much they have been
abused by sub-Committees, sub-Treasurers, sub-sequestrators, and an Omnium
gatherum of beggarly Informers. Some fear of damage by fire in London; as also
Action in Scotland. The Venetians have no good success this Month. The Turk
thrives not: A Mutiny is to be feared in Constantinople.

Monthly Predictions upon July.
SEvere Judgments, or a woeful sentence is like to begin this Month, inflicted
either upon some notorious Malefactor or Traitor, who is now upon the stage
acting his last farewell. What? have we in vain fought for our Freedoms; shall
we be denied Justice in cold blood? shall we Commoners be ever passive? we
whose Bodies, Purses, Pens have sustained the burden of the late Wars; shall
we have no time limited for our Redresses? we mourn and send millions of
prayers to Heaven.

Some news of insurrections and hostile intentions, arrives at the beginning of
this month to interrupt our peace; yet I fear not the success, though for the
present it may be as unwelcome as the wet weather.

A Description of the great Eclipse that will fall out this year, 1652.
FOur times shall the bright Lamps of Heaven be deprived this year, thrice
shall the Inhabitants of the earth lose the light of the Sun by the
interposition of the opacious body of the Moon, betwixt their sight and him;
and twice shall the Moon be deprived of her borrowed light, by the direct
interposition of the earth betwixt the Sun and her: Both of the Moon, and the
first of the Sun will be conspicuous to us.

The first is of the Moon, and happens according to the Julian account with us,
the 15. day of March, at which time will the Moons Body be darkened. The
beginning shall be seen only in the Eastern parts of Europe, and the whole in
the Western: In Asia and Africa it will not be discerned.

For the better understanding of the effects of this Eclipse of the Moon March
15. I will parallel it with a former Eclipse, which by tracing Antiquity I find
happened 1345. three hundred and seven years since, being within one degree of
the Zodiak in the same sign as this, wherein the position of Heaven not much
differed from what it is now. The principal effects which that Eclipse
produced, were these; great tempests, mighty high winds, great floods through
abundance of rain, which continued all Summer, and most part of Autumn that
year, insomuch, that in these Northern Regions Corn did putrify and rot upon
the ground by reason of the excess of wet, and great corruption and decay of
all fruits, as also a great rot of sheep, so that for two years next following,
there was a great scarcity and dearth in most Countries, many Diseases and
sudden deaths amongst Christians; much Wars slaughters and bloodshed was in
the world during the effects of this Eclipse. The same year on St. Paul's day,
was so great an Earthquake in Germany, that many Villages and Bridges were
overthrown, and horrible Rains mixed with Toads, annoyed the Inhabitants. In
the year 1346. the 28. day of the Month of August, wax the sharp, yet famous
Battle fought in France, near the Village of Cressye, between Phylip the French
King, and Edward the third then King of England, where the English with a weak
power in comparison, gave the French a total overthrowe: the King of Bohemiah
his Son, newly elected Emperor, was overthrown with the King of France, who was
brought prisoner into England, the King of Bohemiah slain in the field, and
many gallants more: And in the same year, on the 17. of October following, a
party of the English under the Command of Mowbray, and Queen Phylip, who in the
Kings absence were left to guard the marches of Scotland, and lay upon the
Borders of England, to hinder the Invasion of the Scots: these gave battle to
the Scotch King, and all his Forces near Nevil-Crofle, in which Battle the
Scotch King was taken prisoner, and the chiefest of the Nobility were all slain
and taken. Thus had the English three great Princes at once prisoners; thus as
trouble, so Honor Victory did attend the English, during the effects of this
Eclipse, they were crowned on every side with glory and Renown. I question not
but the true English power will be as victorious: let Scotland, France, the
Dutch and Germans beware of too much provocations. Some vctions of the like
nature will be attempted to complete the English glory. The same year the 2. of
August, Callice was yielded to the English, which had been long besieged; thus
Renowned were the English in all parts, the Reasons in art I have not room to
insert.

During the effects of this Eclipse, the Heresy of the Adamites sprang up in
Bohemia, and John Wickliets opinions in England. In the year 1347. and 1348.
was so great mortality and pestilence, the like had not been seen before, and
people were stricken with horror and fear, by reason of the violent Fevers,
Aposthumes, and swellings in their Bodies, of which they died extremely, and
continued so long, that they were out of hope. These evils I fear overmuch
will be the effects of this Eclipse amongst us.

The first Eclipse is of the Sun, March 29. 15. minutes, 53. seconds after 10.
in the forenoon, at which time Sol the glorious eye of Heaven will be darkened,
by reason of the interposition of the Moons opacious body betwixt our sight and
him, and will appear to us as a yellowish green color, mixed (as it were) with
red, as blushing to uphold us, will almost quite hold his head from us.



Places which will feel the smart of this Eclipse may be gathered out of the
antecedent Discourse; but more plainly those Countries under Aries, Cancer, and
Capricorn. Saturn Lord of the eighth in the Ascendant, threatens Scotland,
Ireland, the West and North of England, with diverse and sore sicknesses, as
also the Pestilence: Before the effects of this Eclipse be over, let London
pray for a Reprieve; for about this time there will be a great decay in her
Health and Trading: Let France take heed, the flame is there breaking forth:
The Emperor of Germany begins to totter: The Hollander suffers prejudice by
Sea: And the Turkish Territories are invaded with factions: Let the glory of
Rome also (about this time) expect an eclipse from the English.

The second will be a very terrible eclipse of the Sun, the eye of Heaven, in
the same Month March 29. the beginning will be at half an hour past 9 in the
morning: Early Misers may dreadfully behold it: the middle at 40 min. after 10.
the end at 12 min. before 12 a clock. This Eclipse continues two hours and a
quarter, and will be very fearful to behold: The Sun will be almost wholly
darkened, only a little part of the lower South part of his body, like a new
Moonlight; as appears by the ensuing Figure.



This Eclipse will be visible to all Europe, as also Asia minor. Arabia,
Persia, Tar^aria, and in Africa and the West-Muscovi*

Monthly Predictions upon August.
IF a serious Disquisition did not find guilt, and remove some against their
wills from their Dignities last Month, this will; And I tell you plainly, I
smell some new Tenets studied and urged, which if not timely prevented, may
produce something unexpected: I think upon Burford business. Thunders, and
fiery Apparitions appear: great sickness to women; strong drinks are hurtful:
many die in Childbed. A time of mourning and lamentation draws near upon
France. Heavens gracious God protect us English from some eminent Mortality or
Plague this month, or high divisions amongst the Commons and their Superiors;
many men's Spirits are full of revenge; but the Father of Time and Eternity, I
hope sends his Angels of meekness to transform the furious thoughts of some
Zealots.

Monthly Predictions upon September.
THe Presbyterian Ministers are now satisfied in conscience touching the
lawfulness of this present Government: and a general Reconcilement appears.
Therefore let France, O people of Europe, be the mark unto which we all shoot
our Arrows. A great Victory seems to attend the English, and according to the
Calculation of the great Eclipse, March 29. a great Prince will be taken, and
another lose his life in the field. From all which we may traduce, that the
French King is falling from his lofty Cedars; and that the King of Scots shall
never more annoy Us.

Monthly Predictions upon October.
THis month begins with Justice, but ends with Execution: and many there are,
that receive condign legal punishment for their former knaveries. A great
Sea Fight happens about this time, with the French, but Victory redounds to the
English Some blustering (...) the tempestuous Scot; wherein they threaten a new
game; but after once (...) more, they will be quite cut out.

Monthly Predictions upon November.
AS the last month ended with troubles; so this begins with oppression: Heavy
Exclamations and cruel Execrations fly abroad in several Counties of England
from thousands of poor people against their hard fate, since they must know no
end of their miseries: they pay, they pray, and yet have no rest or peace.
Well! be not dismayed, thy Redemption draws near, its so appointed,
notwithstanding all opposition.

Monthly Predictions upon December.
AS this month begins with complaints for money; so it likewise supplicates
for another Tax: but this is no news: For diverse distractions arise through
pernicious Counsels. No Faith is in the Scot, they often murder the English in
corners. Sly treacheries are too frequent; and many great Officers are
displaced. Diverse Levitical Plots are near Discovery. Yet let the Countryman
keep an honest merry Christmas, that his poor Neighbors may commend his
Religion from his Charity. And I think if the consideration of Gods love who
has given Christ for us, move Us to Love and Unity, we shall make a good end
of the old Year, and happily begin the new. But there will always be a
Generation, who will with the Poet sing: Our present Age does us displease.
And present things we all despise.


FINIS.

