An Account of Last Sundays Engagement BETWEEN His Majesty's, and the Prince of
Orange's Forces, in the Road between Reading and Maidenhead, amongst which, its
said, a Blue-Garter fell.
With a True Account of some Occurrences at Portsmouth.
The Account from Maidenhead, is as follows,
THe Engagement that happened between His Majesty's Forces, Quartered at
Reading, and the Prince of Orange's Vanguard (then passing through the Town) is
variously Reported: But, according to the most credible Information, is Thus:

That the Princes Army was there, and Quartered in the Town, is undeniable; and
that Reading-Coach on Saturday Night stayed, and allighted their Passengers,
Five Miles off this side the Town, not adventuring to go any further.

The same Night the King's Forces withdrew from the Town, forming themselves
into a Body, put themselves in a posture of Defense. On Sunday Morning, they
were Assaulted by the Dutch Forces; where there was a hot Skirmish, and several
Killed on both Sides. The Relation is differently Discoursed of; some advancing
the Loss on one Side to Thousands, with unproportionable Loss on the other. The
most probable Account is of those that came to the Markets of London; who
relate, That they found several Persons, as well as Horses, lying Dead upon the
Road, (they say) to the Number of 200. Amongst these, it is Reported, was foond
a Blue Garter; but of this, we will give a fuller Account in our next.

The Account from Portsmouth, viz.
THe Sum of 8000. Pounds being sent to this Town, under a strong Conduct, for
the Paying of the Army, begot no small Joy in the Hearts of the Soldiers; when,
contrary to their Expectation, the next Morning it was distributed amongst the
Seamen and Officers of the Navy, then Riding in that Road, under the Command of
the Right Honorable the Lord Dartmouth. This, as it had Animated the One,
Dejected the other Party. By Night the Tarpolins, Inspired with the Juice of
the PunchBowl and Bottle, came scouring about the Town, singing Catches, and
Drinking the King's Health: But what occasioned all the Disturbance, was a
Mariner, more out of Meriment than design of Affront, Sung aloud in the Streets
the new Irish Song, known by the Name of Lilli-Bolero; some Dear-Joys,
affronted at the National reflection, but more perhaps for the want of their
Pay, drew out their Bionets, with which running him into the Heart, spoiled his
Singing for ever after. This loss of so eminent a Swabber, gave Alarm to the
whole Fleet, who gathering together in great Numbers, soon Revenged the Death
of their Brother, by a merciless Slaughter of the Dear-Joys. The Lord Dover,
Governor of the Town, having notice of this unhapy Tumult, applied himself with
all Expedition and Zeal to prevent any further Mischief. But all his Arguments
could not prevail, till the Right Honorable the Lord Dartmouth came a Shore,
to Interpose between them. He used all persuasive Arguments to Reconcile the
Difference. He begged them, in the Name of the King, as they tendered the safety
of His Person, their Loyalty, or what else they counted dear, to cease from any
further Outrages on either side. But they still persisted in their Violence,
demanding the Persons who were the first occasion of this Tumult. He promised
on the Word of a Peer, to see it done, which pacified for the present. In this
conjuncture the Prince of Wales got safe to Town. But the Lord Dover not making
good the Promise, the Town is since Blockt up, if not by this time Surrendered.

LONDON, Printed for W. D. 1688.


