AN ACCOUNT OF Major General KIRCK'S SAFE ARRIVAL AT LONDONDERRY.
With Allowance, June the 21st. 1689.
AS there is nothing more desirable, then to hear the glad Tidings of the safe
Arrival of Maj. Genesis Kircks, Sr. John Hanmore, Coll. Steward, and Sr. George
St. George's Regiments, at Londonderry, so we are assured, that, to the
inexpressible Joy of Coll. Walker, their Governor, and all the Protestants in
Garrison, they came with their Ships, being Twenty Four Merchantmen, and Three
of his Majesty's Men of War, the 13 th, Instant.

Upon his Arrival at the Mouth of the River he found it Blocked up, there being
a Battery Planted on each side of it, which run in a pretty way into the River;
and the middle of it was filled up with great Boats that were Sunk in it, and a
Bome across, and other such things, so that it was not possible for any Ship to
get over. The Major General finding things in this case, was resolved to make
his Entry, and first he played Briskly with his Great Guns from the Frigates upon
the Two Forts, as likewise with Small Shot; and the Forts being not so high as
they ought to have been, he had the advantage of them, and dismounted all their
Cannon, which he took, though his Frigates are much shattered; after he had
dismounted their Cannon he sent off several Boats, with Hooks, and such
Instruments as they use to Heave up their Anchors with, and they at last made
so much way, as for one Ship to go safely over, and so they all followed one
after another, and Arrived safely at Londonderry, to the Unspeakeable Joy of
those poor distressed People, who by the help of God will now be able to hold
out till such time as h^ s Majesty's Army Arrives, which will be very speedily.
The Major General lost in this Expedition about Three Hundred Men, and it is not
doubted but double the Number is Killed of the Enemy.

He carried with him Provision, Powder, and Ammunition for their Relief, viz.
500 Barrels of Powder, 6000 Arms, and Provision for Ten Thousand Men for Three
Months which was taken from on Board, and reposited in particular Storehouses,
and some of it delivered out the Garrison, and a Distribution made of Ten
Thousand Pound, which the King sent as a Donative to the Garrison, but a
particular Reward to Coll. Walker and the rest of those noble Chieftains that
have so bravely signalized their Valor against the Enemy; and who, without all
doubt, will no less courageously behave themselves for the Future, they having
resolved upon the next Effort the Enemy shall make upon them to march out and
give them Battle, and enlarge their Quarters into the Country; being assured
from England, That Duke Schomburgh is speeding to their Assistance with a
gallant Army of Twenty five, or Thirty thousand Men, with a proportionable
Train of Artillery: And it is not in the least to be doubted, but that his Grace
will soon reduce those rebellious and stubborn Papists, supported by the
Assistance of the French King; who we doubt not also suddenly to see Reduced by
the Confederate, German, and Belgic Forces, as low as the Pyrenean Treaty. And
there being now a Conjunction of the English and Dutch Fleets, who will be
undoubtedly Master of these Narrow Seas. Some great Enterprise, perhaps of
making a Descent in France it self will be attempted, there being diverse
Regiments of Infantry on Board the Dutch Fleet, for what Service shall be
judged most requisite. And the great News being brought us, That the Affair of
Holstein being Compremized; his Danish Majesty restoring that Duke to his
Country, quitting all his Engagements to France. His Majesty of Sweeden is
sending Ten thousand of his Forces to King William's Service, with some of his
Ships of War: Which as it will be a great Reinforcement, so it is not to be
questioned, that, if it be thought fit to employ them in Ireland, we shall soon
hear that they will possess themselves of their Metropolis Dublin,
notwithstanding the boasted Armies of the French and Irish.

LONDON: Printed for John Lyford, near the Green-Dragon in Fleet Street, 1689.


