Christian Charity, OR, Seasonable Advice to a Friend. Communicated by Letter
to a young Gentleman, his Kinsman, to persuade him to a Virtuous Course of Life.

Wisdom that is hid, and Treasure that is hoarded up, what Profit is in them
both? Eccles. 20.30.

To Reprehend well, has been said to be the hardest, yet the most necessary
Part of Friendship; -- And a word spoken in due Season, how good is it? says
Solomon, Prove. 15.23.

Quicquid pracipies esto brevis --
Horace de art poet.
Nec omnia, nec nihil.
By P. A. Gent. Author of the New-years-gift, or Advice to a Godson.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by J. Wells in London-house-(...) St.
Paul's 16^^

The PREFACE.
IT being some years since, that the following Discourse, (a great part of it)
was sent to a young Gentleman of a great Estate, my Kinsman, by way of Friendly
Advice, which I hope was not altogether unuseful to him; and now in hopes it
may be useful to others in the like Circumstances. I have thought fit to Print
the same with some Additions, being animated thereunto by the Considerations
following, viz.

That (as one says) It is every Man's Duty to make himself profitable to
Mankind, if he can to many, if not to fewer, if not so neither, yet to his
Neighbor, but however to himself; and most useful even to all Mankind, and to
the height of those excellent Principles, which all the sober and serious Men,
since the World began, have justified and applauded; according as a late worthy
Author expresses himself in Verse.

It Is not my business to my self to live,
There Is yet a nobler end, at which I drive.
The Oar that is treasured up, is sure abused,
And might as well not be, as not be used.
Suitable hereunto is that excellent saying of the Son of Syrach, Ecclus.
24.38. Behold I have not labored for my self only, but for all them that seek
Wisdom.

And considering, that the honest Heathen Socrates is said to have made it his
business in all Places wherever he came, to Instruct Men in Moral Pbilosophy,
Virtue, and Goodness; and even all virtuous Mentake a delight to communicate to
others what they have great esteem of themselves, and would willingly make
others as happy as themselves. But more especially, I having read in our
Chronicles, That one Thomas Scroop, Alias Bradly, of the Noble Family of the
Scroops, in the Reign of K. Henry the 7th. who having lived a Strict and
Religious Life in a secular State, and after being made a Bishop, and then was
sent an Ambassador abroad; yet toward the latter end of his days, thought it
no Dishonor to go about barefoot (in Norfolk where he lived) teaching Men the
Ten Commandments, who, nevertheless is said to have lived to the Age almost of
100 Years. All which Great and Heroic Examples have excited me to make this
poor Essay toward the promoting the same good End, the Honor of God, and the
good of Men. And although it may be granted that we live in a more knowing Age,
then to need to be taught the Ten Commandments, yet it may be much feared that
we may yet stand in great need of being excited to the Practice of them, and
other Christian Duties; and therefore it is my Hopes I may meet with a
favorable Construction of my Intentions in the following Discourse; for in a
vicious Age, and a torrent of wickedness; its every Man's Duty to endeavor to
stem the Tide, to prevent, if possible, the Dessolation it threatens

The LETTER.
Dear Cousin,
OUT of my great Respects I have for you, not only in memory of your good
Father and Mother (now I hope in a State of Rest and Peace with God) but also
my nearness of Relation to you. -- I have taken the freedom to present to your
View and Consideration, those few Maxims, Aphorisms and wise Sayings and
Discourses of both Heathen Philosophers, and Christian Divines, and others,
which I have taken more especial notice of. For as that wise Man, the Son of
Syrach, Ecclus. 8.8. Advises us, despise not (says he) the Discourse of the
wife, but acquaint thy self with their Proverbs; for of them thou shall learn
Instruction: But then we must also consider that moral Precepts are learned,
not to be repeated but practiced. Maxims and Doctrins, when well digested (as
our meat) Convert into Nourishment, and make the Soul and Mind Healthful and
Vigorous, as a late Author tells us.

And, Cousin, Considering that Transient Discourses (as we say) many times
prove ineffectual and useless, for want of time to weigh and consider them, I
have made choice of the present Method of imparting my Mind to you by Letter,
and this with all Respects, deference and Affection imaginable.

And may I use the Words of a Great Prince of this Nation, once to his Counsel,
the Parliament; Ajove principium, let me begin with God, that Optimus and
Maximus, the best, tho greatest of all Beings (as the Heathens used to style
him) our great Lord and Benefactor, which caused the Son of Syrach, aforesaid,
to say, Ecclus. 10.24. Great men, judges, potentates shall be honored; yet
there is none of them greater then he that fears the Lord, and Ecclus.
1.11.12. The fear of the Lord is honor, glory, and gladness, and a Crown of
rejoicing. The fear of the Lord makes a merry heart, and gives joy and
gladness, and a long life. For to speak truly, Bonum Corporis est animus, and
bonum animi est Deus, (i. e.) The Good of the Body is the Soul and Mind, but
the good of the Soul and Mind is God. The Son of Syrach again tells us,
Ecclus. 31.9, 10. Blessed is the rich that is found without blemish, who is he,
and we will call him blessed? For wonderful things has he done among his
People, who has been tried, and thereby been found perfect; then let him
glory, who might offend, and has not offended, and might have done Evil, and
has not done it. For the great Philosopher, Aristotle, tells us, that Felicity
is an Assemblage of three things, really beneficial. 1. That which depends upon
the Soul, viz. The Endowments of the Mind, that is Wisdom and Integrity. 2ly,
That which depends, or proceeds from the Body, as Health, Strength, Beauty, and
the like. 3ly, That which is grounded upon outward Conveniences, as Riches,
Nobility, Reputation, and the like, that depend upon Fortune; yet, (says he)
Vice is sufficient of it self to render life miserable, though accompanied with
all Corporal Conveniences. No wonder therefore that Metrocles the Philosopher
said, That a great Estate was a mischievous thing to one that did not know how
to manage it wisely. As also that honest Socrates made this Observation, That
he could not rosolve the Case, whether a Rich Man was happy until he saw how he
had spent his Estate. And the Spanish Critic has this excellent Passage, at
the top of the Hill of all the Virtues, sat Prudence as a Queen, reaching out
in her Hand a precious Crown, with this Inscription; for him who knows a
Mediocrity in Wealth.

And Antisthenes the Philosopher used to say, That virtuous and good Things
were Amiable, and Vicious and bad Things were Deformed and Ugly, and that it
was the same thing to be a Gentleman, and to be a Man of Virtue; (Gentlemen
therefore of of all others should study to be amiable and lovely, and hate
Deformity) And that Virtue was a Weapon that a Man could never be disarmed of.
Now Sobriety, (says Monsieur Charron) is a way and kind of progress to other
Virtues, and which is not painful to any but Fools and Madmen, according to
that saying, salubrium Consiliorum parens Sobrietas. Now, Sir, it is to be
observed that the first step to Virtue, est Bellum Indicere vitiis, etc. To
enter into a War with our sensual Appetites: And accordingly the late Reverend
Dr. Tillotson, when Dean of Canterbury, used to cite that Saying, Magna pars
virtutis est been meratus venture (i. e.) That a well governed Appetite was a
principal part of Virtue, and accordingly the said before mentioned wise Man,
the Son of Syrach, advises us Ecclus. 18.30, 32.) Go not after thy lusts but
refrain thy self from thine Appetite; take not pleasure, in much good cheer.
And venerable Bede advised Men to deal with Pleasures, as they did with Honey,
to taste only a little of it with the tip of the Finger. And accordingly it was
the saying of a Noble Spaniard. Major sum, and ad Majora natus, quam ut sim
mancipium Corporis mei, (i.e.) I am greater, and born to greater and more noble
ends, then to be a Servant, or Slave to my body.

And Priscus an excellent Philosopher tells us, That they who are broken with
Pleasures, and indulging their Carcasses, grew headstrong, and at last became
haters of Reason and Philosophy; wherefore he put a restraint upon himself in
many things. And accordingly, upon one Saying to Menedemus the Philosopher,
that there could be no greater Good then for a Man to enjoy whatever he
desired, the Philosopher answered; a much greater happiness for a Man to desire
no more than is needful. Accordingly Socrates Triumphed, and said, How many
things are there in the World of which I have no need? And that Riches,
Nobility, and Birth, were so far from deserving to be valued and esteemed, that
they were rather the usual Fountain of all Mischief. And as to Pleasure, that
it was a greater Pleasure to conquer inordinate sensual pleasure, then to enjoy
it. One said not Improperly, that Pleasure and Destruction are near of kin, but
when Inordinate, they were Brothers;

And further, as to Pleasures, Seneca tells us, if we would have Pleasure,
consider, wherein it consists, viz. in a knowing and virtuous Mind, and
accordingly labor to obtain that, but this is a Work of Labor and Industry.
Yet certainly its worth the while to purchase that Good which brings all other
along with it; and that they are the most miserable of all Mortals, who deliver
themselves up to their Pallates and Lusts. If it be Pleasure in this World that
you covet after, why do you not give it your selves in the Blessings of a well
composed and virtuous Mind, that is a Pleasure, Substantial, Sincere,
Unchangeable, and Untainted. Socrates advised those who were Slaves to sensual
Pleasure to pray to the Gods for better Masters. And as to sensual Pleasure,
Seneca says, it is a mean servile Transitory tiresome sickly thing, the good
of the Belly, and only the Felicity of Bruits. And that he who knows the
Irregularities of his own depraved Affections, had need keep a perpetual
Sentinel upon them, as well as a Prince among turbulent Subjects, or else he
will not be safe. Our Christian Warfare may be therefore said to be Dura pugna,
a hard Task, but this is as sure, that Solus Amor nescit dissicultates, (i. e.)
the Love of God knows no difficultys; and when also we have under the Gospel
the assurance that God will enable us by his Grace and Spirit, which he has
promised to such as unfeignedly beg it of him. And (as a late Author tells us,)
That that may be called ours, which we may have for asking. Let us not then
pretend to Impossibility of our Victory in our Christian Warfare, when even
Nature went so far with honest Socrates, that it made him one of an excellent,
most virtuous and obliging Temper, who was naturally of an ill, crabbed, and
sour Disposition. What a shame therefore will it be, that we Christians should
not be of the most, sweet Charming, Amiable, obliging Tempers of all other
People in the whole World, far from all Sedition and Rebellion, etc. And this
was truly verified in the Primitive Times, when that Holy Father Lactantius
said, bring me a proud Man, a malicious, a covetous Man; and by Christianity I
will quite alter and change him, make him Humble, Meek, Patient, Friendly, a
liberal Man. And here may I make mention of but one instance of many in this
kind in our own Nation, (passing by that other of the late Pious and Honest
Judge Hales in our days,) viz. that worthy Christian, Sir John Fineux a Judge
in K. Hen. 8th's Reign, of whom it is said, he hated nothing but what was
Dishonest, he feared nothing but what was Ignoble, and loved nothing but what
was Just. And that he was, A most prudent Man, of a Noble Stock and Family,
Famous for Justice, adorned with Piety, Eminent for Humanity and good Nature,
abounding in Charity; and that he was also entire in his Devotion to that
Sacred thing, called, Friendship, that Bliss on this side Heaven, made up of
Peace and Love, who also is said to have prayed so much Morning, Noon, and
Night, as if he never studied. And he would say, to day I have not lived, when
he had done nothing, whose excellent Motto also was, Misericordiam Domini
Cantabo in Eternum, (i. e.) I will sing of the Mercies of God to Eternity.
Indeed that late Learned Divine Dr. Stillingfleet, when Dean of St. Paul's,
tells us, That Man is a Mass of Vanity and Disorder, naturally weak in his
Judgment, wilful in his Passions, uncertain in his best Resolutions, violent in
his worst Inclinations, strangely bent upon what tends to his Ruin, and hardly
brought to understand and pursue his truest Interest. No wonder, then that
Diogenes said, that most Men are within a Finger of Madness; how great need
have they then of the Instructions of the Christian Religion? and the Grace of
the Gospel, to reform them? Learning Instruction, therefore (says one) is
Sobriety to the Young, Consolation to the Old, Riches to the Poor, and an
Ornament to the Rich. And to one that said to Diogenes, that he was not sit for
the Study of Philosophy, he answered him, why do thou then live? If thou
take no care to live well? For (as an other speaks) a Man may as soon be well
without Health, as happy without Virtue and Goodness. Nothing therefore (as the
Son of Syrach speaks) Ecclus. 28.14. Is so much worth as a Mind well
Instructed. Eger animus semper Errat, (i.e.) a sickly and unsound Mind always
Errs and Mistakes; for the Mind of Man has its Maladys, as well as the Body.
And Dr. Sibs, long since in one of his Printed Sermons, informs us, That
whosoever is Corrupt in Faith, is Corrupt in Obedience in that degree, and that
evil Opinions did breed evil Life. And therefore I may add, that it is
requisite for a Man to have an humble, sober ingenious, temperate, teachable
Mind and Understanding, as well as a Temperate and Chaste Body. According to
that Saying, quid prodest vinum non bibere and ira inebriari? (i. e.) What is a
Man the better to be Temperate, as to Meat and Drink, and yet to be an
Hypocrite, entoxicated with Spiritual Pride, Passion, Self-conceit, and Malice?
A Philosopher, (says Plato) must have a natural Affection to Truth, and an
Aversion from receiving Falsehood; as also to be very Temperate and Virtuous,
according as the wise Man, Ecclus. 27.9. Says, The birds will resort unto
their like, and so will truth return unto them who practice in her.

Knavery, (says Epictetus the Philosopher) proceeds from vicious Principles,
and the Corruption of the Mind, and also that Diffimulation and Trick is what
no Circumstance can render excusable to a good Mind, an honest Man. Simplicity
and Truth, (says Seneca) is a great and wise thing, but Cunning and Deceit is
foolish and mean. And that Honesty is that which raises a Man to Esteem; as
possessing a Good that deserves the greatest Applause of all Men, and he cries
out, oh! what a Mischief is too much Cunning? Accordingly, it was the Opinion
of most of the Philosophers, that Honesty was the chiefest Good, yea, the only
Good; and that when a Man had once lost his Integrity, he became as a noxious
Animal, sit to be abandoned by all, yea, hunted out of the World. Now, what
will then become of our sharp Men Without Honesty? sit to make Devils of?

A Man's Mind should (says Seneca) be erected also above the things of, the
World, O quam Contempta res est homo, nisi supra humana erexcrit, (i. e.) O
What a poor despicable thing is Man, except he raise his Mind above the Things
of this World! And further, he says, Quid infelicius est quam Amator esse and
non Dei? (i.e.) What greater Unhappiness can there be then to be a Lover, and
not of God: And then we may be sure, Amor Dei amorem proximi generat, (i. e.)
The Love of God will produce Charity to our Neighbor, and this will bring
Peace to the World, and make it a Paradise.

In the next place, as to Custom and Habit, which is said to be a second
Nature, both Aristotle, and Gallen tell us, That Custom is an ascititious
Nature. To which Gallen also adds, That a Habit in any thing is a lasting, and
hardly dissolveable Disposition; long Use and Exercise at last become Nature,
Custom, (says another) is the most intolerable Tyrant, and that the greatest
Sin by Custom comes to be accounted as nothing. And Cicero also says, That so
great is the Infection of evil Custom, that the Seeds of Virtue communicated to
us by Nature, are choked by it, and Vices contrary thereto begotten. To which
a late worthy Author further adds, That Consuetude in Sin does so Corroborate
Men in Sin, that a vicious Person cannot do well, even if he would, through an
inveterate Inclination of Will; Men become so addicted to Evil, and so averse
and disaffected to Good, that no Arguments to the contrary weigh with them;
they grow so alienated by impure Habits, that all Virtue becomes distastful,
and Wickedness grows a Pleasure, (which is a woeful Case indeed) So that much of
our Impotency to Good is derived in Truth upon us, from our Earniliarity with
Sin. And that every inordinate Desire, is as a Vessel without a bottom, that
whatever you put into it, presently runs out, and you can never sill it.

It was excellently Discoursed of by the Reverend D. Tillotson, when Dean of
Canterbury, in a Lent Sermon upon Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his Spots, etc. That it was a difficulty, next to
impossible, for a Man to conquer an evil Custom and Habit in Sin, and that
without a great deal of striving, diligent endeavors, assisted by a great deal
of the Grace of God, it could not be conquered and subdued. But hence we may
learn also, how we may make Virtue and Goodness easy and delightful to us, if
he will, by accustoming our selves to it.

In the next place, as to Conversation, to which, Man (being a Sociable
Creature) has naturally a strong Inclination, noble Conversation, (as one
calls it) the great Comfort of human Life, concerning which, a late Reverend
Author has given us these wise Cautions and Advice. Above all, (says he) have
a great care to shun and avoid the Company of wicked Men; for the World is so
full of them, that one can scarce go a step without meeting them; keep your
selves from them, if you desire not to sin, a mad Dog, a Viper ready to burst
with Poison, are nothing so dangerous.

Now as to that noble Conversation of Man and Wife in the Matrimonial State.
The Roman Tacious tells us, neque aliud probis quam ex Matrimonia solatium
esse, (i. e.) That Matrin any is the choicest Comfort of Minds, honestly given,
according to that saying of the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 26.22. That a harlot
shall be counted as spittle, but a married woman is a tower against death to
her husband. And further, Chap. 4.23. Solomon also advises us, Prove. 5.19. Let
her be to thee as the loving hind and pleasant roe. Let her breasts satisfy
thee at all times, and be thou always ravished with her love.

And may I, Sir, further recommend to you that great Christian Duty of Justice
and Charity, the Sum of the Law and the Prophets, to do as you would be done
unto? To give it you in the Words of a Reverend Divine of the Church of
England, in an excellent Printed Sermon Preached in London, Nov. 29. 1684. at a
Country Feast. The shortness, (says he) of human Life, and the difficulty and
tedioufness of Learning, and the Intricacy of Knowledge, and the multiplicity
of particular Cases, Exceptions and Restrictions, has in all Arts and
Sciences, recommended the usefulness of short Aphorisins, of compendious
Axioms, of little Summaries, and comprehensive Abridgments, in which are
contained the Substance, Pith, and Marrow of Things, and which are as so many
Polestars to direct us in all our Doubts, and as so many Clues to guide and
extricate us in the Labyrinth of Knowledge, in the variety and Meanders of
human Affairs. Accordingly, (says he) our good Lord, our gracious Lawgiver,
Jesus Christ, in condescension to our Infirmity, and in Compassion to our
Weakness, has in the Art (...) Godly living, in this Art of Arts; epitomized
our Duty, and comprised in one easy and plain Rule, all those numerous, and
sometimes difficult Precepts which are diffused, and are more largely commented
upon, in the Law and the Prophets, in the short Abridgment summed up in this
Golden Rule, of my Text; viz. All things whatsoever ye would that Men should do
unto you, do ye even so to them.

Now in the next place, tranquillity of Spirit is said to be the soverain Good
of Man, and to this Innocence and good Conscience are necessary. Accordingly
was the Wise and Christian Advice, which the Famous L. Burleigh in Q
Elizabeth's Days, is said, gave to his Son; Labor, (says he) to keep a good
Conscience for thy Comforter; for he that is disfurnished thereof, has fear
for his Bedfellow, care for his Companion, and the sting of Guilt for his
Torment. And indeed it has been observed for an undoubted Truth, that true
Religion is the strongest Exciter, and Spur to the Virtue of Integrity and
Honesty, fixing and engraving them upon the Heart of Man, making such deep
Impressions on the Soul, that a Man shall even prefer Death to the foregoing of
his Duty; (for as it has been said truly) That it is not enough to be Just,
and where there is Honor to be got, but to continue so in defiance of Infamy
and Danger, is that approves a Man's Fidelity. In truth, (as Sir Francis Bacon
used to say,) That Prosperity and Riches was the Blessings of the Old
Testament, but Affliction was the Bsessing of the New, the Cross was the way to
the Crown. There are (it is most certain) Difficulties in Religion and Virtue,
especially at first, and that the ascent up Virtue's Hill, is hard and tedious,
especially in the beginning and entrance into our Christian Warfare and Race,
but the Serenity and fair Prospect at the top, is sufficient to invite to the
labor of undertaking it, the Reward being no less then an eternal weight of
Glory in the highest Heavens. As the Apostle St. Paul calls it, 2 Cor. 4.17.
And what Man in his Wits, and not a Madman, but would prefer an Eternity of
Happiness before a few short-lived transitory Pleasures of this frail Life here
in this World?

I know, Sir, your Religious and Virtuous Education has been such, that you
are not a stranger to most of the things I have now presented to you; but this
is most true also, that wise Men have need sometimes to be put in mind of what
they know already. Pardon, Sir therefore my Attempt of Kindness and Affection
to you, who am,

Dear Cousin, Your Affectionate Kinsman And very humble Servant.
London, May 13. Anno 1696.
WHY may I not now further add to my said Letter? What Aristotle says of
Riches, That one of the best things that belong to Riches, is to get the
knowledge of them, how little they are good for? How unnecessary? How
dangerous? How destructive in most to the true Felicity? And what Plato also
tells us, That it is best for a Man not to be Rich, for his Riches will
enable him to compass his Desires, and those are usually evil; therefore I
shall never grant, (says he) a rich Man to be truly happy, except he be truly
good, but to be extremely good, and extremely rich, is impossible; no wonder
then at that smart saying, (alluding to our Savior's Words) That it was as
rare a thing to find a Venison Pasty in a poor Man's Cubbard, as to find a rich
Man in the Kingdom of Heaven. And Seneca says, That God could not traduce
these things of the World, which Men so much desire, more, then by taking them
from the best of Men, and giving them to the worst. And indeed it has
accordingly been the Observation of wise Men. That Wealth has seldom been the
Portion, and never the Mark to discover good Men. But that God Almighty, who
disposes all things wisely, has of his abundant goodness denied it, (he only
knows why) to many whose minds he has enriched with the greater Blessings of
Knowledge and Virtue, as the fairest Testimony of his Favor and Love to them,
according to that saying. Amor Ingenii nunquam divitem facit (i. e.) That an
honest and ingenious Mind never makes a Man rich with the Wealth of this World,
(a lively Instance whereof We have had in our Age, in that excellent Person,
Sir Francis Bacon, L. Virolam, who was accounted by Sir. Julius Casar, (in
whose Family he was in his low Estate, as a Burden to it) and my L. Brook, (as
is said) denied him a Bottle of Small beer) And in truth, such noble Souls are
above those transitory and fading Riches of the World, and regard them not, and
have little need of them. As it is said of the Gods, by the Philosophers, and
that truly; That they want the fewest things, so it may be said of good and
virtuous Men, who are most like them, they content themselves with a few
things. According to the Advice of the Apostle St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8. Having
food and raiment, let us be therewith content; for we brought nothing into this
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. And it has been an
Observation of wise Men, That there is no Heart so poor and barren, as that
which is set upon Riches and Abundance, like to the ground where Gold and
precious Stones are, is most Barren; for in truth, Virtue and Goodness is the
true Riches, and yields the fullest Satisfaction to the Soul in this Life, and
then sits and Capacitates it for, and thereby ensureth to it eternal Felicity
in the next Life. And it has been observed to be a thing of great difficulty
to possess the Riches of this World, and not to have out Hearts set upon them,
according to that saying, Ardua res est opibu^ non tradere mores. (i.e.) Its a
hard thing not to have our Minds set upon Riches.

Also, why may I not here mention that excellent Advice which that Statesman,
Machiavel gave to all Princes and Republics, who would keep themselves from
Ruin; above all things to preserve the Rites of their Religion incorrupt, and
to maintain it venerable; for that there was no surer sign of a Countries
Destruction, then to see in it a Contempt of Divine Worship, unto which I think
may be added, That to keep up Religion, and the Worship of God venerable, it is
necessary that the Credit and Reputation of the Clergy be kept up also. And it
had been long since observed, that the City Troy lost their Gods before their
City.

As also that excellent Discourse of that Reverend and Pious Man, Philip
Melancthon, to our English Ambassador in Germany, Sir Richard Morrison, in the
beginning of the Reformation, viz. That the Reformation of Hearts should go
before that of the Churches, and that Men should try that on their own Hearts,
which they design upon the Church; for that Deformity within would soon betray
the Pretenders to Reformation to such private Designs as must needs hinder the
public Good.

And also that prudent Caution of a late Reverend Divine of the Church of
England, Dr. Cudworth, in his Sermon at Lincoln's- inn, June 1664. viz. That if
there be not a due and timely regard had to the Commands of Lawful Authority in
indifferent things, and to order Peace and Unity in the Church, it may be
easily foreseen that the Reformed part of Christendom will at length be brought
first to Confusion, by crumbling into infinite Sects and Divisions, and then to
utter Ruin; all which concerns us Protestants to consider, Prudence being
accounted next to Prophecy, if we observe also what Sir Edwin Sands, long since
has told us in his Europa Speculum, Speaking of the Romanists, who have the
Pope as a common Father, Advisor, and Conductor to them all, to reconcile their
Enmity's, to decide their Differences, and to unite them together, which is
their Glory, as also upbraiding to their Enemies, (meaning the Protestants) who
are on the other side as severed, or rather scattered Troops, each drawing a
diverse way, etc. And now, may I conclude, and say? I pray God preserve my
Mother the Church of England, and grant that she may never renounce her
integrity and honest Principles to preserve her Religion. And her Children may
also live in the Fear and Love of God, without which our Reformed Christianity
will be no Advantage to us. And O that this poor Essay, (in Addition to my New
Years Gift, or Advice to my Godson (may be any way useful, especially to
caution all Persons to the avoiding those most dangerous Rocks of Hypocrisy,
inordinate Love of (...).


