AN ACCOUNT OF Nineteen REBELS That were Executed at Taunton-Dean, in the
County of SOMERSET: On Wednesday the 30th of September, 1685. For High Treason
against His most Sacred MAJESTY, etc,
AFter many disapointments in underhand contrivances, and malicious
machinations; the restless Faction grown big with mischief, being no longer
capable to hide their Rancor, gave it vent, though to their Shame and
Confussion; for as it has in most Ages been Evident that Heaven frustrates and
blasts evil Purposes and wicked Designs; so more especially in this it has
appeared even to a miracle, and peculiarly in the preservation of his most
Sacred Majesty the best of Princes, and subduing his Enemies under his Feet, to
render all good men entirely happy, and to bring those to Condeign Punishment,
which neither clemency nor mildness were able to reduce too, or retain in their
due Obedience to their Lawful Sovereign; so that where Mercy cannot prevail, it
is very reasonable Justice should take place, and Examplary Punishment restrain
by fear, where Favor and Indulgence proves ineffectual; that Treason and
Traytorous Designs, those bains of Kingdoms and disturbers of Common-Peace and
Tranquillity may be rooted out, or at least overwhelmed, to a degree of rendering
them impotent, and warn those who have been, or hereafter shall be tempted by
such guiled baits of Ruin by sad Example, to fly and avoid them, as they tender
their Safety and Reputation, which had these Persons whose Names follow, and
who deservedly fell by the hand of Justice done, it might have proved happy to
them and their Posterity; but entering upon an unjust and unnatural Rebellion,
being by Divine Providence frustrated by their wicked undertaking: They were
taken in the Pit they had diged for others, and being with many more brought to
Justice, and plain Proof made out against them, they received Sentence of Death
as Rebels and Traitors against their King and Natural Lord, which Sentence was
on Wednesday the 30th. of September put in Execution, in the manner under
mentioned, upon Nineteen of them.

On the 30th. of September aforesaid.
Abraham Ainsly of Wapping, by Trade a Tallow-Chandler. Arthur Mathews of
London. William Jenkins of London, Son to William Jenkins, the Non conformist
Minister, who some time since dyed in Newgate. Benjamin Heuling of London,
Merchant. John Dryer of Taunton. John Hucker of Taunton. Jonathan England of
Taunton. John Sharp of Taunton. Percy Morrin of Taunton. John Savage of
Taunton. John Fricker of Taunton. John Williams of Taunton. John Petram of
Taunton. James Whettam of Taunton. John Trickey of Taunton. William Satchel of
Taunton. William Davison of Wellington. Henry Lisle of London, Linnen-Draper.
Robert Parrot of Shorditch, in the Subburbs of London a Brewer, Notoriously
known, as a Party actually concerned in stealing the Crown out of the Tower of
London, in the Reign of his late Majesty, (of Blessed Memory) and thereby
incurred the Penalty of Death, but was pardoned by that Gracious Prince; yet
such transendent Goodness and Dispensation of Mercy, was not sufficient to
deter him from entering into a Rebellion against his Royal Brother, our present
most sacred Sovereign, for which he met his just Reward.
All these, the Day before mentioned, were conveyed with a strong Guard to a
Triangle Gallows placed on the Cornhill, at Taunton-Dean, in the County of
Somerset, where according to their Sentence they were Executed.

This may be Printed,

R. L. S.
October the 5th. 1685
LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet, in Bluck-Horse-Alley, near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


