Poor Robin, 1683

A PROGNOSTICATION For the Year of our Lord God 1683.

Containing the Vulgar Notes for this present year; times when to marry a good
Wife if you can light of her; a description of the three Eclipses of this year,
two of the Moon, and one of the Sun, when they happen, and what is signified by
them; a more accurate account of the four quarters of the year, than has
hitherto been given; a very useful Scheme, Ass trologically and poetically
describing and prognosticating many weighty matters; a description of the
twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and over what persons they have dominion; with
several other things, which when you have read them over, you will know as well
as I.

The one and twentieth Impression.
This is the sum of our Prognostications,
Which we do send abroad unto the Nation;
And for the truth thereof, we do averr,
(As Papists of the Pope) we cannot err;
For those who think themselves herein are bitten,
May blame their faults for what herein is written.
LONDON, Printed for the Company of Stationers, 1683.

Vulgar Notes for this present Year 1683. according to the Julian or English
account.
The Golden Number -- 12 Cycle of the Sun -- 12 Do^^nical Letter -- G Roman
Indiction -- 6 Epact -- 12 Number of Direction -- 18 Sundays after Epiphany --
4 Septuagesima Sunday Feb. -- 4 Ashwednesday Feb. -- 21 Easter Day April -- 8
Rogation Sunday May -- 13 Ascension Day May -- 17 Whitsunday May -- 27 Sundays
after Trinity -- 25 Advent Sunday December -- 2
Times prohibiting Marriage.
MArriage comes in on the 13 of January, and by Septuagesima Sunday it is out
again, until the Octaves of Easter, or day after Low-Sunday; at which time it
comes in again, and goes no more out till Rogation Sunday: for Rogamen vetitat;
from whence it is forbidden again until Trinity Sunday; from thence it is
unforbidden till Advent Sunday, when it goes out, and comes not in again until
S. Hilary, or 13 of January next following.

In thy choice of a Wife have a special care, for Women are

The best of Goods, or else the worst of Evils;
Glorious Angels, or else cursed Devils.
THE bright Planet Venus is our evening star from the beginning of the year to
the 24 of January, from thence she becomes our Morning star to the 27 of
November, and from thence an Evening Star to the end of the year.

This with the other Stars are twinkling eyes,
That with disordered order gild the Skies.
Of the Eclipses this present year. 1683.
THIS year produces three Eclipses, one of the Sun, and two of the Moon; that
of the Sun (if the air be clear) will be visible in our English Horizon, those
of the Moon, let the air be how it will, yet will they not be seen in England.
However, having three Ecl^pses, there will be ground work enough of them for
Ass trologers, thereby to calculate the fates of Kingdoms and Commonwealths; as
also of several other things worthy a serious man's consideration, as when it is
least dangerous for a Master to kiss his Maid for fear of being espied by her
Mistress; whether it be best to do it behind a Door like J D or invite her to
an Alehouse* to eat Cakes and drink Ale like R^H By them also may be predicted
when honesty will come again in fashion; whether a young Wenches Maidenhead be
within her or without her; and it within her, she be not without her
Maidenhead; whether a blind Man can see best with Spectacles or without; if
Pancakes may be ^at lawfully on any other day than on Shrove-monday or Shrove
tuesday; whether my Lady may eat Butter with her Eggs, or have her Posset
turned with Lemon or Ale; whether a Lawyer with a safe Conscience may take
double sees; and many other weighty matters fit for an Almanac makers
observation.

But to come to the purpose, and tell you when these Eclipses will happen; for
if we do not that, it is to no more purpose to tell ye the number of them, than
it is to think to find truth in a Bawd, or honesty in a Horse-courser; though
such things are not impossible, but very rare.

The first then of these is a Solar Eclipse, or (to speak to the capacity of my
Country Reader) an Eclipse of the Sun, which will happen on the 17 Day of
January, about 13 minutes past three of the Clock in the afternoon. It is in
the eighth degree of Aquarius, and if the Air be serene and clear, it may be
seen with us in England; there will be about 9 Digits or parts of the Suns body
obscured, say some of our Ass-trologers: Argel says, that there will be 10
parts and a half, or 10 Digits and 30 minutes of his body Eclipsed; now which
of them says truest, for my own part I cannot tell, for as yet I am not
thoroughly convinced of the difference betwixt an untruth and a lie.

Dragmatus the Diagotian Stigmatist in his treatise of the antiquity of
Shapparoons and careless Bawds, says, that when such differences arise betwixt
Ass-trologers, it signifies, that the price of Sprats, Jerusalem Artichoaks,
and Holland Cheese will be very much increased; the like division happened in
the beginning of the Rump Rebellion, when the scarcity grew so great that the
Brethren Botchers, and such poor zealous Saints as earned but five groats a
Week under a stall, by singing Psalms and drawing up of holes, being they could
not live of their vocation, were fain to leave it off, and turn Teachers and
Prophets.

But to proceed, the second Eclipse will be of the Moon, and happens on the
first day of February about three of the Clock in the afternoon; but it being
then an hour and 44 Minutes before the setting of the Sun, the refulgency of
that Superior Planet, will cause that the defect of the Moon cannot be seen in
our English Horizon. This Eclipse is celebrated in the twenty third degree of
Le^, or the Lion, a martial warlike sign, and may produce some drunken brawls
and quarrels in those Inns and Alehouses who have the signs of the white or red
Lion.

This being a feminine Eclipse, shall have great influence over women's tongues,
insomuch that some Women shall have more and stranger tongues than ever Babel
had to tell its ruins; viz, a lying tongue, a lisping tongue, a long tongue, a
lawless tongue, a loud tongue, and a liquorish tongue, but never a true one.
Jupiter domineers in the tenth house, this will cause great ambition, some men
shall be ambitious to get them handsome Wives, and those Wives shall be
ambitious to make their Husbands Cuckolds. olds. This ambition shall also be
predominant in vulgar and inferior spirits, like Herostratus who to get
himself a name, burnt with wildfire the famous Temple of Diana at Ephesus,
accounted one of the seven wonders of the World. Nay, I knew one so desirous of
this ridiculous fame, that he caused his name to be inscribed on a small-Bear
Pitcher, which caused my Muse, to correct this idle folly of his, thus to
express her self:

How greedy some men are of idle fame,
That they on Pitchers will inscribe their name,
As if the Hangman should ambitious be,
That he is Headsman of his faculty;
Vintners, their names on Wine-pots do appear,
But his ambition only was small Beer;
Such as your Plough-boys use, when in that case
They to their Teams do whistle Chevy-chase;
Alas, poor fool, 'twill do thee greater fame,
In Ballad-rhime to eternise thy name.
The third and last of this years Eclipses, will be likewise of the Moon, and
will happen on the 28 day of July, about eight of the clock in the forenoon, in
the 14 degree of Aquarius. Now this Eclipse cannot possibly be seen of us in
England, because at that time the earth interposeth betwixt the body of the Sun
and her, and the earth not being so transparent as Crystal, you cannot see
thorough it, although you have on your nose a pair of spectacles.

Now to give you my Ass-trological judgment on this Eclipse, it portends a
great deluge and inundation of Knavery, new inventions and stratagems for the
further exaltation of Legerdemaine in cheating, and that to such a high pitch
of perfection, that were Mall Cutpurse, alias Mrs. Frith alive, she would be
quite put down in her own art, as a Bucket is put down a Well, or a Schoolboy
puts down his Hose when he is about to be whipped. These kind of fellows

D^ live as merry as the days are long,
In scorn of Tyburn, or the Ropes ding dong;
But often times it is their hap to wear,
A riding knot an inch below their ear;
When as they come to take their last degree.
Newgate their Hall and made at Tyburn free.
Venus is in her exaltation, this Prognosticate, great lasciviousness, dancing
naked, (let some people beware, I do not put down their names in my next years
Almanac) some shall be very forward to kiss other men's Wives in private, that
their own Wives may not see them; and their Wives shall ^e as forward to kiss
other men, so that it be not in sight of their husbands; this indeed is a good
way to avoid jealousy, but in my opinion far better is the custom used in West
friezland, of which Mr. Moryson in his Itinerary or Book of Travels, thus
writes.

I remember (says he) that having been at Sea in a great storm of wind,
thunder, and lightning, about the month of November, being very weary and said;
I landed a^ Do^kam in West friezland, where at that time some young Gentlewomen
of that Country, passing thorough that City toward Groaning, according to the
fashion of those parts, we did eat at an ordinary Table, and after supper sat
down by the five, drinking one to the other; where after our storm at Sea, the
cust^me of Friezland d^d s^mewhat recreate us: For if a Woman drink to a Man
the custom is, that she must bring him the cup and kiss h m, he not moving his
feet nor scarcely his head to meet her; and Men d^inking to them are tied to
the like by custom A st^anger would at first sight marvel at this custom, and
more especially that their very Husbands should take it for a disgrace, and be
apt to quarrel with a Man for omitting of this ceremony toward their Wives,
yet they interpret this omission as if they judged their Wives to be so foul or
infamous, or at least base, as they thought them unworthy of that courtesy.
This custom ^s like to our drinking of a Health with a Gun amongst us in
England.

In this year also there will happen in the Months of January and May, two
eminent Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, the two superior Planets in the
fiery sign Leo, and these are the Conjunctions of Heaven; but we shall have
more malevolent Conjunctions on Earth; as when an Extortioner and a Broaker are
in Conjunction to cheat men of their Estates, the one hunts for the prey, the
other seises it, and both devour it. In respect of these our Country cheats are
nothing comparable: He who in the Country commences Doctor in Knavery, is in
the City but a Freshman or Sophister.

Craft there, may here again be set to School,
A Country knave often proves a City fool.
Two more very eminent Conjunctions will operate this year, viz. a Conjunction
betwixt Rogues and Whores, and a Conjunction betwixt Cut purses and Pick
pockets, this will produce great profit to Surgeons, as as also to Jack
Ketch the Squire of the Hempen noose,

Who by his art will give them such a check,
They shall be hanged all but head and neck.
Of the four Quarters of the Year,
and first of the Spring
The Spring Quarter begins always on the 10 Day of March, though many times
you may feel Winter still at your fingers ends, when the frost and snow puts
you in mind to make use of your Gloves; yet however Asstrologers will have it
to begin then because at that time the Sun enters into the first point of
Aries, making the Days and Nights equal, twelve hours wherein to work, and
twelve hours to lie a Bed in.

In this Quarter if you walk abroad the Fields, you may hear both the
Nightingal and the Cuckoo sing; and if you be a married man, you may judge
which of them is the pleasantest music. In this quarter also will be a great
cry about London streets of Macker^l, and they are very good victuals if they
be well buttered. Veal and Lamb will be now in season, and men shall be much
addicted to the drinking of Coffee, otherwise called by the name of Ninny
broth, sold at the Turks head in Pisspot-lane; where also is sold diverse other
liquors, viz. Tea, and Aromatic for the sweet toothed Gentlemen; Betony and
Rosade for the addle headed Customer, Back-recruiting Chocalet for the
Consumptive Gallant, Hereford-shire Redstreak made of rotten Apples at the
Three-Cranes, true Brumswick Mum brewed at Saint Katherines, and Ale in penny
Mugs not so big as a Tailors thimble.

This is the most pleasant Quarter of all the four, both for the temperateness
of the Weather, the wholesomeness of the Air, and the delightfulness of the
Fields. In it the aged feel a kind of youth, and youth the spirit full of life:
The Beggars do now begin their perambulation, invited thereunto by the Music
of the woody Choristers; and the Merchant sets forth on long voyages, to
bring home Commodities from remote Countries:

Crossing the torrid and the frozen Zone,
To bring commodities to England home:
Midst Rocks and swallowing Gulphs their way is made,
For to enrich themselves by gainful Trade.
Summer.
Summer, the second Quarter of the year, begins on the 11th Day of June, and
comes after the Spring, as green Pease come after Mackarel, or a great Belly
after Marriage. This Quarter is so hot that it makes the Country man leave of
his Jerkin, and young men and maids swear at making of H^y: the fat Consciences
of diverse men shall be melted away into nothing: nor shall the Watermen need to
fear the Thames being frozen over all this Quarter. The fleas and flys shall be
very numerous, and Gulls and Woodcocks shall swarm about the streets thicker
than Butterflies at Christmas.

This Quarter will be very hot, which will cause people to be very thirsty, so
that there shall be great employment for Noggins, Whiskins, Piggins, Grinzies,
Tankards, and Cans from a Pottle to a Pint, from a Pint to a Gill: also of
Black Jacks and Bombards much used at Court, which when the French men first
saw, they reported at their return into their Country, That the English men
drunk out of their Boots. But let me advise thee this Quarter to have a special
care of two things, excessive Drinking, and extreme Wenching.

Dote neither upon Women, nor on Wine,
For to thy hurt th^^ both alike incline:
Venns thy strength and Bacchus with his sweet
And pleasant Grapes debilitates thy feet:
Blind love will blabb what he in secret did,
In giddy wine there is nothing can be hid;
When thou with both, or either art possessed,
Shame, Honesty, and Fear, all fly thy breast:
In Fetters Venus keep, Gives Bacchus tied,
Lest by their free gifts thou be damnified.
Use Wine for thi^st, Venus for lawful seed,
To pass those limits, may thy danger breed.
This Quarter continues from the 11th of June, all hot July and fruitful
August, till the 12th of September, when the Days and Nights will be again of
equal length.

Autumn.
AVrumn, which by some learned Antiquaries is derived from Apple time, is the
third Quarter of the Year, and begins on the 12 Day of September, the Sun
then entering the Equinoctial Sign Libra; and now the Days grow shorter than
the Nights, and the weather cooler than before, therefore now the Body is in a
fit temper for a glass of good wine, be it either Red. White, Claret, Granes,
High Country, Malligo, Charnio, Sherry, Ganary, Palerno, Frontiniack
Peeter-see-mee, Vino deriba dania, Bastard, Raspis, Tent, Alligant, Melnisee;
Muscadine, Rhenish or Backrag: Or if it be Wine of the Vintners own making, as
Ippocras White or Red, Boxt Alligant with Sugar and Eggs, Stitch-broth brewed
with Rosewater (...) Sugar, Burned Sack, Mull'd Wine, Tomlons, Balderdash, etc.
any of these may serve a single person, and all of them content a great Company.

As for the temper of this Quarter, it is like to be as were Autumns in former
years; Nightingals shall sing. Cocks crow, Kine low, Sheep bleate, Sparrows
chirp, and Dogs bark as they used to do: If there be store of Apples growing,
there will be great probability of much Cider to be made; and plenty of Nuts
prognosticates plenty, of Bastards, occasioned by young Men and Lasses meeting
in the Woods to gather them.

For there is few what e're they be,
But-yield to opportunity.
With the end of this Quarter ends the Pride of Summer, the Earth instead of
a Mantle of Green, then putting on a Vest of Snow.

The Fields are now bereaved of their splendour,
Which lately were as brave as Owen-Glender
A Prince of Wales, his Countries Defender;
Who of their Privileges was so tender,
That he his valor thereunto would render,
And of his Countries freedom be a mender,
But was orethrown, and so became its ender.
This Quarter continues to the 11 of December, and then comes in cold shivering
Winter, which makes men of all persuasions to turn Quakers. Of this third
Quarter of the Year thus writes the Poet:

The Evening of the Year, when the thresht sheaf
Loses its grain, and every Tree its leaf;
The Choristers o'th Wood do cease their Notes
And stately Forests don their yellow coats.
Winter
Winter the last and worst Quarter of all the four, because it consumes what
was gotten in the former three; begins December the 11. the Sun then entering
into Capricorn, making the shortest day to all on this fide the Equator, and
so by consequence the longest Night. Should we now P^^^nosticate hot soultry
Weather, we might chance to (...) ^ar out in our Prognostications as was the
Quaker when his Wife ^ook him kissing his Maid, she having on her Dames
Wastecoat, which made the Q^^ker thus to excuse himself to his Wife, that he
was mistaken, For that Hagar had gotten on Saralis royment; but on the
contrary, should we predict Frost, Snow, Hail, and cold weather, it would be as
fit for the season as a Pancake for Shrovetuesday, a Tansy for Easter, a Morris
for May Day, a minced Rye for Christmas, a Candle for the Candlestick, a Nail
for the hole or a Nuns lips for a Friars mouth.

Now frost does cast an icie weam
Upon the Lakes and Crystal stream,
And every honey-headed twig
Wears his Snowy Periwig.
Now men drink Ale by the fires side, which shall make them have all the Coat
colors of a Drunkard, viz. sanguine, purple, crimson, copper, and carnation in
their countenances: but this will cost money, of which if they be without, they
must (if they can) borrow money of a pawn of wax and parchment.

But of few men you now can coin command,
Unless it be upon a tie of land.
Four sorts of Knaves shall be much employed this Quarter, viz. the Knave of
Hearts; the Knave of Spades the Knave of Clubs, and the Knave of Diamonds; and
a great many cheating Knaves shall be employed in the using of them; but there
are Knaves of all sorts, as there are Jades of all colors; and he that rises
be times and walks London Streets a whole Day, it is a thousand pound to a
Nu^-shell but he may chance to meet with one of them.

For though the Country be not wholly free,
Yet there is no doubt some Knaves in the City be.
This cold comfordess Quarter lasts three Months viz. most part of snowy
December, all cold January and dirty February, and some part of blustering
March, during which time the Sun passes through the three Celestial signs of
Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces; or if you will, the Goat, the Tankard bearer
and Fishes, and then enters into the Equinoctial Sign Aries.

That pleasant time of year when balmy showers,
Deck the soft breast of fragant Meads with Flowers.
ENdy mion that had Luna 'bout the middle,
Could none of all her mysteries unriddle;
Like to this Scheme, wherein you may behold
Such things as were by any other told;
The Ass-trological Jim-crack or fortune-telling Scheme.


And though some say, that we may see as far
Into a nether Millstone as a Star,
Yet i will maintain that all our Prophecies
Are either very true, (or arrant lies.)
Now though we write not with a beam of Noon,
Nor have no Letter from the man in the Moon;
Yet i will affirm that our intelligence
As true as theirs that say they hav't from thence.
Next though that I do here twelve houses name,
I nere had foot of land within the same;
And should I want a House to keep me dry,
For all these twelve, I in the streets might lie:
They in that case do stand in little stead,
Yet each of them a house is over our head;
It Is true that they are houses in the Air,
And though we know their Signs, we cannot come there:
But my predictions better to disclose,
I Will leave off Verse, and turn my Pen to Prose.
Jupiter is Lord of the tenth House, this Prognosticates ill luck for Usurers,
when their Debtors break, and they for grief thereof hang themselves. Venus is
in her exaltations, this is as plain as the nose on a man's face that Beer will
be but two pence a Flaggon; for though Malt should be dear, yet the Brewers
have a knack to make it so much the smaller. Mars is sextile in the fiery
Trigon, Lo ye now, if some Women be not proud I never saw the like on it. Sol is
retrograde, good wits will be applauded more than rewarded, and Canary will be
in higher esteem than small Beer. The Moon is in a Trine with Venus, Milk will
be apt to be burnt to, to the great endangering of making good Possets. Mercury
is well posited, therefore drink Brandy and it will make you piss clear. About
the Dog days Saturn is in opposition to Venus, when it will be naught to get
Children, because they will be apt to have ill-favored faces, as the learned
Spencer has it in his Fairy Queen.

-- Under ill disposed Skies,
When sullen Saturn sits in the house of obloquies.
Mars in the house of Sagittarius signifies a great year of fruit, that Apples
will be plentifuller than Oranges. Mercury in Leo denotes the strangest things
possible, but that there is no reason in Love; how that Deputies of Wards shall
marry their Cook-maids, Aldermans Widows match with their Turn-broaches, and
great Ladies mate with their Horse-keepers. Luna in reception with Taurus,
young Wenches Prayers shall be, that God would send them handsome, rich, lusty
Husbands, fine Clothes, good Victuals, strong Drink, long Sleeps, and no work.
Jupiter dignified in the tenth house, denotes a great plenty of Naturals,
Changelings, Fops, Bubbles, Wise-acres, Coddle-brains, Shuttle-skuls,
Paper-skuls, Half wits, Simpletons, Ninnihammers, etc. Fasting shall be much
used where people have no Victuals. Mars is in opposition to Mercury, this will
cause many oppositions on Earth, Quakers in opposition to Church Government.

The twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

Aries the Ram which bore the Golden Fleece,
That Jason brought from Colchos unto Greece;
The Sun being in the Ram makes it out clear
At the Ram in Smithfield you may have good Beer.
Aries or the Ram, has Dominion over Butchers, Tanners, Huntsmen, Sow-gelders,
Ink-horn-makers. Lanthorn-makers, Horn-book makers, and all those people who
deal in Horns.


Taurus the Bull, a Bull of high renown,
Whose Hide might make a good Aldermans Gown,
And if they think the Hide will be too small.
Then let them take both Hide and HORNS and all.
Under Taurus or the Bull are born all your Cuckolds, Wittals,
Henpeckt-fellows, and Knights of the Forked Order.


Gemini does appear to all beholders,
To have Dominion over the Arms and Shoulders;
A very loving couple sure they be,
As Man and Wife when they in Bed agree.
Gemini or the Twins bear rule over all couples, as Man and Wife, the Circer
and his Whip, the Tailor and his Thimble, the Cutpu^se and the Hangman, the
Thief and the receiver, the Drunkard and the black Pot, etc.


The Crab or crabbed Woman does bear sway,
Such wives as will their Husbands not obey;
But for such crooked ribbs my counsel is,
A Crab-tree Cudgel will not be amiss.

