An Account of the Barbarous Attempt of the Jesuits upon Mr. De Luzancy, upon
his Conversion to the PROTESTANT RELIGION.
To the READER.
THE Occasion of Publishing this, is to Satisfy the World of the Indefatigable
Industry of the Jesuits, in carrying on their wicked Design; and that this
Attempt upon the Person of Mr. De Luzancy is sufficient to Convince the whole
World, that they will not only stick to take away the Fame, but the Lives of
Princes, to promote their Bloody Religion. As for the latter, Histories have
Examples enough; and for the former, the first of the six ensuing Heads of St.
Germin's wicked attestations (though most abominably false and Treasonable) is
a sufficient Proof, there being no Protestant Prince that has done more for
the security and satisfaction of his Subjects than his most Gracious Majesty,
whom God long preserve from all the Plots and Conspiracies of the St. Germins
and Colemans, which last was recommended to the Correspondence of Mr. Le Chese,
by the said St. Germin; for the Apprehending of whom upon this horrid Account,
a Proclamation was Issued out by His Majesty, bearing date November. 10th. 1675.

THE Fourth of October, a French Jesuit, by Name St. Germin, in Company with
another Man, whom by his Language I perceived to be a Frenchman, and whom I
have understood since to be also a Jesuit, came into my Chamber as it began to
grow dark: They began very Civily with me; so having desired them to take
Seats, and sent for Light, the said St. Germin asked of me, whether he might
speak freely in my Chamber, without danger of being overheard. I Answered,
yes; and that there was no body above, nor below to hear them. Then the said
St. Germin was pleased to bestow on me many Injurious words, calling me
Hugonot, Renegado, and Man without Faith, that had brought a Horrid Scandal
upon the Church, who was bound in Duty to expiate so great a Crime, to go back
for France, and spend there the rest of my days in a Monastery. As I was about
to Reply, his Companion, speaking French, said, there was no need of so much
Reasoning, it being an easy matter to stab or convey me away; and that they
were ready to do it, should I speak one word more; and that they had three more
fit for that purpose, in case I should refuse to do as they would have me: So
continuing their threatenings, they made me promise them that I would depart
from England, and go over in a Yatch His Majesty had granted to a Catholic
Lord, who was going to France, or in a Ship was going for Rochel: They engaged
themselves at the same time to write to the Rector of the Jesuits there in my
behalf, and bidding me not to trouble my self any further, for they would
furnish me with Bills of Exchange to the value of 400 l. sterling, and more, if
need required, the Person they were employed by sparing no money for so good a
Use: the said St. Germin added, to make sure of you, we think it necessary you
should Copy over, and set your Hand to this writing; so giving me the Paper, I
took it, desiring first leave to read it: I found it contained a Recantation in
terms abominable of all I had spoken in general, and in particular against the
Church of Rome, and was full of Horrid Slanders and Calumnies against all the
Protestants, their Bishops and Ministers, with a thousand Impieties, not fit to
set down here. I therefore rising off my Seat, I refused both to Copy and set
my Hand to their Paper, at which St. Germin rises up in Anger, and runs to the
Door to call the Men that were ready to convey me away, or stab me. I was
affrighted out of my wits and all my senses; then all in a Trance I took the
Paper, and Copied it over, and put my Hand to it, having as well as I could in
the Condition I was, first put out, and changed several things that were
against Bishops and Ministers: The two Jesuits satisfied with this, took their
leave of me, threatening, that if I should speak one word of what passed, they
would have my Soul out of my Body, which would be always an easy thing for
them to do, since they had of their People every where Men of Execution, and
were Resolved to kill me, in case I would not depart when they should think
fit, as my Promise was. These Gentlemen having left me, I came to my self, and
began to consider what I had done; I concluded my fault was great, and after
many Reflections I judged the best way was, cunningly to get my Writing out of
their Hands; I have since tried it several times, dissembling for this purpose
with the said St. Germin, and telling him that I would see it only to add
something to it that was more material for the Satisfaction of the Roman
Church, and changing some other things less to their purpose, but in truth, to
tear it in pieces, if I could have it, but all in vain: So seeing they would
not do it, I have thought my self bound in Conscience to Repair in some measure
this my fault, and the Scandal that may fall on the Church openly to complain
of so bold an Attempt, without few or no Presidents in this Kingdom; and
implore the Kings Power and Authority against this bold Jesuit, that I may
live in these Countries without always being afraid of my Life: And further, I
do conceive my self Obliged in Duty to Declare, that I am not only ready to
make Oath of all that is above written, but that this also is what the said St.
Germin, conferring with me, has Attested to me.

I. That the King was a Catholic in his Heart.

II. That the Court was Endeavoring to get a Liberty of Conscience in England
for the Roman Catholics, and that Granted, that in two Years most of the
English would Acknowledge the Pope.

III. That he knew the Kings Intention concerning Religion, and that he was
sure he would Approve of all he should do in that Matter.

IV. That Laughed at the Parliament, it being a word only that had but a
little time, and no better welcome to the Court than me, he having great
Intrigues with all the Nobility.

V. That it was good sometimes to force People to Swear, and that during 14
Months he had Persecuted a Man here in London, whom he had at last got again
to his Party, and Obliged to make a Public Recantation of the Protestant Faith
before 200 Persons more.

VI. That there was an infinite Number of Priests and Jesuits hidden in
London, that did God very good Service.

All these things will be Sworn to by Mr. De Luzancy, to have been Affirmed by
the Jesuit St. Germin, who is the busiest Fellow among them against the
Protestants, and many Persons of good Repute and Credit are ready to Justify
upon their Oaths, that several of the Roman Catholics have spoken things quite
as bad, if not worse.

The Jesuits finding that Mr. De Luzancy, instead of fulfilling his Promise
they had extorted from him, had Preached on Sunday the 31th. of October,
against the Pope, and had spoke something of the Proceeding toward him, a
Letter was sent to him on the Second of November to his Chamber, as follows.

You are a Miserable Wretch left by God, that Preached on Sunday last as many
Heresies as words; this is like a Renegado, an Apostate, and an Abominable
Hugonot, Remnant of a Cloister, without Honor, without Conscience; who having
lost himself in France with a thousand Debaucheries, and committed there
several Thefts and Roberies, is come hither to Renounce Christianism and
Papistry for a piece of Bread; were you not amongst People as bad as your self,
you had been already Burnt alive after the Blasphemies you have committed
against God, the Pope, and the Jesuits: Do you think we do not know you, and
that we have not means to seize on you? If you dare remain a Fortnight longer
in England, you shall have marks thereof, that will make you Repent all the
days of your Life, your not doing what we would have you do some weeks ago.
Have a care of your self, Infamous Renegado.

FINIS.

