1691. ASTROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS AND Predictions For the Year of Our LORD 1691.

Wherein also Is Briefly Shown the Signification of the Earthquake that Happened
in March last in the City of Bristol.

And wherein also Are Briefly Shown the Significations of the Three
Oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter, that will Happen in the 1692. and 1693. And
of the ECLIPSES of this present YEAR, LIKEWISE Monthly Observations for every
Month throughout this present Year; Briefly Containing the most Remarkable
Events and Accidents that are likely to Happen in diverse Places of the World.

By JOHN SILVESTER.

Licensed to be Printed, June 28. 1690. J. F.

LONDON, Printed for the Author 1690.

Of the Earthquake that Happened in the City of Bristol, (and other Adjacent
Towns and Places) on Shrove-Tuesday last, [being the 4th. day of March] Anno
Domini 1689. about a quarter of an Hour before one of the Clock in the Morning,
it being very Calm and without Rain before and after.
I Being not Awake my self at the Time of this strange Accident, made several
Enquiries about it, but the best Information I could have of it was this, --
That it first began with a loud and terrible Noise (like the Bownce of a Barrel
of Gunpowder when a House is blown up therewith) and immediately the Bedstead
and other things in the Room were shaken, and as it were trembled, which so
continued by Guess about four or five Minutes, and at length there was heard
two small Noises like two Steps of a Man (there being some small distance of
time between) and immediately it seemed to go out at the top of the House with
another Bownce, but not so great as the first; This Person then Sitting on the
Bed side, (being terribly Affrighted) fell into a Swooning Fit.

Moreover, by Others I was informed, that it made the Chamber Door and Latch to
shake and make a Noise, and the Glass-windows to Shake and Rattle, as if they
would have been broken to pieces, and made the Bodies of some that were
Sitting, to Rock, and some that were standing, to Reel to and fro, they all
wondering what was the Matter.

And because Report Rendered this Accident somewhat wonderful, I could not but
Enter into some serious Meditations about it, which induced Me to make an
Observation for the time of the Event, which follows.

Sagittarius [ the House of Religious Jupiter] Ascends: Mars lord of the 12th.
and Dispositor of Saturn, is in Opposition to the Ascendant from Gemini [ the
Ascendant of London,] And besides the Monn is Hastening to an Opposition of
Saturn, Posited in the 12th.

This according to my Opinion Signifies, That some secret Mischievous Action,
(or more plainly a Plot) will too soon Manifest it self against some Religious
Sort of Common People. -- But whereas Jupiter Lord of the Ascendant is strong,
and Joined with Venus Lady of the 10th. the evil Design will not prosper, but
will End to the Joy and Comfort both of King and People.

Saturn's a Plotter, Mars does Him dispose,
Threatening the Ascendant with great ireful Woes:
London, beware of Plots and Mischiefs now;
Lest sudden Sorrows come thou Knowsst not how;
Watch wary, the just time thou do not Know.
And besides, the Opinion of the Ancient Astrologers was, that all Earthquakes
denote Wars, or such kind of Troubles, to the Places chiefly where the Event
Happens, so that by this Rule howevtr it should Happen in England; but whether
ever any such evil Design may have its Rise in the City of Bristol or not, I
leave it to some Wiser Head to Expound.

Those Glorious Celestial Bodies the Planets and Stars, that so Miraculously
and Continually perform their Circular Motions, according to the unchangeable
Decree and Will of the most Wise and Omniscient Creator, do seem to show forth
to fallen Man a certain kind of Predestination of Events in the Will of the
Almighty; For the Minds of Men and People, do naturally follow their Motions,
and mutual Concord and Discord amongst themselves, as the Needle does the
Motion of a Loadstone, (though this Mystery be unknown to the greatest part of
Men) as by our daily Experiences we perceive and find, for by some Aspects they
secretly draw the Minds of Men and People to Love and Unity; And by some
Aspects contrariwise they stir up Men's Minds to Enmity and Discord; And
sometimes they Elevate the Lofty Mind unto greater pride, (Men wanting the most
pure Divine Power for Preservation,) And sometimes they secretly operate and
deject the Lofty Mind into a more humble state, and at such a time they often
induce it to Consider, how vain all worldly pomp is by Reason of the Mortality
of the Body, so that at some time or times in every Man's Life, there seems to
drop down from Heaven a Refining Influence more then ordinarily powerful,
whereby the Refining Spirit of Judgment in Man or Men is as it were Awakened,
wakened to Reprove their Lofty Minds for their evil Deeds, so that God has not
limited Himself to work only by his Spirit (within,) but does also freely
Operate by those Heavenly Bodies (without), which being admirably Glorious, as
well in times past as in our days, caused David thus to proclaim, -- The
Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his Handy Werk
Psalm. 19. v. 1.

The most Glorious Lamp of Heaven the Sun Enters into the First Minute of the
Equinoctial Sign Aries, on March the 9th. 19 h. 32.1. P. M. At which time the
18th. Degree of the Irish Sign [Taurus] Ascends, and Venus Lady of the
Ascendant is near unto Mars, (the Dispositor of Jupiter in the Eleventh, yet
slowly separates from him, as if some Discords would yet be Continued in
Councils (especially in Ireland) about some Religious Ceremonies, which will
but Vex the Commonalty, and as if there were yet a people in Ireland that are
somewhat for War, though they sometimes desire Peace, being somewhat loath to
Fight to shed Blood. Saturn lord of the 9th. 10th and 11th. Houses, in the 7th.
does not only show a secret disunity of the Commonalty and Superiors, but also
(being Retrograde toward the Cusp of the 7th.) does foreshew some kind of
secret Plottings, and Mischievous Contrivances in Ireland, tending to the
discomfort of that Land. But in May this present Year Jupiter comes into
Taurus, [the Ascendant of Ireland] and about that time Peace will begin to
mitigate the furiousness of Men; yet I fear the turbulency of Ireland will not
be quite over, till about the time when Saturn leaves the Sign Scorpio, which
will not be till toward the latter End of October this present year, and then
he enters into Sagittarius [the Sign opposite to Gemini the Ascendant of
London] and then I fear some envious dissatisfied Spirits there will begin to
plot and contrive how to bring to pass some Mischievous Design to make
Disturbances and Alteration of Laws or Religious Orders; And besides, the
Warring Planet Mars enters into Gemini [the Ascendant of London] on the 5th day
of August, and will quarter there seven Months; And about December he will be
almost in opposition to Saturn from Gemini and Sagittarius, that I fear, during
the last four or five Months of this present year, there will be some great
Variances and Fury, if not some Warlike Disturbances in some great City about
Religious Orders and Ceremonies; And further, those dissatisfied Spirits will
again be quickened by the Three Oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter in Gemini and
Sagittarius, in 1692. and 1693. -- Of which more hereafter.

Furthermore, I observe the Moon to be Entertained by Jupiter in his Noblest
Sign, and she is applying to his Trine in England's Ascendant, from hence great
will be the Comforts of the Communalty, to see such likelihood of the
Establishment of the Religion, that England does and has formerly enjoyed:
Jupiter will be in Aries till May, so that he intends to Keep Peace and
Temperance in England as much as he can, during the first four Months of this
present Year; But it is observable, that just about the time when Jupiter
leaves Aries, the quarrelsom Planet Mars enters therein, but indeed he stays
there but five or six Weeks, that he cannot do much hurt, though he may stir up
or create some short Variances in England (and France too) in May or June, but
I Conjecture he will cause turbulent Actions in Ireland in July, when he comes
to the opposition of Saturn, although Jupiter stands as it were at his Elbow to
persuade him to Peace.

Again, Venus Lady of the Ascendant, being near to Mars, will incline both
Males and Females to Wantonness, but Mars being exalted above Venus will
somewhat quench those carnal desires, and will also cause Women not soon to
conceive with Child: The Ascendant is a Fixed Sign, and therefore the Judgment
of this Vernal Ingress may the better serve for the whole Year.

The Position of Mars near the 9th. House (in the Figure of the Summer Solar
Ingress) and Saturn in the third House denotes to Mariners pretty dangerous
Summer Sea-Voyages, partly by a disturbed Sea, and partly through Pirates or
Sea Fights, especially near the English, Irish and French Shore; Merchants and
Mariners greatly desire peace and freedom on the Waters.

Leo [the Ascendant of Rome and Bristol] is the Ascendant of the Figure of the
Autumnal Solar Ingress, and the position of Mars in the 11th. in Gemini seems
to cause Discords in Councils, in this Autumnal Quarter, especially in the
Councils of Rome, London and Bristol.

Of the Three Oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter in June and December 1692. and
in April 1693.
IT has been long Observed, That the most Remarkable Mutations of a Kingdom or
Nation, have chiefly depended on the Cunjunctions or Aspects of those two
Superior Planets Saturn and Jupiter, and by their Effects past we perceive
that the most Wise Creator First Placed them higher then all the other Planets,
that they should respect, chiefly, the highest and most durable Affairs and
Concerns of Men on Earth.

And if one Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter produces much, how then can those
three Oppositions to come, do any less then cause some Remarkable Changes and
Alterations of Laws or Religious Orders in Englands Chief and most Renowned
City, because Saturn then will be stronger then Jupiter, who also at his second
Opposition will be near unto the Body of Mars [the Planet of Warre] and having
took Possession of Religious Jupiter, should contend with him (with a frowning
lofty Countenance,) in Londons Ascendant, from whence I fear some Religious
Disturbances, if not some Warlike Violence by Insurrections, or otherwise,
occasioned by some frowning dissatisfied Minds, which will then Happen in some
part of Britain, or take its Begsnning there to the Purpose in those years.

Ah poor Jupiter in Gemmi [L -- n] I fear thou will then be so much Humbled
against thy Will, that thou will think thou have a sufficient Occasion to
bewail thy Condition; And if so, God will suffer this, that thou may humbly
Endeavor to forsake thy accustomed Sins, and that thou may know Pewer is
not in Thee to help thy self, -- But yet I think thou will then have no need to
fear that God has wholly forsaken Thee; For look but a little back unto the
Years 1682 and 1683. where Jupiter was three times in Conjunction with Saturn,
in a Sign of his own Triplicity, and Consider, was not he then stronger then
Saturn, and have not thou been Victorious ever since, throughout all those
great Changes and Alterations, and when thou have thus Considered, perhaps thou will believe that that which begins well will End well, and indeed perhaps it
may so Happen, but be not too proud of this, a Word is enough to the Wise.

Spain is under the Sign Sagittarius (and Buda too) and I Conjecture there will
great Troubles and Discords begin there, as soon as the Mischievous Planet
Saturn Enters into that Sign, which will be at the latter End of October this
present Year, for then there will be secret Mischievous Plottings, by a sort of
People that will be dissatisfied with the present Government there, and in June
1692. when Jupiter makes his first Opposition against Saturn, there will Arise
higher Discords then before about their Religion; And a wonder it will be, if
some Zealous People in Flanders, or some other place under Gemini be not then
quickened and stirred up to make Wars against those dissatisfied people in
Spain; And when Mars comes to the Conjunction of Saturn in November 1692. I
doubt not but it will shortly after cause an Insurrection and Warlike Tumult
amongst the people of that Land; And in December (which is the next Month
after) when Jupiter makes his second Opposition against Saturn; I am of
Opinion, that there will then be a terrible War and much Bloodshed (or that
it will stir up strong Resolutions to effect it in a short time) because Mars
will then be so near unto Saturn; And when Jupiter makes his third Opposition
against Saturn, there will shortly after be Imprisonments to many, if not also
Death, for as this is the last of the Oppositions, so Imprisonments and Death
are the last, or end of War. Let the King of Spain beware, for I doubt he
will be in danger of being Sick, for those Oppositions do usually dispose Kings
to be Sick, and Magistrates under one of the Signs of the Opposition, and
Jupiter the lord of Spain will then he very weak, I doubt not, but such will be
the Effects of those Oppositions in Spain, or in those places chiefly under
Sagittarius and Gemini, and yet may Operate in a less measure in the places
under Pisces and Virgo, but though they begin to Operate presently, yet perhaps
they may not always publicly manifest their Effects just at the very time of
their Oppositions, but sometimes in some Weeks or Months after; And though
those Oppositions Operate chiefly in those places that are under Sagittarius
and Gemini, yet they will Create great troubles in any other Nation to
particular Persons that are born under either of those Signs, or more plainly
to those whose Ascendants are Sagittarius and Gemini.

I could say something of Scotland and Holland, and I think it convenient so to
do because they are Neighboring Nations. But the Troubles which I am about to
tell you of, will not Happen to those Nations till the years 1695. and 1696.
(yet perhaps may begin in 1694. when Saturn comes into Capricorn) and then
great Troubles, and (I fear) Wars may be there expected, and in or about
those years the City of Oxford (I fear) will have manifold Troubles and
Afflictions, especially because the terrible Comet in the year 1680. appeared
in the Ascendant thereof.

And perhaps some may expect that I should now mtntion something about Italy
and Rome, but Six or Seven years hence will be time enough for that, when
Saturn approaches toward Aquarius, therefore let them be Contented at present
with this short Discourse of Events nearer at Hand, and with true penitent
Hearts and humble Minds let them pray to the Almighty God, that he would be
pleased to Preserve England from the Plague, or any other unusual Mortality,
which I fear some Cities in Britain will be subject to in the years 1692. or
1693. for it has been observed that this malevolent Planet Saturn, never
passed through a Sign of the Fiery Triplicity, but he afflicts some City or
other with the Plague or some other dangerous Disease. Also it has been
Observed, that when he has Transited the Sign Sagittarius, there has usually
Happened some great Fire in an Eminent City; What hurt do I do, by forewarning
them to beware, the most dangerous times being about November and December
1692. and about July 1693.

Of the ECLIPSES of this present Year 1691.
THis Year there will Happen only two Eclipses of the most Glorious Luminary of
Heaven [The Sun]

The First will be a great Eclipse of the Sun on the 18th. of February, and the
middle time thereof will be at above half an Hour past four of the Clock in the
Morning, but it will be invisible to us, because the Sun will then be sub terra
It Happens in the Sign Pisces of the Watery Triplicity, which signifies the
Death of Common People, Rumors of Wars, the Overflowing of the Sea-Banks.
Destruction to Fishes. It Happens in the second House, and therefore it
foreshews many Losses to Happen to Common People.

The Second will be also a great Eclipse of the Sun on the 13th. of August, and
the middle time thereof will be near unto Five of the Clock in the Afternoon,
and it will be visible to us if the Air be clear. It Happens in the First
Degree of Virgo. -- It denotes Scarcity of Corn and Fruit, especially because
it Happens in the Eighth House, for which Reason it denotes Death to Humane
Creatures; Mercury is lord of the Eclipse and Combust, wherefore it threatens
Death to Scholars, and the wiser sort of Men, but Mars being lord of the
subsequent Angle foreshews destruction by Wars; but it will chiefly Operate
in the Countries and Places under the Signs Virgo, Pisces, Gemini and
Sagittarius, and according to the Rule of Astrology, it will not begin to
Operate very manifestly till the Month of June 1692.

Behold now how the Glorious Wise Creator,
Secretly Rules the Air, Earth and Water,
Changing the Minds of Creatures that have sense,
Not only by the Starry Influence,
But also by strange Comets that Appear,
And by the Eclipses that are every Year.
So that he has made none of all his Works in vain.

Monthly Observations briefly Containing the most Remarkable Events and
Accidents, that are likely to Happen in every particular Month this present
Year.
JANUARY.
THE Beginning of this Month, or the latter End of the last Month, seems to
produce some kind of Discords, or Variances amongst Common People; All seems
not to be well then at London; Some Discords, if not some other Afflictions
about Religion, yet chiefly in Ireland, and in the City of Oxford, etc. about
the latter End of the Month; Many Affronts Happen on the Roads, especially in
Scotland, Holland and Ireland; Great Consultations in Councils about the
Affairs of Ireland, about the latter part of the Month; Dangerous Sicknesses
proceeding from Choler and Melancholy, happen in the first half of this Month;
And in the latter, half the Seas are like to be very Dangerous through Pirates,
(if not also at the beginning of the next) especially near Ireland, Lorrain,
the North-part of Scotland, and great part of the Turks Dominions; Ireland and
Paris seem to be subject to some scandalous Sickness; Rain or Snow on or about
the 12th. 13th. 22th 23. and 27th. days; Cloudy, if not some Thunder, on or
about the 16th. or 17th. days.

I cannot Choose but think of something past,
Which lately Happened in November last;
For then the two Infortunes were Conjoined,
As if they had more Turbulence ordeyn'd.
To Happen shortly in Ireland, though the greatest Troubles seem now to be over.

FEBRUARY.
Superiors seem now to be Vexed with the stern and frowning sort of Common
People, as if something lately past were in remembrance, which also seems to
stick in the Stomachs of such Common People, and I think the Core of
displeasure Lies most in one corner of the City of Oxford. I have also observed
Mars and Venus, how briskly they operate upon the Minds of Young Men, to make
them desire the Companies of young Women more then ordinarily; Rain, Hail or
Snow on or about the 7th. 9th. and 24th days, somewhat windy on or about the
15th. and 24th. days, -- The Sun now Eclipsed, see before.

I Wonder why Sly Saturn Entertains.
The Warring Planet to Enrage his Brains;
And wherefore does he Slyly backward move,
As if he were with Mars his Fury drove.
I think sure he does so for no other End, then with an intent to make more
Mischiefs and Warlike Disturbances by some secret Contrivances shortly in some
Part of Ireland, though it seems now to be as it were quite over, and at an
End, Cavete.

MARCH.
THere seems now to be a Treacherous Sort of Common People in many Nations
(especially in Barbary, etc.) that are not yet thoroughly united to their own
Superiors, (as well as not to the Superior or Superiors of Rome) for they
seem yet to remember something past; Bristol, thou art now in a Glorious and
Flourishing Condition, but there seems to be a perplexing Enemy in thee or near
thee; Many will now be subject to Griefs in their Eyes, and to Swooning Fits
Many Losses happen to Common People, small profit by Trading Rain on or about
the 5th. 8th. 23th. and 25th. days, some probability of Thunder about the End
of the Month.

Now Glorious Sol shines in his Exaltation,
And Jove shines with Him in our English Nation;
As if Religion by some high Command
Will shortly be Promoted in our Land.
For Religious Jove [ or Jupiter] is not only there Promoted under Sol, on the
very last day of the Month, by being in his Triplicity in Aries, but Sol is
made more Glorious also by Jupiter's Company; You may understand my meaning
without an Interpreter.

APRIL.
IN the latter half of this Month, or first half of the next, there are likely
to be great and wise Consultations in Councils, not only in England, but also
in Scotland, Holland and Ireland, about the Affairs of Ireland, they being
afraid of some further Treachery there. Very good and Religious thoughts are
now in the Hearts and Minds of the Potentates of England, though something may
happen to provoke them to anger, but an undaunted Courage is in them, to
Consult and Act for the good of the Communalty, who now seem more willing to
Furnish our Superiors with Money, though they love it too well themselves:
Paris is undervalued, or some way vexed or threatened; Rain or Hail on or about
the 5th. 15th. 19th. and 26th. days; High Winds on or about the 15th. and 26th.
days.

Four Planets in the Council-House are Walking;
And Two of them in Englands Sign are Talking
Discreetly too: And Two in Irelands Station
As if they would Consult about that Nation.
As well as about the Affairs of our own Land.
MAY.
IN the latter half of this Month, or former half of the next, there seems to
be a frowning sort of Common People in England; that will be greatly troubled
in Mind, and stirred up to passion against some of the well-meaning Council
that Contrive for the Comfort and prosperity of the Nation; Bristol is now in a
comfortable Condition, and delights more then ordinary in pious Assemblies: The
Common People in England and many other Countries (at the time aforesaid) will
be more then ordinarily inclined to Company-keeping in Alehouses, where they
will be very apt to quarrel: Many Losses happen: A Probability of Rain on or
about the 1st. 2d. 6th. 16th. and 17th. days; High Winds about the 1st. and 6th
days.

What Lofty Strife is this in Ireland now,
Yet Saturn does to Lofty Phoebus Bow:
The Mischief-Maker seems to Hide his Face,
And both the Fortunes now Proclaim a Peace
In Ireland; I wish it may Continue: Religious Jupiter (I Perceive) longs to
see it Established there; for He Resolves to stay in Irelands Sign these Twelve
Months yet, but you shall know more by and by.

JUNE.
THE Hot Month is come, yet the Spirits of the Communalty seem to be Cool, or
to be more inclined to Peace then to War: London cries out aloud for Peace as
well as Ireland, especially in the latter half of the Month; Great Tranquillity
indeed seems to be in Ireland, though there is yet (I fear) in some part
thereof a secret Treacherous spirit remaining, that lies obscure like an
Innocent, yet will shortly appear (perhaps the next Month) Many Distempers
happen among Cattle, especially amongst small Cattle: Many Miscarriages amongst
Women with Child: Rain on or about the 12th. 13th. 21th. and 25th. days: Some
Probability of Thunder about the 10th. and 24th. days.

Venus that on the Irish Shore Resides,
Contends with Saturn, strongly Him derides.
Then comes to London with a smiling Face
To Keep the Citizens in Love and Peace
A Little while; But I doubt She will not Preserve them at all from Wantonness,
she being too Wanton her self.

JULY.
THE latter Half of this Month is likely to produce many Remarkable Events:
Kings and Councils appear in great Glory and Splendour, but the Irish Wars
seems to Leap off the Land into the Sea, that I fear there will be great danger
on the Seas (especially near Ireland) by reason of Sea Fights and Pirates: Many
Ships, I fear, will be taken: Many Mischiefs also on the Roads, that Travelers
had need to beware: The Inhabitants of Bristol now seem to be famously United
in their Minds to Eminent Councils; But Paris suffers by Reproaches; Some
Religion is oppressed, or some way suffers, but I have Spyed out a Friend in a
Corner; Rain on or about the 10th. and 23th. a probability of Thunder on or
about the 6th. 9th. 23th. 25th. and 26th. days.

Now Valiant Mars is out of England quite,
And on the Irish Seas intends to Fight;
And in Conceit I Hear the Cannons Rore,
To Keep the Furies off the Irish Shore;
For indeed, I fear, there is now a Furious Enemy endeavoring to Land in
Ireland, where I perceive there is yet a secret Mischievous Party remaining,
but Jupiter (that Loves Peace more then War) being now an Inhabitant in
Ireland, exhilarates the better sort of Martial Spirits there, and encourages
them to stand up for their Religion.

AUGUST.
THis seems to be a Month of much Action, and it behooves me to speak the Truth
(as near as I can,) Wise are the Consultations that are now in Councils about
Religious Orders, but I fear their Unity is not perfect, and that some of them
may receive some hot and angry Contradictions from a Person more Superior in
Power: Jupiter lord of the 11th. in opposition to the 10th. tells us the
Offense given, will be about Religious Orders, and Mars in Gemini tells us,
That London is one of the many places, where (I fear) those kinds of Discords
will be (as well as in the greatest part of the Turks Dominions) what can I do
more then to wish they could better agree, some of the Communalty seem also to
frown, and I doubt it is at Superiors: Great danger of many Miscarriages to
Women with Child; A probability of Rain about the 6th. 9th. and 25th. days;
Also a probability of Thunder about the 6th. 7th. 20th. and 23th. days, pretty
windy about the 7th. 9th. and 12th days: The Sun now Eclipsed, see before.

Wise Merc'ry that Receives the furious Star,
Speaks Eloquence to Jove about the War,
As if some wise Ambassador was sent
To let Jove know his Peaceable Intent,
Who is yet in Ireland, and he denotes the Persons of the best Religion, he
consents to a Peace, but malicious Saturn is so full of secret Contrivances
that I doubt he is not yet to be trusted in Ireland; but Mars goes now out of
Taurus into Gemini, and perhaps some Souldiering part will come out of Ireland
to London.

SEPTEMBER.
I Pray be not angry, if I tell you that angry Mars is now got into the
Council-House, as well as into Londons Ascendant, and he is more wise and more
Noble then he uses to be, because he is in Trine to Mercury, and lord of the
10th. I pray muse upon this a little, and than tell me whether the Anger that I
mentioned in the last Month be quite over yet or not, for my part, I think it
not quite over, nor quite so bad; I have a mind to tell you of something else
too, though it be the same that I have told you of once already, -- The
quarrelsom Planet Mars entered into Gemini on the 5th. day of the last Month,
and from thence he will continue there about seven Months, during which time I
fear there will be many unusual Discords, and some secret Mischievous Plotting
too, and I think you will be of my Opinion when you have Considered that Mars
is the Dispositor of Saturn; But I Will tell you something more to the purpose by
and by; Women with Child will be in great danger of Miscarriages; A probability
of Rain on or about the 3d. 15th. 17th. and 30th. days.

Venus Gives Jove her Courteous Salutation,
Wishing Him Peace now in the Irish Nation;
L -- n, Oh thou art now become the place,
Where furious Mars stares with his brazen Face,
With Mischievous Saturn in his Bosom; And whereas this Autumnal Ingress
happens but one day after the Preventional New Moon (their Ascendants also
being the same) they will Operate both together the more powerfully this Month,
and the beginning of the next.

OCTOBER.
THis seems to be a Month of Remarkable Events, and it seems to produce much
Brawling and Strife amongst Common People, and a great disunity between some
Religious sort of Commons, and Councils, for indeed something seems to be there
which the Commons savor not, for Saturn is crept into the Council-House now,
where Mars was at the last New Moon, and wherever he goes he usually makes
discords; I am loath to write so much about such high Assemblies, (because some
may think, I mean those in England as well as in other places, though indeed I
do not gain say what they may think (for thoughts are free) but my meaning is,
that those kind of discords will happen chiefly in Spain, Hungary, Ireland,
etc.) but if I write not that which is something near the truth, I had better
write nothing at all, for if Mars or Saturn be at any time in the
Council-House, it is not in my power to Command them to be gone: I wish those
Branglings about Religion may at last rather End with the Tongue than with the
Sword: Some likelihood of Rain or Hail on or about the 3.8.16.19. and 22. days;
High winds on or about the 3.8.13.16. and 28. days.

Wise Merc'ry's in the Council-House, but He
With Irish Jove can by no means Agree;
With Him about Religion He contends,
And twice his furious Rays unto Him-sends.
For you must understand he is the Dispositor of angry Mars: At the latter End
of this Month the Planet Saturn enters into Sagittarius, and it is said when he
goes out of one Sign into another, there does usually happen some kind of
Apparition in the Air.

NOVEMBER.
THere seems now to be a Sly, Envious and dissatisfied Spirit in the hearts and
minds of many of the inferior sort of Common people against the Higher Powers
in many places; and I am almost afraid of some great City in England, for
Saturn is now got into Sagittarius, and he is under the Earth, applying to the
Opposition of the Cusp of the 10th. House in Gemini, the Ascendant of a great
City; Our Superiors there have now need to be very vigilant; God preserve them
from dangers by some Mischievous Plot; My Pen may do them some good, but per;
haps their own Care and Wisdom may do them more good; Let the Higher Powers
that are at Greece, Corinthia, Babylon and Assyria beware but enough of this
because they are Countries far remote from us; There seems indeed to be fears
and troubled spirits amongst (almost) all sorts of people; Bristol seems to lie
under some scandalous Reports; and as it were to be subject to some kind of
Affronts by a secret Enemy; Many great Men die: Many Sicknesses amongst Common
people; Rain, Hail or Snow on or about the 5.7 10.14.24. and 27. days -- A very
Rainy or Snowy month -- High-winds about the 7 and 24. days.

Wise Merc'ry's now with Mars his Fury drove,
Once more to throw his Verbal Darts at Jove;
Soon after goes to Saturn with great Ire;
They Whisper, and with Treacherous Hearts Conspire
To do some mischief (I fear) to Superiors, I have already told you where,
though I have not told you yet, that I fear that People of several degrees will
be Confederates with the Inferior sort.

DECEMBER.
THIS Month, I think, begins with high windy words at London, and Controversies
and public discords seem to be there this Month, I wish it may not continue
till the beginning of March; but if it does, it will then creep into a corner
and sleep for a time, till Sly malicious Saturn has plotted some secret
Mischief there (which I think he already begins to do) though I scarce believe
it will be ripe enough till the latter End of November next, and then Mars will
awake and start up in a warlike Fury to execute the secret Mischievous design
of Saturn; the Year is drawing to an end, I wish the troubles were too; Most of
the Communalty seem to desire Peace, especially about the middle of the Month,
but their Minds seem to be disquieted about the times, and to be tumbled and
tossed like a Ship upon the Rude and deep Ocean: Many Losses now happen to
Common people; Snow or Rain on or about the 7. and 22. days, or at least
Cloudy; some Winds about the 4. and 12. days,

Now Smiling Venus sends her Greeting Rays
To Pious Jove who yet in Ireland stays;
Hermes beholds Him with a Courteous Face,
Great Sol salutes Him with sweet words of Peace.
So that Peace seems now to be better Established in Ireland, and the hearts
and minds of many there Rejoice.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THese are to Give Notice, That at the Blew Boar in the Old Bayley, (near
Newgate) Lives a Student in Physic and Astrology, who by that Noble and
Sublime Art, Resolves all Lawful Question which Rationally can be Required.

Also very good Medicines for the Cure of most (Curable Diseases)

His Hours are from 8 in the Morning till 7 at Nighe


