Astrological and Theological OBSERVATIONS AND PREDICTIONS, For the Year of our
LORD 1700.

WHEREIN Are briefly Shown as well the Judgments and Opinions of several Wise
Men concerning this present Year and other Years as his own Judgment with the
Signification of the Eclipses of this present Year.

WITH Monthly Observations for every Month of this present Year briefly
containing the Most Remarkable events that are likely to happen in England and
other Places, and the most likely days for Rain and Change of VVeather and
other things worthy of Observaton.

Psalm. 19.1. The lofty Heavenes by their Whirling Motion
Over the Earth, deep Seas, and floting Ocian,
Daily declare to sinful Flesh and Blood,
The Glory of the great Omniscient God,
The Firmament filled with amazing Lights,
Does Show his Handiwork to Earthly Sights:
Psalm. 147.4 He tells the number of Sidereal Flames,
And calls them by their own Celestial names,
Thei're happy who have carnal eyes to gaze,
Upon those glorious lights, which us amaze:
2. pet. 1.19. More happy they, who can with Spiritual eyes,
Behold the day Star in their Hearts to rise.
By JOHN SILVESTER, Student in Astrology*

Living near the Market-house at Alders Key in Bristol.

BRISTOL, Print^^ for the Author and are Sold by W. B^ near the Tolsey.

Astrological and Theological, OBSERVATIONS AND PREDICTIONS For the Year of our
LORD, 1700.
THIS is that great Year, which several Wisemen have pointed at, wherein or
about which time, they have Conjectured that the World would see some great
Unusual and Famous Changes.

John Napeir L. of Marchiston, believed the day of Judgment would fall between
the Years 1688. and 1700. for he believed the Abomination that made Desolate,
was set up in the Year of Christ, 365 by that Abominable Julian, when he made
Decrees for Desolating and Devouring Gods Servants, therefore he said from the
Year of Christ 365 we are Commanded to Reckon 1335 Years, which falls in
Anno. 1700 And then (says Daniel verse 6th.) shall be the end of all Wonders,
even the Wondrous and great Day of the Lord: Read the last Chapter of Daniel.

George Withers conceived that near unto this Year the Roman Empire, would be
totally subverted and overthrown, for they made their Computations by these
Numeral letters, MDCLXVI. which are the Numurals for 1666 which being added to
32 Years (about which Age Christ suffered) the Aggregate will amount to School
which is near unto 1700.

In a little book entitled Reverend M. Brightman's, Judgment or Prophesies, it
is thus Written, but the Pope is to be quite and fully overthrown at the Year
1686 and that in the Year 1696 the great Turk also shall be utterly overth^own.

T. B. In his little Book, Wrote that the Turkish Power should come to his end,
and that none should be able by any help what ever to prevent it, even at the
Year 1697.

I.H. In his Catastrophe Mundi wrtho^ (...) the Year 1700 saying, now is Rome
Destroyed and the Downful of the Seat of Peter; the Conversion of the Turks,
and Jews, soon follow, and in his appendix Wrote that the in in 1722 will
Destroy all the Opinions of of the Pagans, all over the whole World, and Reduce
all to the Faith of our Savior Jesus Christ, and that all Contrariety of
Opinions will be laid Open. The Man was Ingenious, but I doubt his Judgment
will fail him this Year.

In a certain Book (Entitled a Calender of Prophetic time drawn by an
Express Scripture line) on the Title page, there is a prophesy thus
Demonstrated; But that the time of their Prophesy in Sackcloth (meaning the two
Witnesses Slain) will not Expire till the Year 1697 And at the Year 1727 shall
begin the final Destruction of the Beast by the viols, accomplished at the Year
1772 in the new Jeusalem briefly described After which time the Author
concluded there would ensue Blessed times accordding to these words, in another
place of the said Book by Calculation of time, this blessed state will begin
e're the Seventh thousand of the World enters, but as near as within 240 Years
I took the more notice of 1772 because it holds a near congruency with the Year
1782 Expressed in my following predictions concerning the Roman Empire
Astrologically and Theologically Composed which as great secret I bequeath unto
the World

Concerning the Roman Empire
I find by our Trigonicall table Calculated by the great pains and Industry of
I. H. which he Extracted from the Caroline tables of T. S. Published in 1663.
That Jesus Christ was Born under the in that Pious Sign [one of the House of
Pious ] but he Established his most pure Christian Religion under the in that
Pious Sign Sagittarus, [the other House of Pious ] and under the Sixth
Trigonicall Revolution of the since the Creation of the World And it came into
my Heart that as the Lord made Man's and Finished his work on the Sixth day of
the Week, and rested on the Seventh day, even so he was pleased to Establish
the true Christian Religion, and to Finish the Settlement thereof, by the Death
of his Dear Son Jesus Christ, under the in that diurnall and Pious Sign that
happned under the Sixth Trigonical Revolution thereof since the Creation of the
World (to bring all belevers into a spiritual way of Worship and to purify
them) who said it is Finished, and then gave up the Ghost, John, the 19.30. And
after his resurrection he likewise entered into his Eternal Sabbath of Rest,
And whereas Jesus Christ, made choice of Twelve Apostles to convert Sinners to
Rightoueness, so it is probable that the Lord will convert many of the greatest
infidels to the true Christian Faith under the that will hapen after their
Twelth ingress into that Piou Sign since the birth of Chist (in or near the
Year 1782) to perfect a Reformation in the World [through the Spirit of Grace
within] for this great Apostolic Number 12 is [by wise Men] called Divine, so
that it seems very likely, that the Pope of Rome (if not also some other
unconverted Monarchs) may under the conjunction of that great Apostolic numb^
(...) ^her totally overthrown or else converted through so me Judgmen, tto the
true Christian Faith, for the Lord Respects number, and order, and a very good
Reason may be given, why Christ made Choice of the Number of Twelve Apostles.

The Number 1728 is by wise Men counted fatal, to which when any City, or
Common Wealth has attained; it shall afterward Decline: Now whereas the true
Christian Religion and Spiritual way of Worship was not fully Established 'till
the Death of Christ ( who said if I go not away the Comforter will not Come
unto you John 16.7.) therefore if we add 32. [the Number of Christ's Age when
he died] to 1728, the total will be 1760. which is the Year, wherein [by this
Rule] the true Christian Religion will by some means begin to decline in power,
but whether by the slothfullness of the Professors thereof or by some great
persecution I am not sensible of* But if it should so happen I conjecture the
Lord will visit his People again; and animate and quicken them by his Spirit
within, and drop down some sweet Celestial influences from the supernall
stellary powers under the aforesaid in that Pious Sign that will happen in or
about the Year 1782. wherefore let them praise the Name of the Lord: for his
Name alone is Excellent, his Glory is above the Earth, and Heaven. Psalm. 148.13.

And whereas the Roman Empire was Established about 45 Years before the coming
of Christ, therefore if we substract 45 from the aforesaid Number 1728. the
Remainder will be 1683. about which Year [by this Rule] the Roman Empire should
have begun to Decline in Power, And ^ndeed I suppose it was sorely shaken, and
the inhabitants possesed with fears that very year when the Turkish. Army
Besieged Vienna, and I believe that Number would have been more Effectual upon
that Empire if the Turkish Empire had not been Established under the in ^ which
was the sign Opposite to the sign wherein the three Conjunctions of and
happned in 1682 and 1683. which gave the Tukish Army a terrible Repulse
according to my Ensuing Discourse.

Concerning the Turkish Empire.
THis present Empire of the Turks was chiefly Established by Othomarn in 1289
under the in the airy sign And therefore after and in 1682 and 1683 had made
their Conjunctions in that lofty Regal high Spirited sign [the sign opposite
to ] the Turkish A^my was Vanquished and by a terrible Repulse at the Siege of
Vienna, were forced to fly away, and in or about the Year 1742. The two
superior Planets will again be in in the fiery sign under which it is
probable that the Turkish Army, will again have a very terrible Repulse; and
that that Empire will then be more woefully shaken, because that conjunction
will be after they have made their third Entrance into (the Number three being
counted a most powerful Number,) But if the Turk be not then driven out of his
Empire, perhaps the Lord may be pleased to give him a Pietious Visitation of
his Love under that famous in that pious sign that will happen in or about the
Year 1782 [before mentioned] it being the Conjunction of the 12 ingresse of the
two Superious into that pious sign* since the Birth of Christ, and then if
that present Turkish Emperor harden not his Heart, he may be Blessed for
evermore; for it is written I will give thee for a light unto the Gentiles that
that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the Earth Isaiah 49.6. These
Turks were at first a small People, and were Driven out of several places but
at length they settled and (by the permission of God) Wonderfully increased and
prospered.

I. M. In his Catastasis Mundi wrote that Ottoman first Founded the Turkish
Empire in the Year of Christ 12^9 and that if Saturns greatest Years [465] be
added to 1289. it will make 1754 therefore said he, this Monarchy seems to
stand Firm and Stable no longer than unto the Year of Christ, 1754 which indeed
agrees with my aforesaid Computations; for 1754 is a Year which is under the in
1742.

The Number 666 is the great Tabuler Number of the Sun, the most Renouned
Planet of Majesty; which is as a King or an Emperor among the Stars.

6 32 3 34 35 1 7 11 27 28 8 30 19 14 16 15 23 24 18 20 22 21 17 13 25 29 10 9
26 12 36 5 33 4 2 31

This soler Table is wisely Composed of 36 Figures placed squarewise and all
the Figures in every Row and overthwart, do strangly amount, to 111 which
multiplied by 6 the product will be the great Tabuler Number of the Sun and of
his astrall Emperial Majesty, Wise Men have accounted this Table and Number of
great virtue and Eessuacy and have said that the most high created all things
by Number Weight and Measure.

Behold this strange Table and ad all the Numbers together and you will find
the total to be 666.

This great solar Number of Majesty 666 may be thus applied to the Number of
the beast, 666 [mentioned in in Reve. 13.18.] and the Number of his Name. for
this Terrible Beast arose out of the Turbulent sea or unstable Element of water
of the Nature of the Lowest Planet, the Moon, but he soon became magnificent
and entered into terrestrial Glory and Splendor [compareable to the Glory and
Majesty of the Celestial Sun, which God has Ordained to Rule as a King or an
Emperor among the stars] and therefore all the World wondered after the beast:
and I suppose John himself, did not believe nor expect, that this cruel
Imperial Seven-headed Beast, would ever Personally appear in such a Prodigious
shape to Rule over Men or Saints, as he saw him in the vision, but rather
mystically in Man, therefore this Number of the Beast is also the Number of a
cruel Imperial Man: And as this horn Crowned cruel Imperial Beast was
Mystically to appear in a cruel Imperial Man, viz, in some Man of Sin, and to
Reign in that unity, as a King of Kings in Earthly Glory and Splendor,
Comparable to the admirable Glory and Majesty of the Astral King or sublime
Celestial Sun so by his terrestial Glory and Magnificence he Merited the Like
Regal and Imperial Name of Majesty, whose Number is 666 And by his Imperial
Majesty and Dragonish fury he made War, with the Saints, and overcame them And
therefore he also merited the Name of Antichrist, which is agreeable with the
Name of Blasphemy Written on his Heads: so that his Name is according to his
evil Nature is [and may not improperly be called] Antichristain Majesty or The
great and mighty, Blasphemer, who Metaphoritally, was a terrestrial Sun whose
number is 666. Note. this cruel Bea^t may also Externally be understood, and
the first Beast as well as the Second may be called Antichrist, though the
Second seems chiefly to merit the said Name

l 30 a 1 t 300 e 05 i 10 n 50 o 70 200 666

John Napier, L. of Marchiston, conceived this Number of the Beast 666 to be
the Greek Name lateino (for the Grecians made their Letters Numurals) which
being thus placed and the Numbers cast up, the total will be the aforesaid
Number 666 and he said lateino is not only the Name of a Man but tha Name of
the first Beast The Man which he meaned was King Latinus, and and the First
Beast he said was the Latin Empire.

Now it is very Observable that the Christian Religion, began to spring up
about the 15th. Year of Christ, and was Established under the great Conjunction
of and in that Pious Regal and Fiery sign Sagitarius, the House of Pious under
which Conjunction, it pleased the Lord to work Wonders and to bring to pass
many Miraclonus and wonderful Changes.

And it is also very Observable that in the Year, 1603. there happened another
great Conjunction of and in the First face of the same Pious, Regal and fiery
Sign, near the Scorpious Heart [a star of the second magnitude] of the Nature
of Mars and pious Jupiter, Under which (according to my best Computation) there
sprung up a certain Religion and a precious people in the North of England,
appearing with Wonderful Zeal, in whose Hearts, the fear of God was placed and
the Mighty Power of God was felt, working spiritual changes, condemning pride
and secret-sinns, leading many into states of humility and into the true
spiritual Worship, which Religion did not much spread it self for many Years.

And in the Year 1642 there happened a Conjunction of in that Pious and watery
Sign [the other House of Pious ] under which Pious Conjunction, the said
Religion wonderfully prospered and the Zeal of the said People was quickened and
much admired, and their Pious conversasions were sufficient tokens to
demonstrate that their Teacher was Divine and spiritual and the said Religion
began to overspread the Kingdom of England, to the Admiration of many People,
and to make a powerful entrance into diverse other Kingdoms and Nations.

Moreover it is very Observable that in the Year, 1663 there happened another
Famous Conjunction of and In that Pious Regal and Fiery Sign Sagittarus, which
may not improperly be called a great Conjunction, because it passed out of a
watery Sign, into a Fiery: under which Famous Conjunction, The said Religion,
Flourished and more and more, overspread the Kingdom of England and more
Powerfully took place in diverse other Nations, so that as the said Religion
Sprung up at first under the ^ in that Pious constellation: even so it has
prospered and flourished under this same.

But many Slighting the day of Gods precious visitation to their Souls went out
of their first tenderness and departed from the Power of God liness and became
slothful and sleepy Resting, only in forms and formalities endeavoring to
comprehend Divine Mysteries (which are Chiefly Reveled through divine and
Spiritual Judgments) from whence differences and Distractions arose so that in
the Year 1677 and 1678 when was transiting the Sign [the sign opposite to
that pious sigine ] and in and therein, the discords about the said Religon
were very Great and Public to the World and arose into a very high station of
contention, and great distractions appeared, to the grief of many souls and
they became subject to the Contentious Planets, and aspects causing the said
Religion to appear infamous (which at the Beginning was beautified with
Holiness) to the Great dishonor of God, and the improsperity of the said
people in Grace and spiritual things.

And in the Year 1682 and 1683 there happned to be no less then 3 Conjunctions
of and in that lofty high spirited Regal and Firey sign Leo, (there happening
a great Commet in one of the said Years which also succeeded that terrible
Commet in 1680) under which three Conjunctions in this Lofty and high spirited
sign, the discords about the said Religion Strangly increased, and lofty
Disputes arose (according to the Nature of the constellation) and they went
into Divisions and separations especially about the Year 1692 and 1693 when
contentions had took possession of that pious Sign and from thence had 3 times
vexed Pious with his three Oppositions who was then very weak in and like one
turned out of his own habitation into a Wilderness, weeping, whilst his
Malicious enemy possessed the House of his joy and glory and Fought against him
wit^ his own Weapons, ah poor despised, and Forlorn, many Pious souls here on
earth have sorely greived (if not Mourned) because of thy Desolation and exile,
but wait a little patiently, for thy next happy Conjunction with in thy own
Pious habitation (which will happen in or about the Year 1722) that thou May
plead With thy Enemy for Dealing so Malicously with thee.

Moreover in or about the Year, 1702 the two superior Planets and will make
their conjunction, in that hotspirited Fiery sign [the house of furious and
Fiery Mars and the ascendant of England] under which Conjunction it is probable
there will arise in England, many hot and Furious disputes [according to the
Nature of the constellation] about some Principles of the said Religion (for
contends wit^ about Religion, in what sign soever he is in conjunction with
him) so that I fear, the lord will suffer the Distractions to be greater in
England, espcially about the Year, 1707 or 1708 when Contentions transits the
sign [the sign opposite to that pious sign ] and that some secret controversies
will again be made public to the World, unless the Lord either by a miracle he
pleased to put a stop to it or many that are lofty and contentions descend into
the Ancient station of Humility and therein abide waiting for the Spiritual
appearance of Christ in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge
Coloss. 2.3. for the Wise-Virgins are usually contented with their Spiritual
enjoyments till through their Experiences a Right understanding of divine
M^steries is given. Note, though the Wise Virgins (under ^his Conjunction) may
be batte^ed by the Foolish with much force and subtility about the said Yrar
1707 or 1708 Yet I conjecture they will begin and End Victoriously.

Again it is Observeable that in or about the Year 1722 or 1723 the two
superior Planet and will be again in conjunction in the same pious Regal and
Fiery sign (under which the said Religion Cheifely arose) under which I believe
and Conjecture the Lord [the the great Governor of Nature and of all Celestial
motions of the Spears and planets] will prune his Vine and cut of many of the
superfluous lofty Branches, which have not yet cast down their worldly
Magnificence, nor said thou art worthy O Lord to Receive glory and Honor and
power, Reve. 4, 11. and he, will dress it and beautify it again in the sight
of other professors and make it more famous, and will Raise up a more ardent
Zeal in and among the Wise Virgins, and work a Reformation through the Spirit
of Grace within: Now shall that was so much Grieved, Despised and Forlorn, in
or about the Year, 1692 or 1693, begin to Triumph over his Adversary, and to
Recover his lost fame, and Renown and the Wise Virgins will begin to hold up
their heads and appear again in beauty, this is the appointed time wherein the
Lord will begin to consolate the Afflicted and he has determined to do mighty
things before the Conjunctions of the two Superior Planets, (which are as the
Lords Instruments) have made their Departure out of the Fiery Trigon into the
Earthy, for ever since the Creation of the World, it has pleased the Almighty
God, to effect the most Remarkable and most Eminent Changes here o^ Earth, and
gradually to bring to pass the greatest wonders under the Conjunctions of the
two Superior Planets in the fiery trigon (we being now under the 8 trigonicall
Revolution incomplete and imperfect since the Creation of the World) and when
their Conjunctions [an hundred Years hence] have made their departure out of
the Fiery trigon into the Earthy, they will not make their Appearance in the
fiery trigon again 'till many hundred Years are Expired.

But under this Conjunction of the two Superiors, about the Year 1737 or 1738,
when begins to make another transit through the airy Sign Gemini [which is the
Sign opposite to ] the Lord will suffer the Foolish Virgins to contend again
with the Wise, and one with another because of their Darkness and Disobedience,
therefore let the Wise Virgins be armed with his power that they may then be
preserved in peace for God has ordained a time to Every purpose under Heaven
Ecclesiastes. 3.1.

But that which is most Remarkable is this, that in or about the year 1782 the
two Superior Planets and will make another Famous Conjunction in that Pious
Regal and Fiery Sign which will be the Conjunction of their Twelfth ingresse
into that Pious Sign since the birth of Christ (the Number Twelve being by
wise Men called divine) under which Conjunction and great Apostolic Number (I
Conjecture) the Lord will do very great things and perfect a Reformation in the
World and gather his People into a more perfect unity and Confound the foolish
Virgins, who are apt to give offenses to the Wise by which they are liable to
that Woe which Christ Proclaimed when he said Woe to that Man by whom the offense
Comes Matthew. 18.7.

I shall now make a great leap over many years to come and shall only mention
one event more, which may be Remarkable to posterity: about 300 years hence the
Conjunction of the two Superior Planets and will make their ingress into the
airy trigon and into the Sign [which is opposite to that Pious Sign under
which the said Religion arose] under whose Conjunction and Conjunctions in the
Sign the Lord, who has given Motions to the admirable wheels of Nature has
preordained by their circulations, to let in a very great flood of afflictions
upon the Professors of this Religion, for a Trial of Their Faith, and a
Grievous persecution (I Conjecture) will arise to overthrow the said Religion
or to drive the professors thereof into Obscurity and Desolation, and the
Induction of strange herisyes will be known (unless the great Governor of
Celestial motions Miraculously prevent it, Therefore all that profess the said
Religion in these our Days ought to prise the day of Gods Visitation and love
unto their Souls, while the storms are not so Great, and as Wise Virgins to
make their progress toward the Lord out of pride and Sins that they may
appear as lights to many that are in Darkness, and let them praise the Lord for
Discovering that Blessed principle of Light, to them in their Days, who also
works by the constellations and heavenly Bodies, as well as by his Spirit in man.

Of the Four Principal causes of Religious Differences.
1. The First cause is from Suspicion Without Knowledge, from whence false
Judgments are given and unsavory offenses; corupting and severing the
Christian unity.

2. The Second cause proceeds from disobedience to the Word and Spirit of
God, through which the loftiness of the Heart continues and the Rich are
Respected above the Poor, by which the ardency of affections may be cooled and
disunity take Place.

3. The Third cause, is for want of Divine Manifestations through which many
Scripture expressions cannot be Comprehended nor understood, from whence
Differences in Opinions may often arise.

4. The Fourth cause proceeds from a Contrariety in nature, for every ones
Nature is not alike, some Natures being very much different and Incongruent,
from whence arise diverse crossings and offenses: And the chief cause of
contrariety in Nature is from the Circumrotation of the admirable wheels of
Nature (which move through the Preordination of the great and wise Creator) in
which he has Fixed many l^ght bright and Admirable bodies (through which the
Heavens Declare his Glory psalm, 19, 1.) which being of Diverse Natures, do
through their Daily and incessant Motions and preordinate circulations, cause a
mixture of influences in the Supernall Regions of the air, from whence proceed
the love and enmity in his creatures here below, who hold a congruency or
incongruency of Natures among themselves, for if the Planet that Governs the
Oriental Angle at the Birth of any person be located in a place opposite to the
Place of any other Planet that governs the Oriental angle (at the time of
another birth the two Persons through a contrariety in Nature, will (to
Admiration) very often Disagree especially if the Planet be either or.

Though many know not the Reason why this is written and Published, yet if
they, Rightly apply it, it may do them much good.

A Short Song of the true Christians or wise Virgins.
OUR Burning lamps were filled with precious Oil,
When we that Joyful midnight cry had heard:
Our lofty foes did make us weep and wail,
When we upon our Hevenly course had stear'd.
Once Israel For an earthly Kingdom Fought,
And were Victorious through their Valiant King
But we an everlasting Kingdom sought,
And of our Spir'tuall Victories can sing,
I shall shall now proceed to give my Astrological Judgments for this present
Year 1700.
THE positions of the Heavens at the time of the Suns, ingresse into the First
Minute of the Vernall Equinoctial Sign seem to be wholly for Peace, and that
England, will not be Molested, nor encumbered with wars but will this Year be
in a state of much felicity, yet from some other positions of the Planets I am
somewhat afraid of some Estival disturbances, especially in Ireland, though the
greatest troubles in Ireland I doubt will be in 1705 But Ho'lland and Scotland
seem to be pretty free from Martial disturbances till 1710 or 1711 but perhaps
France may next year be threatened by a Foreign enemy.

The Clergy seem to be much dissatisfyed in their minds, and to set themselves
in opposition against some other professors: The Planet is now making his long
Voyage through the watery Sign along with the which either this year or the
next may cause some perturbations and distractions, Bloodshed and much Mischief
in many places Especially in Cilicia, Galatia, Normandy, and in Egypt, the
higher, and perhaps France, and Particularly Paris may in some measure
participate of their portended Mischief, and there may also much Controversy
and debates arise concerning sects and the appearance of some new heresy may
take place. In January, the Planet goes out of into and perhaps some unusual
sight may then appear in the air: I expect the apparition of some comet within
three or four years.

About the year 1702. or 1703. (after has made his next congresse with in the
fiery Sign [the ascendant of England] and also after has moved pretty far
therein, we shall best know whether there will be Wars or Peace in England, if
we can but escape a brush then, we may be happy and long rest under the
enjoyment of Peace and Tranquillity: Sed O Anglia timeo ne multi hosts tune
Existerent in te aut Contra, te Ergo cavit^ vos incolae and praecipu^e cum
tempus ad veniat sed utcunque quaedam magnae Mutationes tunc expectentur vel
subito postea, and whereas the is exalted above in the Ninth house, it
Signifies the Death of old Men and of Monks and of Religious Men: also applying
to the at the time of the Suns vernall ingresse portends some scarcity of the
Fruits of the earth yet by some other positions wheat seems to be indifferent
Cheap, all the latter half of the year, But the Positions of our Summer
ingresse very much threaten Miscarryages to Women with Child.

The Kings and Princes of Europe, will this quarter be meditating about the sea
Affiairs, and sometimes about the Religion of their subjects, but they appear
in great Splendor during the vernal and estival quarter, yet seem to be some
way Displeased and disturbed in the Autumnal Quarter.

Of the ECLIPSES, of this present YEAR, 1700.
THERE will happen but two Eclipses this Year and they will be both of the
Moon; the first will be on the twenty third day of February, at 36 minutes past
Six of the Clock in the Morning, this Eclipse will be total and the beginning of
it may be visible to those that are willing to rise before the Sun Rises (if
the air be clear.) It portends the Destruction of some of our Enemies and also
of some great Drinkers or Drunkards, and a Mortality to many Children or young
Folks, and it also threatens sickness or much evil to many Counselors, and
scribes, and signifies unfortunate Navigations and turbulent and pernicious
winds, and perhaps in some Countries it may cause an Earthquake. This Ecipse
will chiefly operate in those Countries, and Places that are Subject to the
signs and but it threatens much evil to all Persons in General, whose
Acsendants were the 15th. degree of (or some degree near it) at the time of
their Births.

The Second will be an Eclipse of the Moon on the 18th. day of August about 27
Minutes past 2 of the Clock in the Afternoon; this will be a great Eclipse but
invisible to us, the Moon being Lady of the 8th. House and posited on the Cusp
of the third, and Religious being both Lord of the ascendant and Lord of the
Eclipse and posited in It has an ill signification concerning the Vulgar sort
of People, and denotes Death and Destruction to many of them, and to many
Travelers and to some sort of Professors of Religion especially in those
Countries and places under, and, and also to Fishes in the Waters, but being
Lord of Subsequent Angle and applying to the Cusp of the ascendant I fear it
has Relation to some future Disturbances amongst Men Espcially in those
Countries and places under the signs and This Eclipse, will begin to operate
most Manifestly about the middle of May in 1701.

The great Omniscient Omnipotent and most wise Creator, did not make the Sun
Moon and Stars for Lights only, but for Diverse Effects and purposes; wherefore
he was pleased to give them power over the Natures of all Creatures in the air
and Water and of all Anminals Vegetables and Minerals here on Earth, yet he
has not given away all his power to them, but as he has been ever so he is
now and ever will be, the Almighty which Commands the Sun, and it Rises not,
and Seals up the Stars, which alone spreads out the Heavens, and treads
upon the Waves of the Sea, which makes Arcturus, Orion, Pleiades and the
Chambers of the South, which does great things past finding out, yea and
wonders without Number Job, 9.7, 8, 9, 10. May he not say unto Man that has
Humane Wisdom? can thou do any of those mighty things? or can thou bind the
sweetest influences of Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion? can thou bring
forth Mazzaroth in his season? or can thou guide Arcturus with his Sonns Joh.
38.31, 32.

Psalm. 148 3 Praise him ye Heavenly Sun and Moon,
Praise him all ye Stars of Light:
Your Rising, moving, going Down,
Glorifies him Day and Night.

Monthly Observation for every Month, this present Year 1700.
January's Observations.
MANY Clandestine Consultations by some great Council or Parliament seem to
have been either in the preceding Month, or may be about the beginning of this:
many Princes of Europe are now very Magnanimous and show themselves in great
Splendor and are acting and contriving for the Consolation and profit of their
Subjects, the City of Oxf^^d, is now much Esteemed and favored and many of the
Clergy; and some other Learned Men will Resort thither: some Potentate in
Ireland seems to be somewhat enraged at the threatenings or some Exasperating
Speeches of some great Potentate whose ascendant is we may now expect the safe
arrival of many Ships to their several Ports: some change of weather may be
expected before the middle of the Month.

E're this cold shivering Month has taken leave,
Of us, who here our earthly Dwellings have,
Chronos and Ericina too conjoine,
Moist'ning the earth with snow or showers of Rain.
toward the latter end of the Month

February's Observation.
THIS Month seems to produce Weighty consultations in Councills, concerning the
Militia, about which some Discords arise The main body of the Commonalty are
now very well united to their head and are earnestly endeavoring to get Money
at home and abroad by their employments; the Seas seem to be perilous for
Merchants ships: some danger of Losses by private Thieve^ on the Roads causing
grief and trouble to Travelers. Snow or Rain about the 9th. 13th. 22d. 27th,
Days.

Now Dusky Phaenon does with Clouds Obscure,
Geat Titans glory, and his splendor pure:
The lofty Heavens weep, their falling Tears,
Wash clean the Earth's green morning gown she wears.
Especially about the 12th. Day of the Month

March's Observations.
THE Potentates and Nobles of some Nations, especially of the Nations that are
under and 69 seem now to blame their Subjects, and to act some thing which the
Vulgar will not like Great Men have wise heads now, with a great ideal of
policy in them, the Seas are now very Perilous by Reason of Pyrots, Travelers
may now Expect many affronts on the Roads by Thieves and highway Men. Men and
their Wives differ much about the latter end of the Month, but I mean those
that are Naturally apt to be passionate; a probability of Rain about the 7th.
21st. 30th. Days, and indeed the latter end of the Month is likely to produce
much Rain.

When I the Rays of my judicious Eye,
Had cast upon the splendid lights on high,
I saw some wondering, some in discontent,
Some great ones under close imprisonment.
and small ones too, or at least threatened.

April's Observations.
THE Consultations of this Month, in Councils, seems to be Chiefly about Marine
affairs; but they differ in their opinions, Sicknesses and Distempers will
Naturally surprise many of the Vulgar sort, especially in the City of London,
let them beware of too much carnality, lest they suffer for it by the Venereal
distemper: many Mercurial persons especially in London and Ireland are now some
way furiously affronted some probability of pretty high winds about the 12th.
and 27th. Days, and of Hail or Rain about the 4th. 13th. 28th. Days

Gradivus does with Furious rays afflict,
Bright Noble Phoebus, does him Contradict:
Some English Hero on the Irish Ground,
I Fear's in danger of a secret wound.
about the latter end of the Month.

May's Observations
IMprisonment seems to be threatened to some great Potentates (especially in
those Countries under) but the benign aspects of this Month do much favor the
Commonalty, and give them the enjoyment of much love content and felicity, and
curb that Spirit in them, that may sometimes be ready to appear in Wrath, but
their success in trading will be but Ordinary: Rain near the beginning and end
of the Month.

Though Valiant Mars looks furious in an Angle,
As if he had a small intent to wrangle,
mild Venus does old Saturn kindly greet,
Making Mars mild by Salutations sweet.
So that he is scarce hot spirited enough to fight

June's Observations.
THE Planet Mars, was persuaded the last month to keep his Sword in his sheath,
but I am half a fraid he will draw him this Month, but Ireland is the Place
chiefly threatened (Ergo Caveat Hybernia quoniam nunc illa inerit periculo
magis quam multa alia adjacentia Regna) and [the asendant of Ireland] is now
furiously ascending upon the stage of the world, and the Planet of Mischief is
now preparing to make ^his transmigration over the degree opposite to the
ascendant, if the heat of be not Extinguished, it may break out into a flame
about the latter end of this Month or the beginning of the next, but there will
be several treatyes to preserve Peace and I wish the animosityes of some
Martial Spirits may not be too much incensed but rather cooled, by moderation
and Rationable compliances: the Seas are now well enough cleared from Pyrots,
many Whoredoms are now discovered and the Parties concerned imprisoned, a
probability of Rain the 4th and 22d. day, and of Rain and Thunder on the 2d 9th
19th. 30th. Day.

Come Phaenon, Phoebus, Hermes, use your Wits,
That fierce Gradivus make no bloody hits,
Phoebus and Hermes spread your arms embrace,
Stout Aris, let him sheath his sword In Peace,
For that is his best place I think we have known wars enough already.

July's Observations
THE Vulgar sort of People are now pretty much Grieved and driven into
perturbations of mind, partly about the sea affairs and losses thereby and
partly about some Kind of Religion which many will now be Zealous for, and they
often discourse about those that belong to the Council house: some Superiors I
fear will be in danger of Imprisonment, The Seas seem now to be very perilous
for Merchants Ships and partly by Reason of Pyrots; the Highways are also
alittle dangerous for Travelers, by reason of Thieves. A probability of some
Thunder and Lightning near the 3d. 8th. 13th. 23d. Day: and of Rain on or about
the 8th. 16th. 22d. 29th. Days.

I wonder why great Titan should abuse,
Our pious star and put him in a muse
The learned Clergy sudden Changes see,
Yielding submission to some high Decree.
perhaps before the middle of the month.

August's Observations
THE Furious Planet mars is once again got into the Council house a little
nearer to the cusp, being lord both of the 10th. and 11th., houses, the learned
in Astrology know that in the sign and house where he is now posited he
usually creates contentions in councils with a great deal of fury, and their
undestandings are so good that by directing their ocular Rays to the Southern
part of the Zodiac, they can tell you that the fury proceeds partly from
thence he that can understand it him. The Clergy in Oxford, and else where seem
now to be in better content then in the last Month: but Merchants are now
subject to losses through Montanous Waves on the perilous Seas: The Commonalty
in General are now Subject to many losses Diverse ways, yet seem to go on in
their business and Trading with exhilarated Spirits: many discourses are now
about the burials of the Dead, and the Taxes laid thereon, the likelyest Days
for Rain are the 24th. 16th. 18th. 21st. 22d. 23d. Days, Thunder about the
10th. 22d. 26th. Days.

Slow Falcifer is in the water creeping,
With Sullen looks on Sol and Venus peeping:
We see the Rain and hear the Roaring Thunder,
(Which makes us at the Works of Nature Wonder
After the middle of the Month but I fear it will make the Farmer a little sad

September's Observations.
THE proceedings in the Council house seem pretty smooth yet not without a
mixture of some Ruggedness through some discontented Spirits: The Clergy in
General (if not also some other Persons professing Religion) seem to be much
Grieved and Dissatisfied at something acted in Councils and they frown at some
of the Vulgar, about some Religious orders, and for something spoken or acted
against them: and in-; deed it may be admired if some of both sorts suffer, not
by Imprisonment I am half a fraid of a conspiracy against some of the higher
Powers, but fears possess the promoters of the Mischief intended, which
perhaps may either frustrate or weaken their designer There is now plenty
enough of Wisdom and Policy, though indeed Wisdom is not always the Conservatix
of Peace and Love: Omnibus temporibus Dominum [Deum] magis quam viros timeant
Cuncti, The Seas now are very perilous for Merchants Ships, some danger of
miscarryages to Women with Child: a probability of Rain at the beginning and
about the middle and also at the end of the of the month.

Phoebus and Hermes kindly do salute,
Bright Phaeton, and with him both dispute,
through wise and Fair entreatyes to assuage,
Some pious fury and Religious Rage.
It Is well there are some pious peace makers, for I think there is need enough
of them now, or may be about November.

October's Observation
Superiors now seem to be in very great Unity and Benevolence among
themselves, and have also pretty good affections toward their subjects, yet
are a little displeased, to hear that their subjects are somewhat unwilling to
pay some kind of Tax. Religion is the thing now much discoursed of in Councils,
together with the Sea affairs: Imprisonment seems to be threatened to some sort
of professors of Religion, and also to some Seamen. A probability of Rain or
Hail about the 2.12. and 25 days

Fair Ericina's pretty wanton Eyes;
Chronos does with his cloudy mask disguise,
They drop Down tears, do sadly weep and wail.
We see them fall like Show'res of Rain or Hail.
Chiefly about the beginning of the month.

November's Observations.
IMprisonment seems still to be threatened to some of the nobler sort of the
commonalty, for words spoken against some Superiors which I fear will inflame
the anger of a great Potentate against them; Ergo linguam Regat Ratio: The
Clergy (if not also some other professing party) have not only been lately
troubled but enraged by some great Ruler. The Seas are now very perilous for
masters of Ships and mariners partly by reason of Pyrots and I fear many
miscarryages will happen to Women with Child: Good news arrives unto us out of
Flanders Norway the Higher, Bavaria and Barbary, some likelihood of Rain or
Snow about the 8th. 13th. and 22d. Days

Gradivus lately did with Jove contend,
Who humbly did to Mars greatness bend,
He still looks with a troubled Countenance,
Because he cannot his purposes advance.
What a deal of crossenesse is here about Religion and like to be

December's Obsevations
I am now beholding a pretty turbulent Face of Heaven: some mischievous
conspiracyes I fear are now in action and some secret evil designs at hand: I
am sorry I see occasions io write so often of Imprisonments though it seems to
be threatened to some of the Vulgar (especially about the latter end of the
Month) who now seem to be displeased, at something acted by superiors about
Religion and weighty discourses and consultation are now in Councils about the
Comonalty and the Soldiers: beware of Robbers on the Roads in January next*
probability of Snow or Rain about the 5th. 19th. and 29th. or 30th. Day.

Gradivus now sees louring Phaenon walk,
Comes to him and with angry tongues they talk,
One Stamps in fury; speaks a frowning word,
The other wishes for his naked sword.
about the latter end of the month. one of them looks like one of the Council.

Per Coacervationem propositionum Dialecticae.
Per cau^as and Effectus
Astrology gives some the foreknowledge of the times of future events.

Therefore knowledge of the times of future events, makes some to be admirers of
the Wisdom of God.

When some are admirers of the Wisdom of God, they are induced to fear God,

When some are brought into the fear of God, they enter into lowlines of mind,

When they are brought into lowliness of mind their actions are lawful and
pleasing to God.

Therefore Astrology is lawful and pleasing to God, and many have been
benefitted by it.

per tertam syllogismi figuram.
da m^ rap min ti med

All Starry motions are certain

All Starry motions are depended on by Wise Astrologers to make predictions.

Therefore some predictious made by wise Astrologers are certain (...) if not
varied by a miracle, but you must have Respect to the word wise or well learned.

Per Enthynema in these following Verses.
Semper sidereos motusait esse Johannes
Silvester certos, igitur per eosque futuri,
Eventus certe nunc praedicantur ab illo.
FINIS

