AN ACCOUNT OF THE ARRAIGNMENT, TRIAL, and CONDEMNATION OF Jonathan Frost THE
CLIPPER: Upon June the 17th instant, at the MARSHELSEY in Southwark.



London: Printed in the Year 1675.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE ARRAIGNMENT TRIAL, and CONDEMNATION, Of Jonathan Frost the
CLIPPER.
UPon Thursday 17 of July instant, at the Marshalsey in Southwark, by a special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, was held a Court for the Trial of one Mr.
Frost, a person Committed for Clipping of Money; for which Crime he was now
Arraigned and Indicted, together with one William Griffin, (Servant to the said
Frost) before several of the Honorable Judges of the Courts at Westminster. and the
Recorder of London named in the said Commission, to sit as Judge^ f^r the Trial
of the said Prisoners.

This Mr Frost, it seems, at the time of his being taken, which was in July
last, lived at Rotherith in Surrey a Housekeeper there; and about the same
time kept one Wheat as his servant: which Wheat (as is reported) being formerly
a Prisoner in the King's Bench, and not being able to discharge himself from
thence, was by the said Frost kindly and Charitably Redeemed from his
Engagement, set at Liberty, and afterward taken into his Service, where he
continued till such time as for his lend practices the said Frost dismissed him.
After which, the said Wheat being taken somewhere in Southwark, upon suspicion
of the same Crime of Clipping of Money, was for the same Arraigned at the last
Assizes held for the County of Surrey: But upon his then proffering to Impeach
the said Mr. Frost, his Trial was then respited for some time, and he kept to
prosecute against him. And the same Wheat was the chief Witness that came in
against him upon his Trial.

Mr. Frost having lain near a Twelvemonth in the Marshalsey-prison, for want of
Air and Exercise began to grow very sick and infirm, being taken with great
Swellings in his Limbs, in so much as they could not get Irons to come upon
him: and continuing so ill, as was feared he could not live till the Summer
Assizes; It is said, that he presuming upon his own Innocence, did endeavor by
his Friends, to have this special Court appointed for his Trial, whereby he
might have opportunity to clear himself of the Crime he was accused of before
he died, although at last it fell out contrary to his pretenses and expectation.

At his Trial, which began about three or four of the clock in the afternoon of
the aforesaid 17th day of June instant, after the Commission read and Jury
called and Sworn, the said Frost being brough to the Bar, as it appeared, in a
very low and weak condition, was arraigned for Treasonably Clipping and
defacing of several pieces of English Coin upon the 4th day of August last,
etc. to which he pleaded Not Guilty.

The other person, William Griffin, who came in upon Bail, was likewise
Indicted for the like offense, who also pleaded Not Guilty; and both put
themselves upon their Country. The principal Evidence that came in against
Frost was the aforesaid Wheat, who swore directly against him, that upon the
day laid in the Indictment, he did see the aforesaid Jonathan Frost in the
Fact, Clipping of Money; which although he was but a single Witness to prove
the Fact, yet several other Witnesses came in to prove other circumstances
relating to it, as the frequent uttering of several parcels of clipped Money by
the said Frost at several times to them; as also his offering to sell several
pieces of Silver which had been melted down, and which were alleged as
probable circumstances to make the said Frost guilty of the Clipping. And for
Will. Griffin, it was alleged against him, that while he was servant to
Frost, he had offered to sell some of the aforesaid melted pieces of Silver:
which the said Frost replied, was done by his order, and that the Silver so
melted down, were some pieces of Spanish Coin which he had by him, and no
otherwise.

After the Evidence against the Prisoners had been called and heard, the
witnesses on their part were produced, and several did testify their knowledge
of the said Frost: As for Frost himself, his Spirits being weak through
sickness, he spoke but little; but in effect did utterly deny the Fact charged
upon him, and did except to the Evidence of the aforesaid Wheat, as a person
of a very ill fame and life, and malicious; and did call some witnesses to
prove that the said Wheat during the time he was in Prison, should say, that
he must get him (meaning the said Frost) hanged, or else he should be hanged
himself, or something to that purpose. Many other circumstances on both sides
were given in evidence, which would be too tedious to enumerate. But in
conclusion, the whole matter being loft to the Jury, they went together, and
after about an hours debate upon the Evidence, they brought in their Verdict,
and thereby found the aforesaid William Griffin not guilty; who was thereupon
that night discharged: but found the said Frost guilty of the Treason whereof
he was indicted; who thereupon, after a grave exhortation made to him by the
Judge who past the Sentence, had Judgment past upon him To be carried back to
Prison, and thence to be drawn upon an Hurdle to the place of Execution, and
there to be hanged by the Neck till he were dead; which Sentence being given,
the Prisoner was carried back to Prison, and the Court broke up about 9 of the
clock.

Jonathan Frost was committed to Prison about half a year since or more, and
could not be tried the last Assizes past, but was forced to sue out a
Commission of Oyer and Terminer at his own charge, and was thereby accordingly
tried on Thursday the 10 day of Ju^e 75. at which time, and before the Judges,
there was a Bill found against Frost and his man William Griffith; but the
Court was adjourned to Thursday following, the 17 day of June 75. at which
time, Frost, by the Evidence of one John Wheat now a Prisoner in custody on
the same account (and several others) about 16 witnesses or more, was
Arraigned, and Condemned to be drawn and hanged: but he has got leave of the
Court for three weeks time before Execution, with intent to get a Pardon if he
can.

William Griffith, who was Frost's man, was cleared and discharged out of
Prison the same day 17 of June 75. only kneeling on his knees to the Judges.

Wheat is yet in custody, and must stay there for another Trial.

FINIS.

