THE ENGLISH HORSMAN



The English HORSMAN And Complete Farrier: Directing all Gentlemen and others
How to Breed, Feed, Ride and Diet all Kind of HORSES, whether for War, Race, or
other Service.

WITH A Discovery of the Causes, Signs and Cures of all Diseases, both Internal
and External, Incident to Horses: Alphabetically digested.

WITH THE Humors of a SMITHFIELD Jockey.

By Robert Almond, a well known and skilful Farrier of the City of London,
Practicing therein above forty five years.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, and are to be Sold at the Sign of the Star
at the West End of St. Paul's. 1673.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Do here present you with a book which with modesty I may say is worthy of
your perusal; it contains almost whatever is useful and necessary, as to an
Horse, and all his diseases. I confess in my younger days I was not a little
curious, and have been at some expense for translations out of several
Languages as to the several practices of diverse Countries in the profession
wherein I was bred. I have made it my study and practice out of all to select
what I have here for the good of my Country delivered with great pains and
long experience. I must confess I owe much to my famous Country men Mr.
Blondevil, Mr. Markham, and Mr. Le Gray, for that great light and knowledge I
have received from them.

I have very much lamented the several books I have read in Horsemanship, which
only discourse of Cures without giving any account either of the cause or sign
of the disease, which I am sure has been the occasion of the loss of many a
good Horse. What I have done is as plain as I could; read and judge.

Your affectionate Countryman, Robert Almond.

The Table.
A.
AGe of an Horse to know 48, 49, 50 Anticor, its cure 70 Anbury or Wart 139
B.
Breeding Horses, best method 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Bones of a Horse 47 Blood
letting 59. 137, 138 Bots, Cause and Cure 72 Blood staling, its cure 73 Blowing
with difficulty, its cure 74 Belly ach, cause and cure 75 Broken Wind, a
certain Cure 76 Broken Lungs or Rotten, how to know and cure 77 Bloody Flux,
cause and cure 106 Brittle Hoof, cause and cure 144 Bone Spavin 145 Back Swankt
or Swollen 147. 150 Burning by a Mare, its cure 147 Button Farcy 148 Bunches of
all sorts, how to cure 149 Blood Spavin, its cure 150 Barbs, cause and cure
151. 265 Botches in the Groin, cause and cure 153 Blood to stanch 277
C.
Colts, when to geld 9 Colts, when to break 10 Complexion of an Horse, how to
judge. 20, 21 Choice directions in bleeding or Physicking Horses 55 Cold, the
best cure 78 Consumption, cause and cure 78, 79 Colt Evil, cause and cure 79
Clysters proper for Horses, and how to apply them 81, 82, 83, 84 Canker in the
mouth, cause and cure in the head 154 155 Curb, cause and cure 157 Crest
fallen, cause and cure 158. 273 Casting the Hoof, a remedy 158, 159 Camery, its
cause and cure 160 Cronet, a certain cure 161 Canker in the Withers, cause and
cure 161 Casting the hoof, how to do it 162
D.
Directions for choosing good Horses 15, 16, 17. 346, 347 Diseases in Horses,
and their causes 50, 51, 85 Dropsy, cause and cure 84 Drenches for all
diseases 85, 86 Diseases of the Gall, cause and cure 87, 88 Defense against
Flies 163 Dangerous sickness, its cause and cure 164, 165 Dislocation of joints
167
E
Exerements of an Horse to judge 56 Ears imposthumated cause and cure 89
Enterfering, cause and cure 168, 169 Eyes hurt by blow, cure certain 171 Eye
Film, Pin or Web 171. 174 Eye Canker 172 Eyes watered 175 Eye bitten 175 Eyes
imposthumated 175 Eyes inflamed 217
F.
Feeding of Horses for Race, choice observations 26, 27 Fevers of all sorts,
their cures 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66. 93 Frenzy, cause and cure 91. 334
Falling Evil 91 Foundring in the belly 92 Flux in Horses, cause and cure 95
Farcy, cause and cure 148 Falling of the Fundament, cause and cure 177 Fetlock
hurt, cause and cure 178, 179 Frettizing, a certain cure 180 Frothy hoof, a
cure 180 False quarter in a hoof, its cure 182 Fig, a disease on the heel, its
cure 185 Fistula, cause and cure 187, 188, 189, 190 Frets, Cause and cure 190,
191
G.
Glanders, cause and cure 95, 96, 97 General Rules for Sores and outward
Maladies to be observed by the Horse Surgeon 133, 134 Gaunt belly, how to
remedy 152 Gravelling, cause and cure 191, 192, 193 Gourged or gourded legs 193
Gelding of Horses and Colts, what to be observed, and time when 195 Garget,
cause and cure 196 Gauled back, its cure 198 Gigs, cause and cure 200 Glanders,
a Pill 262 Grease molten 305
H.
Head Ach, cause and cure 98. 205 Hungry evil, cause and cure 98 Horse Hide
bound, cause and cure 99 Horse lean, how to fatten 100, 101. 213. 345. 357
Horse shot, to cure 144 Hurl bone disjointed 203 Hide bound, cause and cure
204 Heels troubled with the Mellet 206 Hips hurt or strained 211 Hough bonny,
cause and cure 212 Halting by stroke or strain, its cure 213 Hair to make slick
and smooth 339 Hair, how to take off of any part 340 Horse, how to make to
follow his master, or find him out amongst a multitude 342 Horse to make nimble
at the spur 343 Hair to make grow soon, thick and long 344 Horsemens
observations for ordering Horses 351
I.
Instructions to accomplish a rider 22, 23, etc. Jaundies, eause and cure 101
Inflammations, how to ripen and cure 103. 217 Inflammations about the heels, to
cure 142 Ives, cause and cure 216 Itch in the tail, cause and cure 220
Interfering its cure 220 Joints grieved with ach, weakness or swelling by cold
221 Jade tired, or dull, how to make to go forward 341. 356 Though resty and
heavy, to prance and caper 355
K.
Kidney infirmities, cause and cure 104 Kernels like Grapes, cause and cure 140
Knots or knobs to remove ^22 Kernels in the throat to dissolve ^23 Knees
broken, to cure ^24 Kibed heels, cause and cure 239
L.
Loathing meat, cause and cure 105 Lask, cause and cure 106 Lips heat 210 Legs
swelled, to cure 224 Leprosy, cause and cure 227. 272 Lice to clean from
Horses 229 Lampas, cause and cure 230 Lave-Ear'd Horses how to remedy 232
M.
Method of breeding Horses 4 Molten grease and fatning balls 39 Murrain or
Plague 68 Molten grease, cause and cure 108. 238 Mourning of the chine, cause
and cure 108, 109 Maunge 201. 235 Mouth heat 210 Moon eyed Horses, its remedy
173. 223 Melander, cause and cure 234 Mouth sore 237 Mellet, cause and cure 237
Mortfounder'd, its cure 238 Mallender, cause and cure 240 Mourning of the
chine, its cause and cure 241 Molt long or Molt worm, its cause and cure 242
Mollifiers against hardness 243 Main shedding, its remedy 297 Mark in the mouth
to counterfeit 355
N.
Night Mare, cause and cure 110 Navel gall, cause and Cure 244, 245 Nose
running 247 Neighing, how to hinder 340
O.
Over gorged, cause and cure 111, 112, 113 Over reach and over strain, its
cause and cure 247 Oil of Oats its sovereign virtue, and how to make it, a
great secret 250 Old sores a speedy cure 251 Old Horse how to make him seem
young 339
P.
Praise of a Horse 1 Properties of a good Horse 11, 12, 13, 14 Pursiveness, its
cure 74. 116 Pissing blood, cause and cure 115 Pricking by shooing, a remedy
140. 157, 158, 159 Pole evil in the Neck cause and cure 251, 252, 253 Pole evil
in the Head 254, 255 Pastern joints strained 256 Prick on the Crownet, its cure
256 Purgation, its benefit 264 Purgation for Surfeits 264 Pains near the
Fetlock, its cure 266, 267 Plasters 274
Q.
Quitter bone, cause and cure 269, 270, 271 Quick scab, cause and cure 272
R.
Rules for ordering breeding Mares 348 Rules for ordering Colts 8, 9. 349 Race
Horses, how to order 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 Rot in
Horses, cause and cure 118 Red water and matter to take away 273 Ring bone,
cause and cure 274, 275 Rats tail to cure 276 Rowels, how to order in any part
276 Ring worm 317
S.
Scouring for a Horse 36, 37 Shape of a Horse good to know 42, 43 Sinews of a
Horse 46 Sneezing to cause 67 Shedding Seed, cause and cure 120 Staggers, cause
and cure 121 Sleeping evil, cause and cure 122 Surfeits of all sorts, cause and
cure 123, 124, 125 Staling, how to cause 126 Squinzy, cause and cure 126 Star
in the forehead how to make 127 Strain in the Kidneys, its cure 147 String
halt, cause and cure 156. 307 Scab on the Hoof to cure 160 Stub or Thorn, how
to draw 166 Scab or Leprosy 201 Shoulder hurt or Wrench, cure 208. 279. 281
Strain or swelling 214 Shingles 234 Sore mouth 237 Sores to skin presently 268
Saddle hurt or swelling, its cure 276. 302 Swift cut 277 Stanching blood 277
Salves for all sores 278 Shoulder dislocated, its cure 280 Shoulder splat,
cause and cure 282, 283 Shoulder pincht 284 Sinew sprain'd, strained or grieved
285, 286 Scratches 287, 288 Surbating of an Horse 289, 290, 291 Sinew crampt,
cause and cure 291 Strangle 292 Strain in the Pastern 293 Strain in the Coffin
joint 295 Stifling, cause and cure 295 Stumbling 298 Stars artificial to make
300 Smath'd back, cause and cure 303 Spur galling 303 Selender, cause and cure
305 Surfeit or Grease molten 305 Stripe on the Eye 307 Swelling after bleeding
308 Screw or splint 309 Shackle gall 310, 311
T.
Tiring on the road, a remedy 128, 129 Teeth pained, cause and cure 265 Tongue
hurt, how cured 313 Tetter or Ring worm, a cure 314 Tail how to cut
V.
Veins of an Horse to know 44, 45 Universal medicine for all diseases 69 Vives
in the Ears, cause and cure 70 Vomiting, cause and cure 130 Ulcers of all
sorts, a speedy remedy 215 Universal Plaster for most sores 262 Venom drank,
its cure 318
W.
Worms how to cure 73 Wind Cholick, its cure 131 Wind broken, its cure 131 Wind
to preserve 131 Warts to cure 149 Wens to cure 149 Weeping Hoof a cure 180
Withers grief, its cure 201, 202 Wild Fire, its cure 321 Warts in the Eye 322
Wens to remove 322, 323, 336 Worms of all sorts, a cure 324, 325, 326, 327,
328, 329 Wind gall, a cure 330, 331, 332 Weakness in the back 333 Water Farcy
334 Wolf teeth, a cure 319
Y.
Yellows vide Glanders Yard mattering, to cure 337
A Brief Encomium OF AN HORSE By way of Introduction.
OF all four-footed Beasts I cannot find any so useful to man, and so
serviceable as is that generous Creature we call an Horse. Neither does the
pleasure man receives by him, come any ways short of the profit he reaps
thereby. In peace he serves to till the ground; and as he takes great pains in
causing the earth to bring forth its fruits in its proper season; so when
produced, he labors no less to lodge them where his master shall appoint. If
the gallantry of his Masters spirits commands him to the War, how cheerfully he
obeys, and foams with impatience, till he shares in his riders self-propounded
honor!

How troublesome would Land-travail be, were it not for this hardy and
laborious creature, who in the darkest night through thick and thin performs
his journey, not valuing the extremity of weather? And this he seems to do
out of pure gratitude to his feeder, endeavoring this way to recompense his
cost; and why not? since it is acknowledged by all intelligent persons, that an
Horse is endued with great understanding, and, from my own experience, often
knows when he has a fool on his back. It is reported in History, that
Bucephalus, that famed War-Horse, would not suffer any to mount him but
Alexander the Great, who then expressed all imaginable pride and satisfaction in
bearing so victorious a Conqueror. And that we may see farther, how far this
Creature is naturally inclined to love man; I have read of one Nicomedes a
King, whose Horse so entirely loved him, as that upon his Masters death the
beast refused his best beloved food, and so continued till he dyed.

And that we may not altogether borrow examples of this kind from foreign
parts, I shall produce you this one and no more, observed in the Battle fought
on Marston-Moor. A Gentleman of eminent note, being at that time there mounted
on an excellent Gelding, (whom he had bred up from a Colt) charged the enemy
with much Gallantry; yet notwithstanding it so happened that he was slain: he
that slew him, observing his horse to be much better than his own, alighted and
so exchanged; the horse immediately finding a rider on his back which he was
unaccustomed to bear, and now retaining as it were a resentment for the death
of his Master, began to fling and bound, and never gave off yarking till he
threw his rider, and then fell to him with his heels, which he exercised so
nimbly, that he gave his masters overcomer not the least opportunity to escape,
and having killed him, left him, and ran into the body of his own party.

I know not whether this Horse might not deserve as great esteem, as such
horses, who for their love and tractableness have had Statues, nay Cities
erected to their memory. However I must not applaud the Egyptians, who have
raised mangnificent Pyramids to those, who have been eminently serviceable in
their Wars. But as I must condemn, so I cannot but laugh at the preposterous
folly of that Roman Emperor, who doted so much on a horse, that he made him a
Senator.

But in truth there is so much to be said in the praise of this noble useful
creature, that should I write the one tenth thereof, there would be no room for
my ensuing matter. But by the way this Encomium does not belong to all Horses,
but such as are good. To the intent therefore you may reap the pleasure and
profit from them, as is before expressed, I shall advise you to be very curious
in your choice and purchase. But it is not to be expected that you will ever be
provided with such good horses as what are of your own breeding; wherefore that
shall be the subject of the following Chapter.

CHAP. I.
The best Method of breeding Horses.
To avoid all prolixity and impertinency, take this order as the most
expedient: Let your studd of Mares be very choice, abounding with mettle and
spirit, so must your Stallions be qualified also, and let neither be defective
in shape, color and good marks. If you find any natural defect in the
Stallion, endeavor to mend them in the Mare that shall be joined to him, and
so let what is amiss in the Mare be repaired in the Horse. As near as you can
couple them young, and handsome of size, neither too large nor too small, well
limbed, and well joynted, and see that your Mare have a good forehead, and a
large Womb: and have a special care that neither of them be diseased, for that
natural distemper will undoubtedly be hereditary in the Colt. The most proper
age for your Mare to be covered is between three and four: from that time to
fourteen a Mare will bring forth; and an Horse will be fit to cover from three
to fifteen years old, and longer.

The most convenient time for covering Mares is delivered diversely. Mr Markham
is of the opinion that the beginning of March or May is the fittest time: for
by the coming about that time they will be prepared for the coming of Winter,
whereas those which fall after are necessitated to encounter two great enemies;
that is, hunger and cold, with which the early Foal has been before familiar.

Others are of opinion that Lammas Foals prove ever the best Horses (if they
are not scanted of food) for having tried the worst of Winter before Summer
comes.

Others affirm that the most convenient time to have a Mare covered, is from
the end of May to the beginning of August; for by that means the Mare shall
foal at such a time when the earth has clothed her self in green, I mean when
there is plenty of Grass; for a Mare goes eleven Months, and sometimes ten days
over; and so by consequence, if the Mare be covered at the latter end of July,
she will foal at the beginning of June, and so both will be well provided for
against the approach of a Gut-foundring Winter.

But for my part I am clearly of the opinion of that excellent Gentleman
Monsieur De Gray; who declares that the best time for foaling is in the dead of
Winter, as either in December or January: for by long experience he has found
out contrary to other men's judgments, that from the time of the covering, to
the foaling of the Mare, is just twelve months and ten days, unless it be a
young Mare with her first Colt: so that if the Mare be covered about St. Lucies
day, which is the thirteenth of December, then will she foal about St. Thomas
day.

The next thing that is to be thought on, is how to couple Male and Female when
they are ready to engender. In the first place, let them be both well fed, so
that they may have the greater strength to perform the work of Generation; nor
will it be amiss to take blood from both the sides of the neck of your Mare,
well nigh a pottle: let this be done seven days before she is covered; and
being thus phlebotomiz'd, the next day fasting, and the next to that give her
Mugwort chopped very small, and put into a quart of milk, with an Ounce and a
half of London Treacle, and a piece of Butter: let these be dissolved over a
fire, and given the Mare warm in the morning. This drink does not only comfort
and strengthen the Matrix, but it also increases seed wonderfully, and inables
her to retain what she has received from the Stallion. Let the time of
covering be as near as you can, either three days after the change, or three
days before the full of the Moon, allotting them some convenient place where
they may be two nights and a day.

The Symptoms of a Mares not conceiving after covering are these; she will be
continually neighing at the sight or hearing of any Horse; she will piss very
often, her eyes will be constantly rolling and gazing at every thing, pricking
up her ears. The Symptoms of her conception are first a good stomach to her
Provender, and that in five or six days her belly seems to be more lank, her
skin more slick and smooth, and altering its complexion into a color seeming
more bright; and lastly she will appear leaner than before.

Being with soal let her run in the dryest grounds, yet not so barren as that
her belly should be pincht for want of convenient sustinence. Being within two
months of her time let her be carefully taken up, for fear of hurting her foal,
and kept within doors to the time of her delivery: that time being at hand, let
her be kept in a warm room with good store of straw under, that in the fall the
Colt should receive no prejudice by bruising. Where it is to be noted that a
Mare foals standing, and let her be carefully watched, lest the Colt should
come wrong. After the Mare has foaled and licked her Colt dry, before the Colt
come to suck, let some body milk the Mare, which will make her give down her
milk the better, and keep the milk from clodding in the Udder. If you fear the
Mare will become dry; then take some of her own Milk with some Spike or
Lavender, and boil them together, then take and bathe her Udder therewith daily
for the space of seven days, and this will infallibly dissolve the curd and
hard knobs therein. As soon as the Mare has foaled give her a warm Mash,
adding thereunto the powder of Brimstone: after this she may safely labor,
provided it be moderately, and it will conduce to the health and strength of
them both.

Now for as much as some Mares for want of right ordering, become barren, I
shall here instruct how all or most a Studd shall be made to prove fruitful. In
the first place, if there be a suspicion that some of the Mares in the Studd
after covering have not conceived, then take a fresh Stallion and a Mare or two
that are eagerly desirous to be covered, and turn them together into your
studd; he having covered these, the rest seeing this that did not conceive,
will infallibly come to this Stallion, and so by this means most of the Mares
will be restrained from being unfruitful.

If a Mare have a difficult labor, and there is danger in her foaling, my
advice is that her nostrils be held close, so that she cannot draw her breath;
but if that prevail not, then take of Madder, the quantity of a Pullets Egg,
and dissolve it in a pint of stale Ale, and being warm, pour it down the Mares
throat, and this will much help her delivery. If her afterbirth or Secundine
come not away, then take three handfuls of Fennel and as much Malmsy, and boil
them together in running water; then take half a pint hereof Lukewarm, and
pour it into the Mares nostrils, holding them close a little while, and this
will help her; but by any means let her not eat her cleansing (which many are
desirous of) for it is unwholsom, and an hindrance to her Milk.

Let not the Colt run with the Dam, less than a year; if it may stand with your
convenience let it be longer, for that will strengthen the Colt. When the Colt
is to be weaned, you must so separate him from the Dam, that he may be out of
her hearing, and not suffered to stir out of doors in sixteen days. It will be
very requisite to have pasture adjoining to the place wherein they are, but
such it must be that it be neither rank nor barren, for a short sweet grass
will nourish them most, and add very much to the increase of their growth: be
sure that at this time they want nothing, for what they lose in the first year,
they will scarcely gain in four.

At their weaning neglect not to give them Butter and Savin for diverse
mornings, for that will kill that worm which otherwise will destroy them. The
first Winter let not Hay be wanting, nor oats in the sheafe, or the offal of
any other grain.

From two years old upward beware that in the Winter your Colt lie not wet, nor
in the Summer feed on rank grass; for the first very much disheartens him, and
lays him open to all manner of watery cold distempers; and the other renders him
an ill shapen sloathful Beast, being always inclined (by reason of his over
great quantity of flesh and fat) to catch the Glanders, and Cough upon every
slight and inconsiderable cold. Wherefore your best Summer feeding for your
young horses is where they are not straightened for want of ground, and that
they must be forced to take pains for a belly full; and let them not cover any
Mare till above five years old, for sooner will debilitate their strength, and
impair their growth, with farther prejudice.

And to this end, as you separate Foals from the Dams, so you must separate the
Male Colts from the Females; for frequent experience may inform you that by
plentiful and full feeding the Horse-Colts have covered the Mare-Colts at a
year old, to the destruction of them both.

As for gelding of Colts you may indifferently take any time from a foal of
four months to fourteen years; but the best time for making of fine Geldings,
is when you perceive the stones to fall, or when eleven days old; taking this
course, you go a safe way to work, which will also produce most incomparable
Chests. When you go about this work, let it be in the wane of the Moon, and the
Spring is the fittest season for effecting your purpose.

If you would have your Stone-Horse, Gelding, or Mare familiar and tractable,
begin with them from the first weaning to make him acquainted with you by
stroking, rubbing and haltering him, leading him to water, frequently taking up
his feet, and sometimes knocking his hoofs, and the like.

As to breaking of Colts to the saddle, several men, several minds; some are
for breaking them at three years old, others at four; but it is the opinion of
the most judicious, that that Horse which is broken at five, will hold out
longger than any other, and shall not be so inclinable to diseases, nor will he
easily be acquainted with the ill quality of Tiring.

By your thus prudent giving your Horse his full time before you handle him,
his joints and sinews grow strong, and are well knit together, his hoofs will
grow tough, his eyesight quick and good, his chine so strong that you cannot
hurt it in reasonable riding, and will continue a good serviceable Horse will
twenty six years of age.

The evil effects of taking him up sooner will plainly appear in a little time
by his blindness, weakness of back, brittleness of hoof, besides his Wind Galls
and Splints; and in short, before he arrives to half his age, he will appear an
old horse, and rejected by all, as having seen his best days.

And that you may not be mistaken in the good properties and shape of those
Colts you intend for your own service, take these observations: a Colt when but
five weeks old will carry the same shape then, whether good or bad (if not
abused in the mean time) as he will have at five years old. If a Foal have a
large shin bone that is long from the knee to the pastern, it foreshoweth a
tall Horse; the double of that space of a foal newly foaled between the knee
and the withers, will be just his height when he is arrived to full growth.
Take notice which of your Colts have most active spirits, wanton, ever leaping,
running, and playing, and striving to outrun the rest of his fellows; such
always prove high mettled Horses: but if on the contrary you find them dull,
unactive, seldom stirring, but melancholy, you may assure your self they will
prove errant jades.

Lastly, to conclude my discourse of breeding horses, let me advise the owner
of a good Studd not to make too early a coiling or election; for some horses
show their best shape at two years old, and lose at four; others not till six
or seven, and ever after retain it; but sooner or later, let him preserve the
best for himself; those of incurable deformities, as Sorrances, Spavens,
Ringbones or imperfect eyes, send them to the Market.

CHAP. II.
Of the properties belonging to good Horses, as to Mark, Color and Shape.
I Must confess, an horse may be good and serviceable, who has neither good
color, true marks, or perfect shape; however I would not have those three good
properties contemned or slighted; for that Horse cannot be bad in whom those
properties remain: and if an Horse well mettled, bold, and hardy, yet of a
gentle condition, of a round and comely trot or pace, obedient mouthed, sure of
foot, tough, strong, and easy, is to be valued and esteemed; then for certain
if to these good qualifications there be added good color, true marks, and
perfect shape, I know not what will make him more considerably valuable; so
that his owner shall be daily courted to part with him at his own terms. Now to
the intent you may understand what these good properties be, which belong to a
good Horse, observe what an ingenious Forreigner says of them. There are,
says he, three of an Ox, three of a Fox, three of a Heart, and three of a
Woman: Those of an Ox^ are a fair full eye, a large neck, and to be strong and
short joynted: those of a Fox are to have a comely short trot, small and long
ears, and a bushy tail: those of an Heart are to have lean and dry legs, to be
well risen before, and a lean head: those of a Woman are to be large and fair
breasted, to have a beautiful and full hair, and gentle to her Rider and Keeper.

And to the intent I may trace the same Author farther, be pleased to take
notice of these his following observations in his own words: These Horses that
have a black mane and a black tail are seldom bad. If the Sorrel have a black
list along his back, and if his Mane, Tail, Knees, and Fetlocks be black also,
he is generally good: the Brownbay, Dun, Dapple-grey, and Iron-grey are usually
very good. But (says he) all Horses must have good legs, good feet, and their
Fetlocks not incumbered with too much hair; they must have quick eyes, obedient
mouths, and high mettled; their legs by no means fat or fleshy, but a large
belly well risen before, straight backed, and not charged with over great
shoulders: he must have a thin bended neck hooking in to his breast, a good
Crouper, large thighs, round well spread Buttocks, and a train well set on, a
lean, dry, and thin head, a full sparkling eye, a a wide Nostril, a wide, thin,
and lean Jaw, a loose Trople, a well trussed body, and legs not over long; the
forelegs above the knees must be strong, flat, and large, although the lower
part the same legs must be small. Thus much of the general shape of Horses; Let
us next consider their Colors.

Though the Black-Roan, or Black, full of silver hairs, Cole-Black,
Chesnut-Black with a Star in the forehead, Dark-Bay, Fly-bitten, or
White-Lyard, be looked on as well colored Horses; yet the Brown-Bay is to be
preferred before them all; and therefore the French, with other Nations, have
the Brown-Bay in so great esteem, that they call him Trusty Bayard. Now as to
Colors in general, the French have these three in greatest estimation among
them, the Chestnut and Cole-Black, but principally the Brown-Bay.

So much of Colors; now for the Marks: All men have a good liking to the White
Star, and white foot, if the blaze be not over large, or the foot too white
about the pastern, for then it is called buskend; the shine or raze down the
face, if it be no broader than two fingers, ending exactly between the
Nostrils, is commendable; and if it be not broader on the one side of the face
than it is on the other, it is prized among the compleatest Horsemen for the
best ornamental Mark an Horse can be endued withal. Different are the opinions
of men concerning their feet, some praising the white on the far foot behind,
others on the near foot before, others would have the white a Cross, that is,
the far foot behind and the near foot before.

All skilled in horseflesh do affirm, that an Horse with much white on his
face, raw nosed, sheath, yard, tuel, and hoofs white, skin white, and legs
hosed, and wall-eyed, is for the most part weak, faint, and of a cowardly
disposition, tender, and washy of flesh, subject to Rebellion, restiseness, to
starting, stumbling, evil sighted, subject to tire, and let his keeper have a
special care of his biting and kicking.

Let us now consider the particular shape of an Horse: In the first place it is
required in a well timber'd Horse, that his hoof be black, smooth, large, dry,
round, and hollow, the pasterns straight and upright, the forehead lean and
large, the eyes great, full, and black, the brows well filled, the Jaws wide,
slender, and lean, the Nostrils wide and open, the mouth great, the head long
and lean, the Mane thin and large, the Withers sharp and pointed, the back
short, even, and plain, the sides and ribs deep, large and bearing out like the
bottom of a Tray, and close shut at the huckle bone, the belly long and great,
but hid under the ribs, the flanks full, yet gaunt, the rump round and plump,
with a large space between the buttocks, the thighs long large, the hams dry
and straight, the Truncheon small, long, well set on, and well couched, the
train long, not too thick, the Yard and Stones small. To describe the perfect
shape of an Horse in fewer words is thus; a broad forehead, a great eye, a lean
head, wide Jaws, yet thin, slender and lean, a long high reared Neck, high
reared Withers, a broad deep Chest and body, upright pasterns, and narrow hoof.

To conclude, if an Horse be well colored, rightly shaped, and truly marked,
coming of a good breed, it is very much if his actions answer not the
expectations of the most curious Horseman, so be it that the Horse has not
been spoiled either by backing or riding.

CHAP. III.
Choice directions for the electing of good Horses according to their several
employments.
IF you fancy beauty, choose the Dapple-Grey; if for service, the Brown-bay; for
gallantry and courage, the Black with silver hairs. The unchangeable Iron-Grey,
the Cole-black and Sorrel are accounted to abound with choler; the Bright Bay,
the Flea-bitten, and the Black spotted with white with blood; the blank-white,
the Yellow-Dun, the Kite-glew'd, and the Pide-bald with Phlegm; and the
Chestnut, the Mouse-Dun, the Red-Bay, and the blew-grey with melancholy* But no
more of this at this present, because in the next Chapter I shall treat
particularly of the several complexions of Horses.

For a Soldier or a Travailer the Trot is most convenient; and herein observe
the neatness of his lifting his limbs from the ground, for if he treads short,
open, and even, then is his pace very commendable.

For great persons and those that love their ease, the Amble is best: if for
Hunting or for an Hackney, the racking pace is most necessary.

As for a good Gallop observe this, that Horse which without lifting his feet
high takes them up nimbly from the ground, that stretching out his forelegs
with the hinder follows them nimbly, without cutting under the knee, and does
not cross or clap one foot upon another, and ever leads with his far fore
foot, and not with the near, is the best sort of Galloper, both for speed and
comeliness.

Concerning the stature of an Horse, it must be left to the judgment of the
Buyer, to fit himself according as his occasions will require: the largest and
strongest for Car-Horses and great Draughts, the middle size for recreation,
and for general use, the smaller sort for Women or for Summer journeys.

I have already spoken of some beauties and deformities which belong to Horses
in general, but particularly take account of these few more, that you may know
how to make a good bargain and not to be cheated in Horseflesh.

In the first place, when any Horse is offered you to sell; if you can, first
inquire of what breed he came, and what his pace is, and having observed his
color, take a strict view of his countenance; if he looks cheerfully and
lively, you may conjecture he does not want mettle: in the like nature it is a
sign of vivacity and courage as well as a mark of beauty, to have his ears
pricked, small, thin, sharp, and always in motion; but when they hang flagging
and motionless, it is the infallible symptom of heaviness and bad nature.

A swelling forehead, a white star, a white rach neither too big nor too
little, with a white snip on the nose, are tokens of comeliness and goodness;
but if the rach stand awry, the forehead flat, and the nose be raw instead of a
white snip, no greater marks of deformity. In like nature little eyes (Pig eyed
as they call it) are uncomely signs, and discover weakness; whereas on the
contrary, black, bright, round, large eyes, starting as it were out of his head
are the signs of a good natured mettlesome Horse: red and fiery eyes are little
better than Moon-eyes, and not far from blindness. Wall-eyes are ever bad, weak
sighted, and do declare a base nature; if with white speeks, they are next door
to the pearl, pin or web; if watery and bloody, the Horse has sustained
bruises; and if they matter, they are signs of old over-riding; and lastly, if
the eyes be black, yet fill not the pit so, but that in every motion the white
glearingly appears, you may conclude that Horse weak and of an untractable
disposition.

If the Thropple or Windpipe be large, and the Jaws very open, they are signs
of soundness of head, and that he has great wind, with courage; if the
Thropple be small, and kernels thereabout, you may then judge the contrary, and
that the Horse is inclined to the Glanders, or is seized with a very soul cold.
Now as to the teeth, be careful of buying an Horse that wants any, for it is
the opinion of the expert, he were as good want all, as lose one.

See that his breast be broad, and out swelling, which shows he has great
strength, and will hold out a long time; the little breast shows weakness, and
is the sign of uncomeliness; the narrow breasted Horse is most commonly a
stumbler, and the inwardly hidden breast will not endure hard labor.

Let his fore thighs be Rush-brown, well sinewed and horny; but have a care
they be not swelled, otherwise they are certain signs of strength, the contrary
are signs of weakness.

His legs must be clean, and the bought of the knee without a seam or hair
broken; if you find scabs under his knee on the inside, it is the swiftcut, and
very unfit to Gallop; and if his legs be round, fat, and fleshy, the Horse is
altogether unserviceable and unfit to take pains.

So that one pastern be clean and well knit, and the other short, strong, and
upright standing; for if the first be swelled, you have cause to suspect sinew
strains, and gurding; if the other be long and bending, that Horse is most
subject to tire.

Good Hooves ought to be black, not quite round, but smooth, yet tough: a white
hoof is naught, being tender, not carrying a shoe well; an hoof that is rough
and gross seemed, denotes old age, or that the Horse has been overheated; a
brittle hoof will not carry a shoe; a very round hoof is bad for deep, dirty
ways; a flat hoof shows foundering. The Crownet of the hoof is sound, if the
hair be smooth and close, and the flesh even; but if the flesh rise, the skin
mangy, and the hair staring, you may then expect a Ring bone, a Crown scab, or
something every whit as bad.

Look now to the Chine of his back, and see that it be broad, even, and
straight, his ribs large, and bending outward, his buttock round and plump, his
stones close trussed up to his body, his Gascoyns well let down to the middle
joint very full and thick, his hinder legs lean and sinewy; if they be swelled
the grease is molten into them, if scabbed above the pasterns, he has the
scratches, if chaps under his pasterns, he has the pains, and these are both
noisome and dangerous.

To conclude, his tail must stand broad, high, flat, and somewhat tauched
inward, but a good buttock will produce a good tail, and a bad one can never
have a tail to sit well thereon.

CHAP. IV.
Of the several Complexions of Horses.
Take this as a certain rule, an Horse Complexion is ever judged by the Color.
Now as in men, so in Horses; what element is predominant and prevalent in him,
from thence is drawn the complexion; so that if he participate more of the
water than of fire, then he is to be looked on as a phlegmatic Horse. If on
the other side, he partake of Fire more than any other Element, he is to be
adjudged ^holerick; the color that denotes a Choleric Horse is either a
Bright-Sorrel, a Coal-Black, or an Iron-Gray unchangeable: These are light,
hot, and fiery, but at the best but weak and feeble: the diseases they are most
incident to, are Inflammations of the Liver, Pestilential Fevers, and the
Yellows: to prevent which distempers, Choler in them ought to be purged, but
gently, because at their best strength they are weak of constitution; so that
without having this consideration, by the imprudent administration of too
strong a potion, instead of curing, an Horse may be confounded.

An Horse of a ^anguine complexion is known by having Air abounding in him, and
the Color that attends this complexion is either a Bright-Bay, or a Dark-Bay,
having no white flank, White-Flea-bitten, Black with a white star or white
foot. The nature of these Horses is to be pleasant, of great strength, nimble
and free: the diseases concomitant are Consumption of the Liver, Glanders,
Leprosy, with other infectious Distempers. As their natures are strong, so
they will endure the application of strong medicaments, especially such as cool
the blood, which are most suitable to his nature and disposition.

As I said before, if ^ater be more redundant in any Horse than any other
Element, then is he said to be ^hlegmatick, and the color thereunto belonging
is either Pide-Ball, Milk-White, Kite-glew'd, or Yellow-Dun; these beasts are
much inclined to sloth, and are very washy; the diseases which accompany this
Complexion are Rheumes, Staggers, Colds, and Headache, etc. By reason of the
great quantity of Phlegm which does infest their bodies, strong medicines will
not hurt them, having so much matter to work upon.

The fourth complexion is called Melancholy, and that has more of Earth in it
than Fire, Air, or Water; his proper color is a Mouse-Dun, Ash-Gray, Dark-Bay
with Mayly mouth, Red or White Flank, a Reddish-Bay, Russet and Chestnut. They
are naturally dull and cowardly; they are afflicted with the Dropsy, Frenzy,
and Spleen, and such like: all dry or cicatrizing Medicaments are injurious to
their natures, but cold and moist are beneficial.

There is a fifth Complexion held by Farriers, being as they say, an equal
composition or commixture of the four Elements; and this constitution they
highly applaud, in that one Element is not more predominant than another, being
so equally tempered that there is no overflowing in either: and this
Temperament participates of all colors, as Brown, Bay, Dabled, or not Dabled,
the Black full of silver Hair, Dable-Gray, or a fair Roan, Red or Black; these
they affirm are most healthful, gentle, strong, and temperate, and inclinable
to no disease: all this any man would believe, if there were any such
constitution to be found, for I think it impossible that the four Elements
should be so evenly and equally tempered in any body, but that one must be more
powerful than the rest; and so consequently the Horses Constitution must
incline to that Element which most abounds in him. But of the temperaments of
an Horse, I shall speak more particularly, when I shall come to give you an
account of the frame or composition of an Horse, dissecting every part as a
necessary introduction to the knowledge and cure of those diseases which infest
every particular member.

But before I shall enter upon that subject, which is the main scope of my
intention; Give me leave to lay you down some new Experiments, which may tend
much to the benefit of him that is desirous to be perfect in the Art of Riding
and Feeding Race Horses.

CHAP. V.
Instructions for the accomplishing a Rider.
TO encourage you in the noble Art of Riding, I have in brief discovered to you
what a pleasant and profitable Creature an Horse is to mankind; and that you
might at no time want a good one, I have endeavored to instruct you how you
should so breed them, that you should not fail in your expectations; or if you
did, then how to buy a good one both by marks, shape, and Color; and having
obtained your desire, let us now consider the office and duty of a Rider.

Some there are so opinionative, that being able to sit a rough unridden Colt a
few plunges by holding Monkey like, with both hands to the Mane and Pummel,
clinging with both legs to the side of the Horse, as if they would clip him in
two, which puts the poor beast into so great a disorder, that by his violent
flinging and flounsing, he agitates the poor Beast clear out of wind; having
made him thus breathless, nothing will serve his turn, but the appellation of a
complete Horseman.

In the first place let me persuade you, not only to lay aside vain glory, but
choleric impatience; for no man, let him love the Art never so well, can make
a complete Horseman if he be rash and hasty; neither will an Horse learn his
precepts if he be not otherwise inclined; and therefore if he prove bad, his
faults and defects must not be imputed so much to his ill nature, as his
indiscreet Rider.

Wherefore avoid severity to your young Horse, for it is a Maxim laid down by
that complete Horseman, Thomas de Gray Esquire He cannot be a good Horseman who
wants knowledge how to bring his Horse to perfection by fair, sweet, and
gentle means, rather than by correction and severe chastisement: however the
whip must not always be neglected if he does amiss; if well, let him be
cherished, by stroaking and otherways to encourage him in well doing; for an
Horse is a creature of great understanding.

Let your Groom frequently toy and play with him, be continually talking to him
in some odd phrase or other, for this pleases a good natured Horse: let him
morning and evening ride him a little way abroad, but he must have a care he do
not heat him too much: he must duly curry, curb, and dress him, wipe, pick, and
cleanse him, feed and cherish him, keeping him sweet and warm, be often
employed about him, tampering with his legs and heels, frequently taking up his
feet, rapping him gently on the soles, and softly knocking him on the Coffins;
by this means he will be brought to lift up his foot at first bidding.

Before you put your Horse to grass (if you have rid him a journey) take some
small quantity of blood from him three or four days before you turn him out:
but I would not advise you to put him forth till about the tenth of May. If
your horse has been pampered in a warm stable, I would have you use him to
some hardness before you put him to grass, for otherwise he may be subject to
take cold; and when you take him up from grass, let it be about the latter end
of August, for then the season will be troubled with cold dews, and the heart
of grass begins then to fail; but in the taking of him up have a care of
heating of him, because that fat he got at grass is not firm, but somewhat
tender; two days after you have him in the stable, then bloodlet him again,
which will prevent a great many diseases which are occasioned by the Gaul and
Spleen.

Make frequent inspection into your Horses mouth, for fear of Barbes, Cankers,
Bigs, Blisters, and these you may discover by the spots of the Gums, Tongue,
and Mouth, and accordingly make speedy applications for their cure. And to this
end both wash and rub his mouth with Verjuice and Bay Salt mingled together,
and all the better if you let some pass down his throat. If your Horses eyes
look dull and drowsy more than usual, you may justly suppose him to be ill; and
to prevent the growth of his distemper, give him the drink of a Diatesseron.

If you find your Horse halt, or favor one foot more than the other, let his
foot be immediately examined, let him take off the shoe, and search for Gravel
or a Nail; if you find none, yet perceive the foot warmer than the rest, then
search the heel and frush; if all well there, then higher to the pastern joint
in the leg, or back sinew: having found the fault, let the Farrier be instantly
acquainted with his malady.

When you are to take your journey with him, let him be watered in the house,
giving him an indifferent quantity of good clean Oats, then tying him up to the
rack, curry, dress, and saddle him, leaving his girts loose, and do not draw
them strait till you are going to mount him; then ride him softly for the first
three miles, that you may prevent crudities, and that he may digest his meat
the better: three miles before you come to your journeys end, ride him into
some River (if any near you) up to his belly, but not deeper, and so let him
drink, not all at once, but by degrees; then ride him an indifferent pace, to
warm his water in his belly, which will so refresh him, that forgetting his
weariness, he will fall to his meat with the greater appetite. Having brought
him to the stable, tie him up to the empty rack, and litter him up to the
belly, and be sure that after you have caused him to be well rubbed, both
belly, legs, back, neck, face, and head, also the breast; then upon a cloth let
his saddle be clapped on, and so let him stand almost an hour.

As for those Lessons you intend to teach your Horse which are fit for his
practice, and the purpose for which you intend him; as if it be for Hunting,
Running, Travail, Hackney, or the like; then the chiefest things you are to
apply your self to, are to preserve a good mouth, to trot freely and comely, to
amble surely and easily, to gallop strongly and swiftly, to obey the hand in
stopping gently, and retiring willingly, and to turn on either hand, readily
and nimbly; to all which, I must refer you to the works of that ingenious and
most accomplished Gentelman, Mr. Markham.

CHAP. VI.
Choice observations for the feeding of Horses for the Race.
AS for the time of keeping the Race Horse, it is not certainly concluded upon
by the Masters of this Art, for some would have it an half year at least,
though they have no other ground for it, but that if he should run sooner he
may endanger the melting of his grease by that violent and too early exercise;
that thereby ill humors will be too hastily stirred, and so consequently bring
upon them innumerable diseases; and hereupon they conclude that to bring him to
it gradually with length of time is most expedient, not considering the great
charge the owner must infallibly be at, and it may be it will eat up the profit
of the price.

Besides, they discover much ignorance herein by not considering that if grease
should be melted (which of all hands is confessed very dangerous) it may be
purged away by wholesome scourings: humors too suddenly stirred, and so
dispersing themselves to the great detriment of the body, may be evacuated by
sweat and moderate Airings.

But if half a year be too long, pray what time then is most convenient, you
will say? For this purpose of preparation it is the opinion of the most expert
judicious Feeders, that seven or eight weeks is time long enough for an old
trained Horse.

And lest any ill humor should lurk within the body of an Horse, and so
detriment the intended purpose of his swift and free running; I would advise
you to elect such nourishing simples, (and not a mish mash of I know not what
poisonous ingredients) which may bring away any melted grease or ill humor
which offends the body, without delaying time; and by this course you may
better and much more forward intents in four days than others in four months;
for by their deferring time (as Mr. Markham observes) they nor no man else can
certainly tell which way the melted grease, and other foul humors will avoid;
whether into his Ordure, and that is the safest; whether into sweat, which is
hazardous; into his limbs, which is mischievous; or remain, and putrefie in his
body, which is mortally dangerous.

But when I advise you to scour, my intent and meaning is, that you should not
run into the extremes of some foolish persons; who are never at rest but when
they are giving their Horses some stop or other, which they call a potion, or
scourings, most commonly without cause, and always without order; thereby so
debilitating the poor Creature, that though he may be willing, yet is rendered
incapable of running that course which must be performed with so much strength,
vigor, agility, and swiftness.

From over doing or under doing, the Feeder ought to make choice of a
mediocrity: if he intends to purge, let him be sure he have a just occasion for
so doing; and that is, when he is certain that foul humors abound; and let the
means by which he intends to evacuate them be wholesome simples, being confident
in what he prescribes that it will rather add to the Horses vigor, than
diminish from it; so with deserved applause he shall succeed in his enterprise.

If your Horse be over fat, or foul, or newly taken from grass, my advice is,
that you diet him two months at least before you let him run the Race-match; if
the wager will permit, take a longer time. If he be very poor by over riding or
some other disorder, take what time you can above five weeks; but six will
serve, exercising him well with his feeding. But if your Horse be in a
mediocrity and good temperament of body, a month is time enough to fit and
adapt him for his race.

CHAP. VII.
Rules for the first and right ordering of the Race-Horse.
AS I said before, when you have matched your Horse, you are to consider the
condition, and principally regard the estate of body, in which the Horse is, at
the time of his matching; which is fat and foul, poor and lean, or in a golden
mean.

If fat and foul, for the first fortnight rise betimes; and having tied his
bridle to the rack, after it is put on him, washed in beer; cleanse your stable
well; and then fall to dressing your Horse, which you may do in this manner.

First curry him well all over; then dust him with an Horses tail, or some
clean dusting cloth; then with your wet hand stroke all his body over, not
leaving any loose hair to stick upon him: having thus done, wipe him dry again,
and be sure to cleanse his sheath, stones, and tuel, his ears, eyes, and
nostrils. Then must you make a large body-cloth of thick warm Kersey if it be
in the Winter; but some lighter stuff, as fine Cotton, for the Summer; and fold
or wrap it about the Horses body; then girt him with his saddle on, the
foremost girt pretty strait, but the other more remiss or slack: Then put on
his breast cloth, covering both breast and shoulders; and let his standing be
continually on good store of fresh litter night and day, of wheat straw, as
near as you can. Having thus accoutred him, draw him out of the stable, and
back him, and walk him a foot pace (which is called raking) a mile or two, but
neither amble nor trot him, for that will prejudice his celerity or speed. If
you can find any steep hills, gallop him up gently, but rack or walk him down
softly, that he may cool as much the one way as he has heated himself the
other: having thus exercised him a pretty space, walk your Horse to some River
or clear Pond, fed by some wholesome Spring, and there let him drink what he
pleases. After this, gallop him moderately, to warm the water in his belly;
then rack him a pretty space, and then show him the water again; if he drink,
gallop him again; and thus exercise him still, both before and after he has
drank his water.

When you have caused him to drink what is enough, and exercised him
sufficiently; Then bring him home gently, so that he have not a wet hair. Being
entered the stable, provoke him to piss by whistling; which you will incline him
to, by often so doing; and this you will find shall add much to the Horses
health.

This being done, tie up his head to the rack, with his bridle on; then with
hard wisps with all your might rub down his forelegs; and unloosing his breast
cloth, with a dry course Cloth rub well his head, neck, and breast; and having
taken off his Saddle and Body-cloth, rub his back, and every other part of him:
then cloth him up in Linen, and over that a good strong housing cloth, and
over that his Woolen body-Cloth; then girting his clothes about him, stop his
Surcingle round with big, thick, and soft wisps, and so shall he lie more at
ease.

Having thus clothed your Horse, pick his feet, and stop them up with
Cow Dung; throwing into his rack a small bundle of Hay, which he shall tear out
as he stands on his bridle.

Having stood about an hour on his bridle, rub then again his head all over,
and the nape of his neck with a clear rubber made of hempen cloth; then draw
his bridle, and cleanse very well the Manger, and put therein a quart or
somewhat more of dry, old, and well cleansed Oats: the best are the heaviest
and whitest, such as are called Poland, or the cut oats: Oats which are moist
swell the body; worms are bred by new Oats: the black Oats, which though they
are tolerably good, yet cause full dung, which hinders a man's discerning the
state of his Horses body. If your Horse with a good stomach shall eat this
quart of Oats, you may give him another, well sifted, and so let him alone till
eleven of the clock. Then come to him again and give him another quart, well
tossed and ree'd; then close up your lights, and keep him as dark as you can
till one of the Clock. This keeping of him in the dark, will occasion him to
lie down, and take his rest, whereas in the light he would not.

At one of the Clock come again, and rub his head, face, and neck, and give him
another quart of Oats, ordered as aforesaid; and having taken his Dung from
him, leave him till three in the Winter, and four in the Summer.

At that time come again, and having wet the bridle in beer, put it on his
head, and tie him up to the rack; then uncloath him, and dress him, as before
expressed. After dressing, cloth and saddle him, as you did in the morning;
and leading him forth, provoke him to piss and dung; then mount him, and ride
him as you did before, but not to the hills, rather choosing some even and plain
ground, at leastwise make choice of that which is most level. Having chosen
your ground, ride him as before, galloping him both before and after his
watering, and then raking him gently up and down, and so return home with him;
and whatsoever you did after his mornings airing, do the like after his
evenings airing.

About nine of the Clock give him your last visit for that night, and first rub
down his legs well with hard wisps, then with a clean Cloth rub his head, face,
and chaps, with the nape of his neck, and fore parts, and so gradually his
whole body; then give him a quart of Oats well sifted, in a thoroughly cleansed
Manger; putting a small bundle of Hay in his rack, and tossing up his litter,
that he may lie soft, leave him to his rest.

The next morning before Sunrising, and so every morning for a fortnight, do
as you have done this first morning; omitting nothing that was done the whole
day. If this you observe to do, you shall so harden his flesh, and dissipate,
or consume his foulness; that the next fortnight you may adventure to heat him,
so it be gently, and with moderation.

And herein you are to consider, that two heats in a week is sufficient for any
Horse whatsoever. Where note, that if your match is to be run on a Thursday,
the fittest heating days are Thursdays and Tuesdays; ever let the one be on the
same day, and the other two days before; but let the former be the sharper
heat: and let not your heats be in rainy and foul weather; for it is
unwholesome; and therefore rather defer your day.

Lastly, let not your heats be late in the Evening, for it is unpleasant to the
Horse, and of a dangerous consequence: but let it be early in the morning,
about Sunrising. So much for the first fortnights observation: let us now
consider what must be done for the second.

CHAP. VIII.
Observations for the second fortnights keeping.
THere is not more to be done as to cleansing the stable, clothing, dressing,
saddling, airing, watering, than was in the first fortnight; but now we must
alter his diet, and with his Oats give him bread: and by the way, let me show
you how to make it.

Take one part of Wheat, and three of Beans, and mixing them together, grind
them to pure meal, then searce and bolt it through an indifferent fine range;
and knead it up with good store of barm, or Yest, but with very little water;
be sure you labor it well in the trough, and then cover it warm, and let it
lie some while to swell; then knead it over again, and make it up into good big
loaves, and so let them soak well in the Oven, and see that they be well baked.
Do not give your Horse any of this bread whilst it is new, for it is very apt
to surfeit; wherefore use it not till it be three or four days old: before you
use a loaf chip it well; and then cutting several pieces thereof, to the
quantity of the Oats you intend to give him, mingle the bread therewith.

Between eleven and twelve give him of this bread and oats, the same quantity
you gave him in the morning, and then do not visit him till one of the Clock;
at which time you shall feed him as in the forenoon, if you intend not to heat
him the day following; if you intend to heat him, then give him neither bread
nor hay, but only a quart of sweet Oats; dressing, clothing, saddling, airing,
and watering him as before showed: and let him have his constant meals of this
bread and oats de die in diem, with the usual Ceremonies as aforesaid; and now
and then in a morning break a new laid raw egg into his mouth, washing it
after with a little strong Ale.

Now make him acquainted with the starting Posts; rake up your Horse gently to
the first post, and let him smell to it; then rake him to the last, and there
let him do the like, that he may take notice of the beginning and ending of his
Course. Now start your Horse roundly and sharply at three quarters speed; and
according to his strength, wind and alacrity, run him the whole course through,
but by no means do not strain him; and when you find him a little yield, then
ease him a little; so that what he does may be done freely, and with pleasure:
this will make him take delight in his pains taking; and so enable him the
better to perform what is to be expected from him.

Having thus coursed your Horse, gallop him moderately, to recover his wind,
and cheer his spirits; and then rake him home to his stall; where having
scraped off his sweat, and rubbed him well all over, give him this scouring
which you had before already prepared.

An excellent Scouring.
Take a pint of very rich Sack (that which is commonly called sweet) and put
thereunto above an Ounce of your clearest and purest Rossen, bruised to a very
fine dust; and brew them well together: when the Sack and the Rossen are
incorporated, add thereunto a pint of the best Sallet-Oyl: lastly take an Ounce
and half of brown Sugar Candy beaten to powder; and having brewed these
together, mull them over the fire; and being lukewarm, draw your Horses head
up to the rack immediately after his coming from his heat, and with an horn
give him this scouring. This is an excellent strong scouring, which purges
away all manner of melted grease and soulness whatsoever.

CHAP. IX.
What is to be observed after the administration of this scouring.
PResently after your Horse has taken this scouring, let his legs be instantly
rubbed, and run his body slightly over with a Curry-comb, and afterward with
the brush; then rub it over again with dry clothes, and let great pains be
taken with his head, nape of his neck, and about his heart; then let him be
clothed very warm, and wisp him round with large wisps; and you may do well to
throw a blanket over him, if the weather be chilly and cold.

Let your Horse fast two hours after he has taken his scouring; and let some
or other stand by your Horse the while, continually forcing him into action,
for this motion makes the medicine work; and those humors which otherwise
with rest would lie undisturbed, are now stirred and raised for the Physic to
work upon, and remove.

After the expiration of two hours, handle his body, the roots of his ears,
fillets, flanks, and thighs; if you find any new cold sweat, or that he breaths
fast and quick, then conclude that the Medicine is still struggling with some
bad humor for the upper hand, and therefore give him nothing; otherwise you
may give him an handful of wheat ears, not rough bearded; but if you find him
thus disordered, leave him in darkness two hours more, that he may take his
rest.

If you find after this time none of those Symptoms, you may then give him a
little bundle of Hay, and an hour after that a quart of sweet Oats well sisted,
and mingled with two or three handfuls of spelted Beans, cleansed from all
impurity; and to these add two or three thick shives of bread well chipt; and
so leave him to his rest for three hours, or thereabout.

At the Evening before dressing, give him the like quantity; but ride him not
out, nor give him any water; but instead thereof, take three pints of well
sifted Oats, and wash them well in Ale, and so give them him; for this will
inwardly refresh and cool him.

The morrow following very early dress, feed, and cloth your Horse; then
saddle, and air him abroad, watering him in the same manner as formerly
expressed; having brought him to the stable, give him Oats, spelted Beans, and
Bread, but very little Hay; and keep your heating days if foul weather prevent
not, and omit none of the aforesaid preparations.

Thus you shall spend the second fortnight: having in that time been well
heated and well scoured, there is no question but that his body is sufficiently
cleansed from filth and evil humors. You may now order him the third Fortnight
after this manner.

A finer sort of bread made after this manner.
Take three pecks of clean Beans, and two pecks of fine Wheat; grind them well,
and ^earce them through a fine range, and knead it well with Barm, and soaking
it in good big loaves in the Oven, let it be well baked.

Let it be somewhat stale before you use it, cutting off the crust, and
mingling the shives with clean sifted Oats, and spelted Beans; and so feed him
therewith, observing the same hours therefore, with the times of dressing and
airing as in the former fortnight; so likewise to his heating days, only with
this difference, his heats must not be so violent as before; neither must you
use your scourings; but instead thereof, immediately after the heat, give him a
Ball about the bigness of a Pullets egg, which is called the Cordial Ball.

The manner of making that excellent Cordial Ball which avoideth all molten
grease, recovers a lost appetite, cures any violent Cold, and the Glanders,
fattens an Horse speedily, and preserves an Horse from fainting with exercises.
Take the seeds of Cummin, Fenugreek, Carthamom, Elicampane roots, and
Coltsfoot, of each two ounces, beaten, and ^^arced to a fine dust; two ounces
of the flower of Brimstone, then take an ounce of the juice of Licoras, and
dissolve it on the fire in half a pint of White Wind; which done, take an ounce
of Chemical Oil of Anniseeds, then of Sallet Oil, Honey, and the Syrrop of
Sugar, or of Molosses, of each half a pint: then mix all these with the former
powders, and with as much fine Wheat flower, as will bind and knit them all
together; work them into stiff paste; and make thereof Balls as big as Pullets
eggs, when you use them; and so put the Paste in a close Gallipot, and you may
keep it a whole year.

If you will use these Balls as an Antidode, or prevention of sickness; then
anoint them with sweet butter, and in a morning give them as a Pill, three or
four mornings together, exercising him a little after their reception.

If for a Cold or the Glaunders, let them be taken every morning for a week
together; if to fatten an Horse, use them a fortnight. But if to remove molten
grease and foulness, then let them be taken presently after, or in the heat

This Ball dissolved in a pint of Sack, and given an Horse which has taken
cold, which you may know by the rattling in his throat, is a present and
infallible cure.

If taken before travel, it prevents all tiring; if in the height of travel, it
refreshes, and banisheth weariness; and if you give it after travel, it
prevents all surfeits and inward sickness.

CHAP. X.
What is to be done in the fourth and last Fortnights keeping.
IN the first place, you are to take notice, that as his Oats and Beans must be
well sifted and cleansed, so must his bread be finer than what was made before;
and thus you must make it.

The fourth and last Bread.
Take one peck of clean Beans, and three of Wheat; grind them on black stones,
and let them be bolted through the finest Bolter you can procure; then knead it
up well with Ale Yest, with some strong Ale, and also the whites of above
twenty Eggs; instead of water, some new Milk; and having wrought it
laboriously, let it be well baked; and cutting off the crust, mingle it with
your Oats and Beans as aforesaid; and feed your Horse at his ordinary feeding
times, as you did before.

You must observe his heating days, the first week in this Fortnight, as you
did formerly: the last week you must not give him any heat, till five days
before the match, only give him good airings.

Whatever washed meat you give your Horse this Fortnight, let it not be washed as
formerly, in Ale; but in the whites of Eggs, or Muscadine; this will make him
long winded: give him but little Hay, but what he takes out of your hand.

The last day, you must cool and shoe your Horse; and whatever Ornament was
intended, let it be now done, that the Horse may take notice thereof, and so be
encouraged, and not encumbered that day he is to run.

The morning before he is to run, get up before day, and rub his head well,
giving him Oats washed in Muscadine; but if he refuse that, or the whites of
Eggs, then mingle among your Oats a little wheat, or your late made finest
bread; and provoke him by all means imaginable, to empty before he runs.

Having warning to make ready, wash his Snaffel in Muscadine; then bridle him
up, and dress him; and as you are about to lead him out, put an half pint of
Muscadine in an horn, and give it him. When you come to the place of starting;
rub and chafe his legs with hard wisps, then pick his feet, and wash his mouth
with water; let the Rider then mount, and starting fair, let him refer the
success to Providence.

The next thing we should insist upon, should be the knowledge of all diseases
or maladies belonging to an Horse, whether external or internal, and their
cures and remedies: but because they can never be certainly known, without
knowing the composition and several parts of an Horse, I shall begin with the
Anatomy of an Horse, as the best introduction to the Physical and Chirurgical
cures of his distempers, and first

CHAP. XI.
Of the Symmetrie, or Proportion of Members in an Horse that is well shaped.
IT is the opinion of the best Farriers, or Horse-leeches, that there are in an
Horses mouth twelve steps one above another, like a pair of stairs: his tongue
is generally reckoned half a foot in length, his upper lip six inches, and his
nether five; his jaws each of them ten inches, his head from his eyes downward
full twelve inches long, his ears five inches in length, and his eyes four
inches in circumference, his neck from the nape unto the withers seven
handfuls, from the Withers to the Fillets twelve handfuls, and from the Fillets
to the setting on the Tail six handfuls; the length of the shoulders twelve
inches, the length of the Shank six inches, the length of the hinder Hough
twelve inches, and the Cambrel five inches, and the length of the whole body
from Head to Tail should be an hundred inches.

It is not to be supposed that the parts of all Horses are of this dimension;
for as the stature of the Horse is, so are his Members, greater or less: but
these aforesaid observations are uncertain; wherefore I am more inclined to
believe the experience of Mr. Gervase Markham in this matter; who says, Look
what quantity is between the Nape of the Horses Neck and the uttermost part of
the Withers, three must ever be twice as much between the Withers and the
setting on the Tail; and what quantity is between the Shoulder blade, I mean
the top thereof, or the top of the Withers to the Elbow of the Horse, it must
be twice as much from the Elbow to the setting on of the hoof; and look how
much it is from the top of the Hip to the stifling place, it must be twice so
much from the stifling place to the setting on the hinder hoof: this is the
certainest rule for an Horses truest proportion: and from experience I am apt
to believe no less.

CHAP. XII.
What and how many are the Veins properly belonging to an Horse.
THe knowledge of the veins in an Horse is a study so needful, that he cannot
be a skilful Farrier that is ignorant herein: wherefore according to my best
ability, I shall endeavor to give you an account hereof.

From the Liver the fountain of all blood, proceeds one large Vein, from
whence comes these lesser rivulets.

First, within the palate of his mouth, above the first and third bars, are two
considerable veins, and are frequently struck for diseases in the head or
stomach: there are two which descend from his eyes to his nostrils, and are
opened for maladies in the eyes. He has also two very large veins on each side
of the Windpipe, and are breathed upon any distemper whatsoever. He has
likewise two veins which ascend from between his fore legs, and rest upon the
foremost bough of the fore leg, which are called the Plat-Veins; and these are
struck for foundring, or other distempers in the limbs.

There are two other Veins, which run down from the Elbow of the fore shoulder,
along the insides of the fore legs, and are called the Shank-Veins, which are
opened for Splents and Mallanders. Again there are four veins which run along
the Fetlocks, and are called the Shackle-Veins; they are small, and are often
opened for stiffness in the joints, or for tyring.

He has four veins also, about the Cronets in his Hoofs, called Cronet-Veins,
and are opened for Ring-Bones. There are four Veins in his four hoofs, called
Toe-Veins, opened for frettizing in the feet, and for foundring. From his
stones two great Veins descend along the inside of his Thighs, to his Cambrel,
and are called Kidney-Veins, and are opened for diseases in those parts. From
above the hinder Cambrel descend two Veins along the inside of the hinder legs
down to the Fetlocks, and are called the Spaven-Veins, and are opened for the
blood Spaven only. There are two Flank-Veins, and are opened for any malady in
the Reins and Fillets; and two hinder Hanch Veins, opened for Consumption of
the flesh. Lastly, he has one single Vein in the Tail, and is properly called
the Tayl-Vein, which is commonly opened for shedding of hair, or for the Mange.

There are a great many more veins which have their derivation from these, but
they are so small they are of no efficacy, and were any of them cut, it would
tend to no prejudice; but as to these aforementioned, if cut, great danger may
ensue.

CHAP. XIII.
Of an Horses Sinews.
THe Brain is acknowledged by all, to be the Fountain, from whence Sinews have
their rise; particularly, there is derived thence one great Tendon, which
passes through the cavity of Neck and Backbone, extending it self to the
nethermost joint of the Strunt. Two small branches proceed from this main
Tendon, which passing through certain holes in the Horses skull, run down along
his cheeks, even to the summity of his Nostrils. Besides these there are two
more which pass through holes in his nether chap, knitting that and the upper
together; and running down by his great teeth, meet below his nether lip.
Moreover, there are twenty eight small threads, which running through so many
holes in the seven bones of his neck, knit them fast together; and those which
knit his Chine to the end of his Strunt are infinite.

To speak of every particular sinew would take up too much time; wherefore, in
a word, from the setting on the Horses Neck, unto the flat Columel, or
Huckle-bone does extend one great broad sinew, of three inches in breadth,
being of one single substance, no other sinew having any derivation from it;
which not only holds the Shoulder-Blades together; but covers all the Chine
over; and this is commonly called Pax-wax. Of all the principal Sinews
appertaining to an Horse (from whence an infinite number of small ones are
derived) there is in number thirty eight, according to the opinion of such who
have made frequent inspection into the Carkase of an Horse.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Bones in an Horses body.
AS in an Horse so in an Ox, there are just one hundred and seventy bones,
which are numbered thus: in the upper part of the head, two bones, from the
forehead to the nose two, his nether Jaws two, twelve fore Teeth, four Tushes,
twenty four Grinders, seven bones from the Nape of the Neck to the points of
the Spade-bones, eight from thence to the Huckle-bones, and thence to the Tail
seven.

The great broad binder bone has twelve joints in it, then are there two
Spade-bones, and from the Forcels two Marrow-bones, two Thigh-bones, two
Shank-bones, and from thence downward into the Hoofs there are sixteen small
bones.

In the Breast of the Horse there is a great bone, whereunto are fastened thirty
six Ribbs; there are many more bones, in all two hundred fifty seven; of which
you may come to the knowledge (if you are so desirous) by your own strict
indagation, and curious inspection or inquiry.

Before I enter on the cures of the several Distempers that attend an Horse;
which are more than belong to any other Beast, especially the running Horse, by
reason of his violent exercise; give me leave to inform you, how you may know
the age of any Horse.

CHAP. XV.
The most experienced, and most approved way to judge an Horses Age, by his
Teeth, Hoofs, Tail, Eyes, Skin, Hair, and the Bars, or Stairs in his mouth.
AS I told you before, in the Chapter of an Horses bones; an Horse has twelve
fore Teeth, six above and six beneath, twenty four Grinders, and four Tushes,
which make in all forty Teeth.

His Foal Teeth, for the first year, are only Grinders, without Tushes; which
are white, small, and bright; the second year, the four foremost Teeth change
color, and appear more big and brown.

The third year, the next Teeth unto these do change also, and no Foal Teeth
are visible before, but two on each side above, and as many below, being both
bright and small. The fourth year he has left but two Foal-Teeth, one on each
side, above and below. The fifth year, his foremost Teeth will all change; and
then his Tushes will appear complete; and those which appear in the place of
the last Foal-teeth cast, will be hollow, and have a little black speck in the
midst; and this is the mark so much talked on, which continues till after
eight years old. The sixth year bears little difference to the fifth: but in
the seventh year his Teeth are at their perfect growth; and the mark in the
Horses mouth will then be plainest seen. In the eight year, the mark will in a
manner disappear, and vanish. At the ninth year his foremost teeth will seem
longer, yellower, and fowler than before; and his Tushes very bluntish. After
this year you shall never certainly discern what age an Horse is by his Teeth;
wherefore you must apply your self to other helps: as first, observe whether
the Horses Hoofs be rugged and seamed, full, dry, and rusty, he is then for
certain stricken in age; whereas if his hoofs are smooth, moist and hollow, he
is undoubtedly young.

Secondly, with your finger and your thumb take your Horse by the stern of the
Tail, close at the setting on by his Buttock; and if you find a joint sticking
out more than any other joint, about the bigness of an Hasel-nut, then you may
adjudge him about ten; but if it be smooth in that place, and no such thing be
felt, he may be eighteen years old for ought you know.

Thirdly, mark if his eyes be round, full, and staring from his head, and the
pits filled, even with the Temple, it is a sign he is young; if wrinkled under
his eyes, or about his brow, he is then old.

Fourthly, pull with your forefinger and thumb his skin up, if it return to
its place smooth he is young; if otherwise, old.

Fifthly, if the eye brows or main of a dark colored Horse shall grow grissel,
he is very old.

Lastly, if the bars in his mouth feel rough and hard, and are great and deep,
then conclude him very old; but if otherwise, soft and tender, there is no
fear, but that he is young and lusty.

And now we shall descend to the cure of diseases, which are twofold, internal
and external; we shall begin with the last, and end with the first.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Diseases in Horses, and their causes.
IT is not to be expected, that any man should become a Farrier, who shall not
know, First, to what disease an Horse is most inclinable. Secondly, what are
the causes of every disease in particular. Thirdly, how and by what means those
diseases do accrue. Fourthly, the signs and symptoms how to know and
distinguish them; and Lastly, the means and manner how to cure them.

I shall insist on every one of these in its due order. Now first, touching the
diseases an Horse is most inclinable to; and they are suitable to the
complexion or constitution of the Horse: for example, if the Horse be colured
Mouse-Dun, Chestnut Brown, Soot color, or Iron-Gray, his complexion then is
melancholy, participating more of earth than any other Element; by which means
he becomes dull, heavy, dogged, restise, faint-hearted, etc. and therefore most
inclined to Inflammation in the Spleen, siccity in the Liver, to the Dropsy,
Frenzy, and the like; and so may you judge of other diseases by the other three
Complexions already treated of in a foregoing Chapter.

Secondly, we must consider what are the causes of every disease in particular:
where note, that the causes of sickness are all unnatural effects and evil
dispositions. Of these causes, there are two sorts, external and internal:
External are such which afflict the outward parts of the body, and the Internal
the inward parts, proceeding from ill diet, evil humors, obstructions, etc.

Sickness it self is no more than an evil temperature, and that is two fold,
either simple or compound: simple, when one quality is redundant, as too cold,
too hot, too moist, too dry; compound, when more than one quality abound, as
too cold and too moist. Some diseases are lingering, and consume the body by
degrees; as Consumptions, Glanders; others short, and presently mortal as soon
as discovered; as Yellows, Anticor, and Staggers: Now some diseases again do
occupy the whole body; as Fevers, Pestilence, Convulsions, and so forth;
others, only some parts; as Colds offend the head, Surfeits the stomach.

Thirdly, how and by what means do these accrue: the means are inbred or
accidental; either coming from ill humors, and surfeits, or molten grease, and
foulness by over exercise, and the like.

Fourthly, of the signs and symptoms of Diseases, which are many, nay, almost
innumerable; however, take them thus in brief. First, observe the place of the
member grieved; and see whether it have its true proportion, and is not less or
more in quantity; if either happen, the Horse is diseased: next, mark the
alteration of the quality; as, whether too moist, too dry, too cold, or too
hot. Your third sign may be taken from the members nonperformance of his duty;
and lastly, by the thicker and thinner Excrements. But these directions may
seem to some difficult and abstruse; wherefore take these plainer instructions,
which are the thirty years observation of a most ingenious Gentleman, and one
admired by all the Horse-Doctors in or about this City; and thus he lays down
the undeceivable signs of all sorts of internal diseases.

If an Horse be more than usual slower to labor, or duller to the spur.

If he be shorter winded, drawing his breath quick.

If his ears hang down more than they were wont.

If his hair do bristle, or be more staring*

If his Flanks be more than usually lank and hollow.

If he burn betwixt his ears, or about his pasterns.

If traveling, his stomach fail him, and his mouth dry which used to foam.

These are infallible signs of inward distemper, as to the general; now as to
signs of particular diseases, take these.

If an Horse hold down his head, whereas he was wont to have a cheerful look,
it prognosticates a Fever, Headache or Foundring.

That Horse whose eye were naturally clear and quick, and of a sudden look
dull, and dim, and heavy, is troubled either with the headache, or the staggers
is seizing him.

An Horse will frequently discover obstructions in the Liver, by often turning
his head to the right side; and the like by turning it down to his belly, make
appear that he is troubled with the Bots, Worms, or Cholick.

Water running from an Horses mouth, is the sign of a wet cough, or staggers.

If foul matter issue from an Horses Nostrils, it signifies an Ulcer in the
nose or head; if it be white, it is a sign of the Glanders; if black, of the
mourning of the Chine; if yellow, the consumption of the Liver; if little lumps
proceed from his mouth, it shows the rottenness of his Lungs.

The beating of the Flank with shortness of breath, is the sign of a Fever or
^trangle.

If ought may be felt on both sides the Forehead beating, it is a sign of the
Staggers.

Swellings about the ears betoken the Pole-evil; under the ear, the vives; and
swelling in the mouth, is the sign of the Canker, Flaps, or Lampass.

Swelling under the throat* and swelling about the root of the Tong^^, is in
the first, a sign of the Glanders, in the last, a sign of the Strangle; but if
about the tongue roots there be only knots or kernels, it is only a sign of a
Cold.

If an Horse tremble after drinking cold water, during that time he has a
certain fit of an Ague; for if any will observe it after the trembling is over,
he shall find him burn and glow extremely.

If an Horse piss with much difficulty, you may suspect him either foundred, or
troubled with the Wind-Cholick or Stone; if the color of his urine be yellow,
it is a sign of the Glanders; but if thick and black, he is afflicted with pain
in the Kidneys.

If Horses Dung stink much it is the sign of a hot Liver, if little, then of a
cold Liver, and if undigested, then of a Consumption, or some dry Malady.

If an Horse desire extremely to lie down on his right side, he is troubled
with a hot Liver; if on the left, it is the sign of a distempered Spleen; if he
tumble to and fro, taking no rest, then he is troubled with Worms, Bots, or
Wind-cholick; if not able to rise when down, it betokens mortal weakness, or
foundring in the body.

If an Horse covet much meat and little drink, it betokens a cold Liver; but if
he thirst much, and eat little, then it denotes a Fever, rotten Lungs, an
extraordinary heat in the stomach, or the dry Yellows.

If an Horse strike with his foot at his belly, it signifies the Cholick, or
Griping of the Guts; but if he fisks with his Tail when he strikes, then it is
Bots or Worm^.

If a knotty Ulcer creep along the Veins, it is the Farcy; if expanding it self
only in one place, it is a Canker; if the Ulcer be hollow and crooked, it is a
Fistula; but if it be a spungy wart, and full of blood, it is an Anbury.

If an Horses tongue be swollen, and hang out of his mouth, it is the Strangle.

To conclude, there are many more signs and symptoms o^ diseases, the discovery
whereof I shall leave to your own industry.

And now I am come to the fifth and last thing which I promised to discourse
upon, and which must conclude this Treatise, viz. The means and several ways
used to complete the cure of every individual disease incident to the
afflicting an Horses body; observe this first as a Prooemium thereunto.

CHAP. XVII.
General, yet choice, observations in the administration of Physic to Horses.
THe signs and symptoms of diseases will avail you little, if only knowing how
to judge of health and sickness, you know not also how to apply things proper
to every malady: and to the intent you may avoid all absurdities herein, take
these rules.

First, let what ever potion or drench you give your Horse be but lukewarm,
for it is of a most dangerous and deadly consequence if you scald an Horses
stomach.

Secondly, give him his potion easily, that you may avoid suffocation.

Thirdly, draw out your Horses tongue a little before you clap the horn into
his mouth, and then let it slip in again, and that will force him to swallow
what he has received.

Lastly, if you will have your physic work well, keep your Horse fasting, a
good while, both before and after the reception thereof; and use him to
moderate exercise for the better operation, as walking or trotting him, as you
shall find him furnished with strength.

As to the mixing your medicaments, take these three observations.

First, if your Horses distemper be hot, as a Fever, etc. then let your
simples be mixed with Oil, Honey, or warm water.

Secondly, if the disease has its rise from cold causes, as Coughs, Rheums,
etc. then mingle your simples with Wine, or good Ale.

Lastly, if your Horse be weak, and much debilitated by his distemper, then mix
your simples with Milk and Eggs.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Blood-letting.
PHlebotomy, or Blood-letting, is either to prevent diseases, and so preserve
health, or to refrigerate the spirits, or else, to take away blood where there
is too much, or else to void and purge gross and foul humors.

In phlebotomy, you are to observe this, first, to chase or exercise him
moderately; then let him rest a day before you draw blood from him, and three
days after.

If you find the vein to swell after you have opened it, (as it will do when
wind gets in, or when a steam miscarries) then take white Pitch, black Pitch,
and Rossin, of each a like quantity, and boil them together, and lay it on with
a flat stick, and then flock it; let it lie all over the swelling, and anoint
it with the Oil of Populeon; once doing this commonly effects the cure; but if
once does it not, then use it oftener, till you have discust the swelling.

If your Horse bleed violently at the nose, and you cannot stanch it, then take
Betony, and stamp it in a Mortar with salt, and put it into the Horses nose: or
if your Horse be wounded, and bleedeth exceedingly, the same applied thereunto,
will immediately stop the flux of blood.

Observe, that April and October are the two principal months for
Blood-letting: now, what may be said more on this subject, I shall refer you to
the Chirurgical part of this book, treating of the cures of external maladies.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Excrements of an Horse.
THe Excrements of an Horse are of two sorts, Dung and Urine.

If the Dung of your Horse be of the color, or somewhat near of his food, he
is in a sound condition: as for example, if an Horse runs at grass, his dung
will be green; if it be bright, and neither too hard nor too soft, it is an
excellent sign of an healthy constitution; but if it be fluid and waterish,
though it be green, it betokens the Horse troubled with coldness in his stomach
and bowels.

If the Dung be neither too thick nor too thin, yet the greenness intermixed
with blackness, it signifies the Horse inclined to the Yellows or Staggers.

If the food of an Horse be straw, the color of his Dung will be a bright
yellow, and rather thick than thin; the grain whereof being long, it is a sign
of health; but if the Dung be reddish, and either very dry, or as thin as
Cow Dung, they are infallible signs that the Horse is inwardly diseased: if
this redness do turn to blackness, having lost its scent, it betokens the
speedy death of the creature.

If Hay and Provender be the usual food of your Horse, if healthy and sound,
the color of his dung will be a brownish-yellow, moist, and of a grain
somewhat long; but if that brownness turn to redness, it is a sign of sickness;
if to blackness, then of death.

Lastly, if your Horse feed altogether on Provender, then will his dung be of a
pale yellow color, if he be in health; but if it look reddish, then it
signifies that the Horse has taken some inward heat, and that there is an
inflammation in his bowels and stomach. Now if it be brown, and shiny, or
greasy and shining, it is a sign of molten grease putrefying in the body. Thus
much of an Horses Dung, now of his Urine.

In the first place, if it be of a pale yellow, or straw color, smelling
strong, and not very clear, then is your Horse healthy, well, and lusty; but if
its color be very white, it is a sign of weakness in the Reins, Stone and
Obstruction in the Kidneys.

If the Urine be high colored like Beer brewed with over dried Malt, then is
that Horses blood inflamed, signifying a Fever, or some great surfeit; if
blood red, an heat by over riding, whose inflammation is so great, that if
scowring, or some other physical means be not speedily used, the Horse will
fall irrecoverably into some mortal distemper.

If the Urine be pale and greenish, it is a sign of a Consumption of the seed,
and debilitation of the back.

If the Urine be high colored, yet clowdy and blackish, it foretells speedy
mortality.

CHAP. XX.
Of the several sorts of Fevers in Horses.
Fevers are usually engendered either by over much travel, or disorderly diet;
and these Fevers by some are divided into three parts; the first are bred in
the spirits; the second in the humors; the third in the firm parts of the
body, being all set on fire beyond the ordinary course of nature.

Others divide them into two parts; The ordinary which are either bred in the
humors or spirits; and these are Fevers, Quotidian, Tertian, Quartan,
Hectic, Fevers in Summer, fall of the Leaf, and Winter.

The extraordinary are all those which are bred in the firm parts of the body,
and are pestilential Fevers, and the Plague.

The rise from whence ordinary Fevers proceed, I have told you already, viz.
from excessive Travel, or disorderly Diet: but the causes of extraordinary
Fevers, are either corruption of blood, or infection of the Air. Now here is
to be noted, that the Staggers, Yellows, and An^ecor never seize an Horse, but
a Pestilential Fever is their Harbinger or Forerunner: and they are like
pestilential marks, rarely seen, but when the disease is too far gone.

The signs and symptoms of these Fevers, as well as most other distempers I
have declared already, and therefore I shall here let them pass, and fall to
the cure.

CHAP. XXI.
A general Cure for general Fevers.
AS soon as the Fever is apparent by the signs aforesaid, some will
phlebotomize the Horse in the face, temples, and palate of the mouth,
restraining him from all food the first day, and only giving him by little and
little, some warm drink, giving him good store of Litter, having a care he
catch no cold; and as he begins to mend, feed him with boiled Barley, well
huskt and beaten.

Others do judge of this to be a better and speedier cure; that is, as soon as
you discern his shaking, give him instantly the yolks of five Eggs, beaten
with nine spoon-fuls of Aqua-vitae; and having drunk it, chafe him well till
his shaking be over; then put him into a warm place, and force him to sweat an
hour, by laying on him store of clothes: let his food in the mean while be Oats
well dried and sifted, and once a day some washed in Ale; and let him drink no
water, but what is warm: and this course you must take at the beginning of
every fit, if you will have your Horse cured of his Fever.

A cure for a Quotidian Fever.
This distemper takes an Horse once a day very violently, but will not last
above seven hours in a day, and after his fit, will seem to be as perfect in
health as before, till the time of the usual coming of his fit. If his fit
change its accustomed time, as if it takes him at nine of the clock one day,
and at six another, the greater hope there is that his Fever will leave him
the sooner.

As for the cure, give him only a sweet mash of Malt and Water Milk-warm,
walking him moderately in a temperate Air: his fit being over, rub him down
very well, especially his back and legs; then four or five hours after give him
this drink in a horn, thrice at least if his fits continue to afflict him.

A most approved Drink for an every days Fever.
Take a quart of strong Ale, and seethe therein half an handful of Wormwood,
two ounces of long Pepper and Grains, two ounces of the best Treacle, one ounce
of the powder of dried Rue; the third part of the liquor being consumed, take
it from the fire, and strain it, then put therein three ounces of the powder of
Sugar Candy; when it is lukewarm, make your Horse swallow it, and there will
be no fear that he will miscarry, by reason of his present distemper.

A cure for the Tertian Fever.
This disease takes the Horse one day, and forbeareth him the other; the one
day he shall seem to be very well, and the next he shall be really very sick;
when blood begins to abound, that is in the Spring time, then this distemper is
most rise among Colts, and the younger sort of Horses; the symptoms are all one
with those of the Quotidian.

As soon as you perceive your Horse to shake, take a weed called Stone-crop,
and so bruise it that you may get from thence four or five spoonfuls of the
juice, and mingling it with a quart of Ale, put it into an Horn and give it
your Horse; then walk him moderately for an hour; afterward set him up, and
force him to sweat an hour more; then cool him by degrees, and let him not by
any means drink cold water, but let his food be the best dry old Oats you can
procure.

The cure of the Quartan Fever:
This Fever is less violent than the two former, yet of longer continuance;
its time of seizing the Horse is every fourth day, as thus; if his fit takes
him on Tuesday, he will seem well Wednesday and Thursday, and be taken again
with his fit on Friday: the causes and signs are the same with the other, and
the cure differs very little, only, you must not in any wise administer that
prescribed Physic above thrice; and if he recovers not then, you must leave
his cure to time for its working out.

The Cure of the Hectic Fever.
An Hectic Fever when it seizes Horses, it commonly brings death with it,
and is the first breeder of a Consumption: the humor is hot and dry which
runs between the skin and the flesh, occasioned by an idle custom of giving
over hot drenches, or by using them to drink Beer or Wine.

The signs or symptoms are want of appetite with a raw tongue almost scalded,
loose and flaggy flesh, with a continual trembling over all his body.

His cure must be effected thus: let his drink be only warm mashes made of Malt
and water; and let him eat nothing but sweet Hay, or green Corn blades; but
first, wash his tongue with Allom, Running water, Sage, and Wood-bine leaves
boiled together; after this, let him have this drink fasting in a morning.

Take of Aloes one Ounce, of Garlic half an Ounce, of Licoras and Anniseeds of
each a Dram, beaten to powder; then put these into a quart of White wine,
sweetened with Sugar Candy or Honey, and made lukewarm for him to drink.
Probatum est.

Of Fevers seizing an Horse, either in Summer, Autumn, or Winter; and their
Cures.
It is the opinion of most, that Summer Fevers are the worst of all ordinary
Fevers, especially in the Dog Days.

The Symptoms of this Fever are the violent beating of his Arteries, and his
evacuating seed with his Urine.

The old way to cure him is to open the great Vein in his hinder Haunch, about
four Inches below his Fundament; but by reason it is not easily found, and so
by mistake an Artery may be cut instead thereof, I hold it much safer to open
the Neck-Vein; having so done, give him a drink three mornings together made of
the juice of an handful of Purslane mixed with Gumdragacanth, Anniseeds, and
Damask Rose leaves beaten to powder, all put into a quart of strong Ale,
sweetened either with Honey or Sugar Candy; and after this, fail not to keep him
warm, as you must during the whole continuance of his distemper.

If your Horse get a Fever in Autumn, bloodlet him in the Neck-Vein, and in
the Palate of his Mouth; and then give him this drink following, and never
doubt of his recovery.

Take of Germander two Ounces, of Gum Draga^anth and dried Roses, of each half
an Ounce; beat them into fine powder; of Oyl-Olive two Ounces, and as much
Honey; put these into a quart of Ale, and make them lukewarm; after he has
drank it, let him be walked, and then set up close and warm.

A Winter Fever is of long continuance, though not very dangerous; the causes
and signs are the same with the rest; but you must be very circumspect in the
cure: and in the first place, it is required, that you purge his head well, by
sneezing; then phlebotomize him in the Neck, and Palate of the mouth; and about
three hours after give him this drink.

Take three Ounces of Rue, half an Ounce of round Pepper, of Bay Berries and
Smallage seed, of each half an Ounce, boil these in White Wind; and let him not
drink till it be lukewarm.

As for his diet, keep him fasting a good while before his fit comes, and give
him to drink, nothing but warm Mashes; if you find your Horse extremely weakened
by his fits, then use this friction following, whose virtues will loosen the
skin, cheer up the inward spirits, and spread a lively heat through the whole
body. Take this as the most Sovereign friction I have met withal: you must get
Oil de Bay, or Dialthea, and anoint the Horses body all over therewith, holding
a pan of Coals near the Ointment, to make it sink in, rubbing hard against the
Hair: but as for Winter Fevers, there is nothing better than this.

Take of Damask Roses one Pound, of old Oil a Pint, of strong Vinegar a Pint
and half, of Mint and Rue beaten into powder, of each an Ounce and half,
together with one old dry Nut; beat them, and mingle them well together; and
being strained, and made lukewarm, rub the Horse against the hair all over his
body, till he begin to sweat; then cloth him, and let him stand.

Now because I nominated before in the cure of this distemper, that first,
sneezing should be used for the purging his head; let me lay you down here the
several way of making an Horse sneeze and the excellent use thereof.

CHAP. XXII.
Of several excellent receipts to force sneezing, and their admirable Virtues.
NEezing is wrought sundry ways, either by fumes, smoaks, powders, or Oils,
which tickling the tender and quick parts of the head, enforce sneezing; which
is an excellent purgation, not only separating gross matter, but comforting and
strengthening the brain.

You may cause this sneezing either by the stale Urine of a man, or that of an
Ox; this is excellent against every days Fever.

The powder of Gum-Dragacanth, Eusens, and Damask Roses commixt, and blown into
the Nostrils of an Horse, is an incomparable remedy against Winter or Summer
Fevers. Garlic stalks broke into little pieces, and with Frankincense burnt
in a Chafingdish, and held under the Horses nose, and this will cure his head
ach. For any obstructions or cold in his head, there is nothing better than a
rag anointed with Oil de Bay, and therewith rub his Nostrils as high as you
may. For the Glanders, anoint two feathers with Oil de Bay, Euphorbium, and
white Ellebore, and thrust these into the Horses Nostrils. For any Cephalic
distemper, but especially the Staggers, Cold, Glanders, or Strangle; take the
powder of White Pepper, and blow it into his Nostrils, or squirt into them
Aristolochia, mixed with Wine, and you will find a sudden amendment. But the
best fume of all is made of Olibanum, Storax, and Benjamin, being bruised
together, and burned under the nose of the Horse.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Gargil, Plague, or Murrain in an Horse.
THis Disease has its original from several causes; sometimes from Surfeits,
sometimes from evil Planetary influence; not only corrupting Plants, but
several sorts of creatures. Of such an infectious nature it is, that it will
not only spread through a Studd, a Shire, but through an whole Kingdom.

The signs of this disease are lowering and hanging down the head, and in a
small time after this first observation, you will find a swelling under his
Ear-roots, or Tongue; which swelling will be hard, and spread over one side of
his face; his Mouth and whites of his Eyes will be yellow, and will have a very
stinking breath.

As an Antidote or Preservative, take a pint of Muscadine, and dissolve therein
two Ounces of the best Treacle, and give it them.

To cure the deseased; take a good quantity of stale Urine, and mix therein a
good deal of Hens-Dung, stirring it till it be all dissolved; take a pint
hereof at a time, and in an horn give it your Horse lukewarm.

CHAP. XXIV.
A Diacatholicon, or Universal Medicine for all Distempers.
If at any time (according to the former signs and symptoms,) you find your
Horse not well, open his Neck-Vein, taking from him a good quantity of blood,
then fasting, give him three mornings together, half an Ounce of Diapente well
brewed in a pint of Muscadine; which Diapente you shall make after this manner.
Take Gentian, Aristolochia, Bay Berries, Myrrh, and the shavings of Ivory, of
each a like quantity, beat them into very fine powder, and searce it. I say,
having given him of this powder, then ride him abroad an hour, and then give
him what he will eat; at Noon give him a sweet Mash, and at night with a course
Rubber rub him well all over, ^specially his Head and Nape of his Neck; this
you must do three or four days together, and you will find a sudden reparation
of health.

Here follows ^n Alphabetical ^ccount, both as to the names, character,
causes, signs, and cures of the most common and dangerous diseases which belong
to Horses.

Avives.
Avives is a French appellation for this disease; and is corruptly called by
English Farriers the Fives or Vives.

Its growth is under the ears, descending downwards toward the Throat, with
inflammation and swelling; this disease is dangerous, and often mortal; for
this swelling will stop his wind, and choke him, if not timely prevented.

The causes of this distemper are great heats and rankness of blood.

The cure you may effect this one way, which is worth all the rest I have read
of.

Take a penny worth of fine Pepper, beaten to fine powder, a spoonful of Swines
grease, the juice of an handful of Rue, two spoonfuls of Vinegar; mix them well
together, and put it equally into both the Horses Ears, and tie them up with
two strings, shaking the Ear so that the Medicine may sink downward; this done,
let him blood in the Neck-Vein, and Temple-Veins, and you need not question the
cure of your Horse.

Anticor.
The nature of this disease agrees with its name, for by reason of immoderate
riding, or too hard feeding without exercise, the Horses blood becomes
corrupted and inflamed, taking up its residence in and about the heart; and
having not speedy vent is the cause of sudden death.

You may know this disease by this sign; just against the heart there will be a
swelling, in the middle of the breast: before the swelling does appear, the
signs will be these; he will groan very much when laid down, hanging down his
head he will refuse to eat.

Immediately upon the appearance of the swelling, open both the Plate-Veins, or
take away a good quantity of blood from both sides of his Neck; having done
this, give him a Drink of Diapente with Ale, putting thereto an Ounce of brown
Sugar Candy, and half an Ounce of London Treacle, which will expel the grief
from his heart; after this anoint the swelling with Hogs grease, Bores Grease,
and Basilicon, of each three Ounces; incorporate these well together, and rub
the swelling every day therewith, till it come to suppuration or softness; then
by opening it let out the matter; then wash your sore with Coperas water, which
you shall make thus: take two quarts of fair Water, and add thereto half a
pound of green Copperas, with an handful of Salt; and put these into a Posnet,
with a spoonful of Honey, and a branch of Rosemary; boil these together till
one half of the liquor be consumed; a little before you take it off the fire,
put to it the quantity of a Wall-nut of Alum; then let it cool, and preserve
it for your use.

Having washed the sore clean with this water, then apply thereunto this
Ointment; put into a clean Skillet, of Rossin the quantity of a Wallnut, being
molten, add thereto the like quantity of Wax; and when that is melted put
thereunto half a Pound of Hogs grease tried; and that being melted, put in a
spoonful of English Honey; and when these are melted, and well stirred
together, put thereunto half a pound of ordinary Turpentine; this being
dissolved, take it from the fire; then add of Verdegrease finely pulverized
one Ounce; and so stir them all together; then set it on the fire, and let it
simper, but if it boil it is utterly spoiled; then strain it, and when cold,
preserve it for your use. This Ointment is of excellent Virtue to cure old
Ulcers, Fistulas, but more especially any green wound.

Bots or Worms in Horses.
It is the opinion of the most judicious, that there are three sorts of Worms
which breed in the Bowels of an Horse: First, Bots, being short Worms with
great red heads, and long, small, white tails; next, Truncheons, which are
short and thick, being all of a bigness; and the last are as big as a man's
finger, and six inches long, and are only called Worms. Mr. Markham by
experience has found out a fourth sort, which are of a middle size, and are
red and fiery, with thick, short, sharp heads, and are of all others most
dangerous; for sometimes they will get up to his very throat, and choke him,
sometimes eat through his very Stomach, and kill him.

These Worms do proceed from a raw, gross, and Phlegmatic matter, engendered by
foul feeding.

The signs are; the Horse will refuse his meat, and will be much addicted to
lying down, and rolling on his belly, beating it sometimes with his feet: if
troubled with the Red Worms, his pain will be intolerable, so that he will
beat his head against the ground.

Some approve of this as an excellent remedy; take the warm guts of a new
killed Hen, and mixing them with Salt, thrust them down the Horses throat; this
must be done three mornings fasting, withholding him from water four hours
after; or else give him to drink a spoonful of Soap in a Pint of Milk; or
lastly, take of Gentian, Aloes, and Savin, of each half an Ounce, and brew them
together with Honey and strong Ale.

But if it be a Mare with foal, give nothing internally for fear of killing her
Colt; only let her blood in the roof of her mouth, and make her swallow her own
blood, which will not only kill the Worms, but help most internal Maladies.

Blood-staling.
An Horse many times instead of Urine, will void pure blood, which is
occasioned often times by laboring over much; and by that means breaking a
Vein; then will there issue from his Yard pure blood, without any other
commixture; but if the Blood be mingled with Urine, then it proceeds from the
Kidneys, wounded with a ragged Stone therein: but Mr. Markham is clearly of the
opinion, that there is no greater cause of Blood-staling, than the taking up of
an Horse in the dead of Winter from Grass, and without a days respite, riding
him a long journey.

The signs are so apparent, that we will pass them, and fall upon the Cure; and
in the first place, it will be proper to phlebotomize him in the Palate of the
mouth, or in the Neck; and let the blood be sodden with Wheat, and with the
powder of dried Pomegranat pills; having strained it, give him hereof four or
five mornings together; and in the space of time let him not labor by any
means.

Or, take a quart of strong Ale and a red Herring, cut it into small pieces,
and let it lie steeping in the Ale, then give it the Horse with an Horn, and it
will stop the inward bleeding of the Horse.

Otherwise, you may take a spoonful of Taragon, and steep it in White Wind, and
as much Poppy seed beaten as will lie on a Shilling; give this fasting in the
White Wind, and it is an infallible cure.

Blowing and Pursiveness in an Horse.
Many Horses are naturally thick winded, by reason of their being
Cock-throppled and narrow chawled; but most frequently it is so by accident; as
when he is fat and over-laden with flesh, by rankness of blood, or by too much
foulness in the body; and by these means will upon any exercise sweat, pant,
blow, and heave at the Flanks.

To the intent wherefore you may prevent his being broken winded, in time apply
your self to the cure; and let it be in this manner.

Let him feed moderately on Hay, (for Horses so diseased are greedy Feeders)
and let the Hay be always sprinkled with water, which will assuage his thirst,
and very much cool his inflamed blood; then give him two Eggs steeped twenty
four hours in the strongest White-Wine-Vinegar five or six mornings following,
and let him swallow the Vinegar afterward; then ride him gently an hour after,
then set him up warm, and three hours after give him Hay sprinkled with Water,
and at night give him Oats, wetted in good strong Ale; do this ten days,
keeping him the while to spare diet, and let his drink be white Water.

This Medicine will both purge and scowre from him much phlegm and filth at Nose
and mouth; and if moderately exercised, will be both sounder and better in
health a long time after.

Belly-ach.
This Belly-Ach or Fretting in the Belly proceeds from eating green Pulse, or
raw, undryed Pease, Beans, or Oats; or when gross humors, Inflammations, or
any sharp matter is gotten between the Pamile and the great Gut.

The signs are great groaning, wallowing, striking at his Belly, and gnawing on
the Rack or Manger.

The Cure is, first, to anoint your hand with Sallet Oil or Butter, and then
thrusting it into the Horses Fundament, pull out as much Dung as you can reach,
which is called Raking an Horse; then give him a Clyster of Water and Salt, or
a Suppository of Honey and Salt; and then let him drink the Powder of Centaury
and Wormwood brewed with a quart of Malmesey. But the best remedy in most men's
opinion is a Suppository of New Castle-Soap.

Broken-Windedness.
This disease may happen by over hasty running a fat Horse presently after his
Water, or without exercise standing too long in the Stable, or foul feeding,
whereby so many gross humors may be drawn down into the body of an Horse, that
cleaving to the hollow parts of his Lungs, and stopping the Wind-pipes, his
Wind may have its recourse backwards, and not upwards, filling the Guts and
diminishing his strength.

The signs of this disease are violent, beating of his Flanks, drawing his
Belly upward, great opening of his Nostrils, with a swift going to and fro of
his Tuel, all which are accompanied with a dry Cough.

This is the worst of all the Distempers of the Lungs, and therefore the Cure
is the more difficult; however take this method, having been found an excellent
remedy by frequent experience, and has done its work when all others failed.

Take of Pances, Long-Wort, Maidenhair, the Crops of Nettles, Carduus
Benedictus, the Herb Flue^in, Dragon roots bruised, Elicampane roots bruised,
of Water Hemp, Peniroyal, Light-Wort, and Angelica, of each of these a good
handful, bruise them, and lay them all night in two Gallons of Water, let it
boil in the morning, and when it is lukewarm, give the Horse hereof as much as
he will drink; after this drink, give him a good quantity of sodden Wheat; use
him to this Diet for ten days, and then if the season be convenient, turn him
out to grass.

Others apply this Medicine; they will take his Water for nine days, and boil
Liquorish therein mixed with Wine, and so give it him to drink. I do not deny
but this may be a safe and good Medicine, but the first for my money.

Broken Lungs frettized and rotten.
The Lungs are enclosed by a very thin film, and therefore are the more subject
to break; and being broken, if the cure be neglected, they will soon
impostumate and inflame.

The signs are; when the Horse cougheth his Flanks will beat, but the flower
they beat, the disease is the more dangerous, by how much it is of the longer
standing or continuance; besides, he will draw his Wind short, groan much, and
when he coughs he will bring up something, which he will champ in his mouth.

To cure him you must give him two or three Ounces of Hogs grease, and three
spoonfuls of Diapente, brewed in a quart of Barley-Water, wherein Currants have
been boiled.

Or you may take of Fenugreek and Linseed, of each half a pound, of
Gum-Tragacanth, of Mastick, of Myrrh, of Sugar, of Fitch Flower, of each one
Ounce, let all these be beaten into fine Powder, and then for a whole night
infused in a good quantity of warm Water, and the next day give him a quart of
this Lukewarm, putting thereto two Ounces of the Oil of Roses, use him to this
ten or a dozen days, and let grass be his food, for that is best in this
condition.

Cold or Pose, the best way to cure it.
If to be had, take one Ounce of the purest and finest paste of Elicampane,
which has the strings at the roots taken from it; if that cannot be gotten,
take an Ounce of the Conserve of Elicampane, and dissolve it in almost a quart
of Sack, and so give it in an Horn to an Horse fasting; and then ride him half
an hour after, and after that let him fast two hours; do this three or four
mornings, feeding him as at other ordinary times.

Consumption.
This Disease is called the Dry Malady, and indeed it is nothing else but an
Ulceration of the Lungs, proceeding from a sharp corroding humor engendered by
Cold or Surfeit. Some would have this Malady to be the Mourning of the Chine,
but they are mistaken, for the Dry Malady, or general Consumption, never
evacuateth any thing at the nose; but the Mourning of the Chine ever voideth
thereat some filthy matter.

The signs hereof are, Consumption of flesh and strength, the Belly will be
gaunt, and the Backbone hid; he will offer to cough, but cannot, or if he
does, it is but faintly.

This disease is incurable, yet his life may be so prolonged with a competent
strength, to do a great deal of labor: to the intent therefore that he may be
serviceable, you must purge his head; then give him Cole-worts chopped small in
his Provender, and now and then give him the warm blood of a sucking Pig, or
the juice of Leeks mixed with Oil and Wine.

But the best cure is to purge his body clean, with comfortable and gentle
Purges; and then suffer him to run at grass a Winter and a Summer, and he will
either dye in that time, or be restored to perfect health.

Colt-Evil.
It is a disease in the Yard, Sheath, and Cods of an Horse or Gelding by reason
of heat, and rankness of seed; but to a Gelding it happens by weakness and
coldness of Seed. The too great abundance of Seed in an Horse causes a
stopping in the Pipe, or conveyance of the Yard: now a Gelding for want of
strength and heat to send it forth, his seed stops the passage; and so his Yard
and Sheath swell very much.

The best way to cure an Horse, is to let him cover a Mare; and after this,
ride him up to the Flanks in running Water against the stream.

If this will not do, swim him against the stream five or six days following,
and then apply to the part this Plaster.

Take Bean-Meal and Mallows, of each one handful, Hogs grease half a Pound;
chop the Mallows small, and so boil them in a pint of White Wine, when boiled,
put it into a cloth, and wrap his Cods up close therein; use this often, and
you will not only take down his swelling, or continual erection of his Yard,
but heal any excoriation by sharpness of Seed. If he shed his Seed much; then
beat Venice Turpentine, and Sugar together, and give him every morning a good
round Ball thereof, till you have stayed the running.

Clysters, a general discourse thereof.
A Clyster or a Purgation is defined to be the emptying of superfluous humors;
which by their malevolent disposition do cumber and disturb the body; now when
nature is too weak to throw off these peccant humors; then Art must be used,
either by Purgation, Vomit, Clyster, or Suppository.

Clysters or Glisters and Suppositories contrary to the administration of other
Physic, are applied to the Posteriors, whose natures are to purge the Guts, to
cleanse Ulcers, to assuage the pains of Belly-ach or Cholick.

Now Clysters are not all of one nature; for some are laxative, some are
restringent, some cleansing, some preparatory to other Physic for its better
operation; and therefore my advice is to all Farriers, not to administer any
Physic, if the Horse be not soluble in body, till having first breathed a
vein, and the next day give him a Clyster.

Now Clysters are made either of Decoctions, or Drugs, or Oils, and sometimes
by the adding of Salt; and the quantity of these is given according to the age,
strength, greatness or corpulency of the Horse: as for Example: If an Horse be
lean, small, weak and feeble, then of a Decoction a quart is enough; if on the
contrary, strong, etc. three pints, of Oil half a pint, and of Salt three
drachms at most. Of Drugs, as Sena, Cassia, Agarick, etc. you must not exceed
the quantity of three ounces at most in one Clyster, and of Butter not four
ounces; and let your Clyster be never more than lukewarm. Before he receive it
let him be somewhat empty, by raking, etc. and let him retain it half an hour;
and for the better effecting thereof, let his keeper hold his Tail close to his
Tuel, for the space or time aforesaid; the longer it is kept in, the more
effectual it will be to him: observe to draw away the Clyster-pipe by degrees,
and not all at once.

Clyster against costiveness, which causes a loathing to meat, drooping and
languishing.
Take the fat of Beef-broth one pint and an half, of good English Honey half a
pint, adding thereto of white Salt two drachms; mix these well together, and
administer it blood-warm: if it work not in half an hour after you have clapped
his Tail close to his Tuel, then ride him a little, but not so much as to make
him sweat; then tie him up warm, clothed and littered, for five hours, in
which time he will purge gently, after this give him sweet Hay and white Water,
but let him not drink cold water in two days after.

This Clyster is most excellent for opening the body, for purging offensive
humors, for removing obstructions, and for cleansing the guts.

Clyster Restringent for an Horse that emptieth himself too much, either by
debility, or Nature too much offended.
Take of Mellilot two handfuls, or rather Pellitory and boil it to a Decoction:
of this take one pint, adding thereto as much Cows milk (coming warm from her)
and put also thereto the yolks of 3 new laid Eggs, well beaten and well mixed
with the said liquor, and so give it your Horse blood-warm.

Clyster for a fat Horse, or one newly taken from Grass.
Take Mallows three handfuls, Marsh-mallow-roots cleansed and bruised, and
Violet leaves of each two handfuls, Flax-seed three spoonfuls, so many of the
cloves of white Lilly roots as you may easily hold in your hand; boil these in
fair water from a Gallon to a Quart, then strain it and put thereto of Sena one
Ounce, which most be infused or steeped in the liquor three hours standing over
the hot embers, then add thereto half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, give your Horse
this blood-warm four days before the full and change of the Moon.

Clyster for any desperate sickness.
Take of Oils of Dill, and Camomile, of Violets, and of Cassia, half an ounce
of each, and of brown Sugar Candy powdered three ounces, of Mallow leaves half
an handful; boil the Mallows first to a Decoction in fair water, then strain it
and put therein all the aforesaid ingredients.

This Clyster is a sovereign help against all Fevers, the Pestilence, all
languishing Distempers or Surfeits, and will corroborate and strengthen in a
very short time.

Clyster for the Plague or Pestilence:
Take half an Ounce of the pulp of Coloquintida, the seeds and skins exempted,
three quarters of an ounce of Dragantium, of Centaury and Wormwood of each half
an handful, a quarter of an ounce of Castoreum; boil all these in three quarts
of water to a quart, then strain it, and dissolve into it three ounces of the
broth of Gerologundinum, and of white Salt three drachms, of Sallet-oil half a
pint, and so administer it being blood-warm.

Clyster lenitive against Convulsions, Cramps, Costiveness, Surfeit or
Foundring.
Take four ounces of Butter, or half a pint of Sallet-oil, and put it to the
Decoction of Mallows and give it him Clyster-wise bloodwarm; it is a great
Cooler of the body, and does infinitely assuage pain.

Clyster for the Cholick.
Take salt water, or new made brine, a quart, dissolve therein a pretty
quantity of Soap, and so blood-warm administer. This Clyster is not only good
against the Cholick, Griping of the Guts, but any other distemper.

Dropsy.
This disease is known by an universal swelling of all the body in general, but
especially the legs, through the abundance of water lying between the skin and
the flesh, the Belly will swell like to a Mares with Foal, a swelling also
betwixt the great Bag and the Kell; this disease is farther known by shortness
of breath, loss of natural color, want of appetite, and a continual christ.

This disease, which is an evil habit of the body, is engendered by surfeits
and unreasonable labor, and is cured by taking two handfuls of Wormwood, and
boil it in Ale or Beer a quart or better, and give it the Horse to drink
lukewarm morning and evening; at noon let him drink his own water.

But the best and most approved remedy is to take a Gallon of strong Ale, and
settling it over the fire, scum off the froth which arises; then take a
handful of Wormwood with the stalks, and put them therein, and let it boil to a
quart, then take it off and strain it well; then dissolve into it three ounces
of the best Treacle, and put in also an ounce and a half of long Pepper and
Grains beaten to a fine powder; then brew them together till it be lukewarm,
and so give it him to drink; the next day let him blood in the Neck-vein, and
anoint his Forelegs with Train Oil; then turn him into good grass, and do not
doubt his recovery.

Drenches general for all Diseases in Horses.
If for colds, take half an ounce of the powder called Diapente (the way how to
make it I have already discovered in a Chapter foregoing) and brew it with a
pint of Sack, if for sickness at heart, brew it in Muskadine, and give it the
Horse fasting in the morning: give him this to drink as soon as ever you see
him begin to droop, and so continue doing for three or four mornings.

Another Drench you may make by taking two handfuls of Celandine root and
leaves, chop them and bruise them; then take of Rue, red Sage and Mint as much,
of Aloes half an ounce; boil these in a pottle of Ale to a quart, and give it
the Horse lukewarm.

Or take four ounces of Diapente, and mix it with four ounces of Honey
clarified, and keep it close in a Glass; then take a pint of sweet Wine, and
put half an ounce thereof into it, and it is an excellent Drench.

Take of Liquorish an ounce, of Anniseeds, Cumminseeds and Elecampane roots of
each half an ounce, of Turmerick and Bays of each a quarter of an ounce, of
long Pepper and Fenugreek of each two drachms; beat these small and sierce
them, and put five spoonfuls into a quart of Ale warmed with a little Butter or
Oil.

The powder of Brimstone mixed with sweet Wine is a very good Drench.

The root of the Sea-onion, the roots of Poplar mingled with common Salt, given
in water preserves health a long time.

Garlic and Housleek beaten together in a Mortar, and then boiled in Ale from
a pottle to a quart, and mixed with Liquorish, Anniseeds and Sugar Candy, with a
pretty quantity of Sallet oil, is an incomparable Drench for any internal
maladies proceeding from hot causes. Of Drenches, and their uses, let this
suffice.

Diseases commonly infesting the Spleen:
The Spleen is the receptacle of Melancholy and the dregs of blood: there is no
part of the body more subject to diseases than this is; for through its
Sponginess, it is inclined to suck in all manner of filth, and communicate it
to the whole body.

The diseases of the Spleen usually afflict Horses in the Summer, most
proceeding from the greedy eating of green food.

The signs of these Maladies are Heaviness, Dullness, pain on the left side,
hard swellings, short breath, much groaning.

The speediest way to cure him is to make him sweat; then take the leaves of
Tamarisk bruised, a good quantity of Cumminseed beaten to powder, and boil them
in a quart of white wine, and so give it him lukewarm.

This last is not the least, nor a despicable remedy; Take Cumminseed and Honey
of each six ounces, of Lacerpitium as much as a Bean, of Vinegar a pint, and
put all these in three quarts of water, and let it stand so all night, in the
morning give him a quart to drink, having fasted all the night.

Diseases of the Gall.
If the Liver be troubled with many diseases, so is the Gall; which is a long
slender little greenish Bladder, fixed underneath the Liver, which receives
all the Choleric bitter moisture, which would otherwise not only be offensive
to the Liver, but likewise the whole body. Now if the passage of this necessary
Vessel be stopped, there will certainly follow many diseases; as the Lax,
Bloody Flux, Yellows, and the like. Or if the way whereby such Choler should
issue forth of the Bladder of the Gall, down into the Guts and Excrements, is
closed up, and so abounds with too much Choler; hence proceeds Suffocation,
heat, thirst, and a disposition to rage and fury; and for certain, in any beast
there is not a more dangerous disease than the overflowing of the Gall.

The Symptoms of these Maladies are yellowness of the skin, yellow Jaundice,
with costiveness of body.

The Cure is to boil good store of Saffron in Milk, or Ale; Saffron and
Anniseeds mixed together. But I am of the opinion that Celandine roots and
leaves, chopped, bruised, and boiled in beer, and given the Horse lukewarm to
drink, is more sovereign.

But notwithstanding, our prescriptions for these maladies, some do confidently
affirm that an Horse has no Gall at all; but that filthy and corrupt matter is
wasted and spent either by sweat, exercise, or turns into diseases.

Diseases incident to the Liver.
The diseases of the Liver are many, and do proceed from many causes; as when
it it too hot and too dry, two moist or too cold, or by intemperate riding,
evil food, corrupt humors, or overflowing of the Gall.

If his distemper proceed from any hot cause, then these are the apparent
signs; he will be lean and loath his meat, his thirst will be great, and he
will be very laxative.

Now the general heads from whence a disease in the Liver does proceed, are
Inflammation, Impostumation or Ulceration: If his distemper proced from a cold
cause, it must be by an Ulcer which proceeds from a cold cause; and the
Symptoms to know it by are, continual coldness of his Body, great feebleness
and faintness; and the reason is, because the ulcerated matter diffuseth ill
vapors through the whole body.

So soon as you discover this distemper by the Symptoms aforesaid, let him
blood immediately in both sides of the Neck, and the next day let him blood in
both the Spur-veins, and then give him this Drink.

Take H^ssop, Cowslip leaves, Liver-wort, Lungwort and Hart's-tongue of each an
handful; then take Gentiana, Aristolochia rotunda, Enula campana dried, and
long Pepper, of each the like quantity, so as when they be p^unded and sierced
you may have of each a spoonful; chap the herbs, and then mingle them with a
spoonful of live Honey, then boil all these ingredients in a quart of Ale, till
one half be consumed, then strain it and give it him blood-warm; if he refuse
to eat, by reason this drink has made him dry, then give him a warm Mash; let
him rest three days betwixt every Drench.

Ears Impostumated.
This disease has its rise from several causes, either by a blow about the
ears or poll, or else by being galled thereabout with a new Halter; sometimes
it proceeds from a cold, other whiles by bad and peccant humor.

The Signs of this distemper are burning, glowing and swelling about the part,
and he will not endure to be touched thereabouts.

For the Cure; Take Linseed and make it into a fine powder, and Wheat flower of
each half a Pint, ordinary Honey a pint, tried Hog's Grease one pound; mix these
well together and warm them on a fire, keeping them stirring continually; then
take of this Ointment, and spread it on a linen cloth or leather, the breadth
of the swelling, and so apply it warm, renewing it once in twenty four hours,
till it comes to suppuration, and so break; then having cleansed the part, heal
it thus:

Take Mel Rosarum, Sallet oil, and ordinary Turpentine of each two ounces;
having incorporated them well together, make a bigging for the Horse to keep on
the medicine, and tent it to the bottom with this Ointment, applying likewise a
Plaster of the same to the place aggrieved, renewing it daily till the sore be
well.

Frenzy.
This Frenzy or madness in an Horse is fourfold: first, when some naughty and
corrupted blood does strike only one part of the Panicle of the Brain; and you
shall know this by his turnning round like a Beast troubled with the Sturdy.

The second is, when a poisonous blood infecteth the middle part of the Brain;
then will the Horse be mad, leaping against any thing and running his head
against a wall. Thirdly, he is said to be mad when blood fills his
stomachical Veins.

Lastly, he is then frantic indeed, when the poison of the blood not only
infecteth the Brain and Heart, but the Panicles also, which you may know by his
biting of every thing comes near him, by gnawing the Manger, and lastly by
tearing his own skin in pieces.

The speediest cure is to let him blood in most of the lower parts of the body,
to draw down the blood from cumbring his head. The Veins most proper to be
opened for this dangerous Distemper are the Shackle-veins, the Spur-veins, the
Plat-veins and the Thigh-veins, taking very much blood from them; after this,
give him this drink; take the root of wild Cucumber, if not that, a handful of
Rue or Mints, and an handful of black Hellebore, and boil them in strong red
Wine, and give it in an horn lukewarm.

The Cure which Mr. Markham has by long experience found most safe, speedy and
expedient, is either to make him swallow down hard Hensdung, or else give him
to drink the root of Virga Pastoris, stamped in water. As for his ordering
during the Cure, his Stable must be quiet, but not close, and his food only
warm Mashes of Malt and Water of this but a little at a time, for the slenderer
his Diet, the better it is.

Falling Evil.
This Falling Evil is the same which in men is called the Falling sickness, it
deprives the beast of all sense whatsoever. It proceeds from gross and cold
phlegm, gathered together in the fore part of the head betwixt the Panicle and
the Brain, which being by any hot vapor dispersed through the whole Body, it
does instantly cause the Falling; the signs of this Distemper are so apparent
they need no farther description than this, that all his body will quake and
quiver, foam at the mouth; and when you think him past recovery, he will start
up and fall to his meat.

To effect the Cure, let him blood in the Neck-Vein; five days after bleed him
in the Temple-Veins and in his Eye-Veins; then anoint his body all over with a
comfortable Friction; then bath his head and ears with Oil de Bay, liquid Pitch
and Tar mixed together; dropping some thereof into his Ears, make him a Cap of
Canvas, quilted with Wool, to keep his head warm, and force him to sneeze.

Now because this is a disease that does not frequently invade the bodies of
English Horses, only the Spanish, French, and Italian Horses, I think what
already is written of this Malady may suffice.

Foundring in the Body.
This Distemper, of all Surfeits is most dangerous, and most incident to Horses
which daily travel. It proceeds from suffering the Horse to drink too much in
his travail, being very hot; whereby the Grease being suddenly cooled, it does
clap about and suffocate the internal parts with such a loathsome fullness, that
without a speedy purgation, death will speedily and inevitably follow.

And this disease may proceed from another cause. viz. sudden washing of
Horses in the Winter time, when they are both fat and hot by travail; where are
cold Vapor of the Water striking into the body of the Horse, benums the inward
and vital parts, making the blood to lose its office, whereby he loses his
strength in such manner, that he can neither go, nor bow his joints; and being
laid, he is unable to rise again.

The Symptoms of this disease are, holding down his head, staring up of his
hair, coughing, staggering behind, trembling after water, loathing his meat,
stiff-going, and disability to rise when down; but the most remarkable of all
signs is, his belly will cling up to his back, and his back will rise up like a
Camels.

The first thing you are to do in the curing this Malady, is to rake his
Fundament, then give him a Clyster,; finding the Horses belly emptied, then
take a quart of Malmsey, of Sugar half a quartern, half an Ounce of Cinnamon, of
Liquorish and Anniseeds, of each two spoonfuls, beaten into fine powder; which
being put into the Malmsey, warm them over the fire, adding thereto some Honey;
which being molten, give it the Horse lukewarm; which done, walk him up and
down an hour if the weather be tolerably warm, then let him fast upon the bit
two hours, being well clothed and litter'd; and when you give him Hay, let it
be sprinkled with Water; and give him his clean sifted Provender by a little at
once; his drink must be warm Mashes of Malt and Water; upon his recovery draw
blood from him in the Neck-Vein, and moderately exercise him often.

Fever.
I have in a Chapter foregoing treated of several sorts of Fevers; however, I
must not in this place omit speaking something more thereof.

An Horse that is Feverish may be known by his suddenly falling ill, his
heaviness and gauntness of his Belly; when it first seizes him, he will quake
exceedingly.

The Cure: Take half an Ounce of Diapente, one Ounce of Bay Berries, half an
Ounce of long Pepper; beat these together; then take half an Ounce of
Diascordium, and put all these into a Pint and half of strong Beer, and making
it lukewarm, give him it any time of the day to drink, but take no blood from
him in any case, it is death if you do; only cloth and litter him warm; the
Diascordium will cause him to sleep: Now after the Drink has done working, and
the Horse left off sweating, then give him half a Pint of White Wind and two
Ounces of Honey, mixed together, and made lukewarm; then air him, and four
hours after give him a Cordial, made of three pints of stale Beer, and a
quarter of a Pint of Honey, and a quarter of a pound of Butter, and a good
piece of Household bread; boil them a little together, and give it him
lukewarm; and so set him up for that night.

Next morning fasting, give him the Cordial again, and at ten of the Clock give
him warm Water and Bran, at three of the Clock White Wind and Honey, and at
night warm Water and Bran. Thus do with airing him sometimes; and as you see
him mend, you may air him oftener; at which time take some blood from his
Spur-Veins, and never question his cure.

Flux in Horses.
A Flux proceeds from cold, or from drinking too much after eating too
plentifully of Provender; for the Water coming thereunto causes it to swell,
whereby crudities are bred in the Stomach, and so carried down to the Guts, and
this occasioneth the Flux.

It proceeds sometimes from too soon traveling after Provender, it being not
well digested before; or from drinking cold Water when he is too hot; or from
eating Hens-Dung, or a Spider.

Be not over hasty in stopping this Flux, unless you perceive he purges too
much, and over violently; for then undoubtedly Nature is highly offended; and
then give him a laxative Clyster, which I prescribed before in the Chapters of
Clysters, and that will carry away from him whatever within offends him; a day
after give him this Drink, made of Bean Flower and Bole-Armoniack Powder, of
each three Ounces, mix them with a quart of Red-Wine, give it him Blood-warm;
and afterward keep him warm in the Stable, giving him Hay and Oats a little at
a time.

Another way; Take of wood-Ashes finely searced, and of Bole Armoniack made
into a fine powder, of each a like quantity, put them into the water that he is
to drink, and let him drink thereof morning and evening; and this will stay his
Flux.

Glaunders.
I shall wave what the Ancients have said of the Glanders, imagining that it
comes from the Latin word Glandulae, and say that it is a running Impostume,
engendered either by cold, over much fasting, or long thirst, or by eating foul
meat, or else by infection of other Horses.

It is a Flux or Rheum, which sometimes runs at one Nostril, sometimes at
both: now, he that would perfectly cure this disease, must consider the matter
which issues from the Horses Nose. If the humor be clear and transparent,
then it is not very dangerous; if white, it is worse, yet with no great
difficulty cured. If it be yellow, it is infectious, yet curable; and therefore
separate him from your sound Horses. If that yellow be mixed with red, or if
the color of the matter be like Saffron, the Horse is in a manner incurable.

He ought to consider whether the matter has an evil smell, if so, it is the
sign of an Ulcer; if it stink not at all it is a certain sign of death.

To facilitate his cure you must give him warm Mashes of Malt and Water, with
purging his head by sneezing; you may then give him any of these several drinks.

First, you may take a pottle of Urine, an handful of Bay Salt, and a good
quantity of brown Sugar Candy, then boil it to a quart; after this, add
Anniseeds and Liquorish beaten to fine powder, and give it him blood-warm to
drink.

Secondly, you may take Swines Grease, and boil it in Water; then take the fat
from the water, and mingle it with a little Oil Olive, and a good quantity of
Urine, and half as much White Wind, when it is lukewarm give him a quart
thereof to drink.

Thirdly, take a quart of Ale, an Ounce and half of grated bread, the Yolks of
two Eggs, of Ginger, Saffron, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cardamomum, Lavender,
Galingal, and Honey, of these an indifferent quantity; mix these together,
strain it, and give it him to drink.

But if the Glaunders be of the worser sort, which will be known by the
aforesaid Symptoms; then take half a pound of Swines Blood, add to it a pound
of the juice of Beets, with three Ounces of Euphorbium finely beaten; and when
it has boiled some time, take it off from the fire, and put thereto another
Ounce of Euphorbium; keep this Ointment, and anoint therewith his Nostrils, by
dipping two very long feathers, or little rods therein; and so rub them to and
fro his Nostrils; then walk him abroad, and do thus four days together; and
this by experience has been found an excellent cure.

Gargel, Murrain, Plague, and Pestilence.
Blood-letting is very dangerous in these Pestilential diseases: The signs when
to know an Horse afflicted with this distemper, are, Gumming thick at the eyes,
hanging down of the head, staggering as he goes, swelling of his head, falling
away of his flesh, notwithstanding a good appetite to his meat.

For the Cure, take of Diapente the bigness of an Hasel-nut, as much Dialfara,
as much London Treacle, as much Mithridate, as much Saffron, an handful of
Wormwood, an handful of Red-Sage, Rhubarb as much as an Hasel-nut, and two
Cloves of Garlic; boil all these together in a quart of Beer, till it come to
a pint and half; then give it him lukewarm, fasting, and keep him very warm,
and the next thing you give him must be a warm Mash of ground Malt; it must be
his sweating that principally effects the Cure.

Headache
Is a pain that comes from some inward cause, as some choleric humor
gathered together in the Panicles of the Brain, or from some extreme heat or
cold, or from outward causes, either by a blow or some noisome savor.

The signs are, hanging down of his head, dropping of his Urine, dimness of
sight, swollen, with waterish eyes.

The best way to cure him, is to make him sneeze by fumigation; then let him
blood in the Palate of the mouth, and keep him fasting fourteen hours
afterward; then spurt into his Nostrils Wine, wherein has been sodden
Euphorbium and Frankincense; after this, seed him, and keep his head warm.

Others advise to let him blood three mornings together, after walk him a
while; then cloth him, then cover his Temples over with a Plaster of Pitch;
let his meat be little, and his Stable dark.

Hungry Evil, or greedy Worm.
The hungry Evil is an unnatural and over hasty greediness in an Horse to
devour his meat faster than he can chew it; and is only known by his greedy
snatching at his meat, as if he would devour a piece of the Manger

The Cure is, to give him to drink Milk and Wheat meal, mingled together a
quart at a time, and to feed him with Provender a little and a little at a
time, till he forsake it.

Horse Hide-b^und.
Hide-bound is so called, because the skin cleaves so fast to his ribs, that
with your fingers you cannot pull one from the other.

It proceeds sometimes from Poverty, sometimes from Surfeit, and lastly, from
a corrupt dryness of the blood, which wanting its natural course, forces the
skin to shrink up.

The signs are, besides what is already spoken, gauntness of Belly, and the
Ridg-bone of his back standing up; if this be not speedily remedied, Manginess
will suddenly ensue.

The Cure of this disease is diversely laid down; some will have the Horse let
blood in the Spur-Veins, and then give him this drink.

Take of Strong Ale a quart, and put thereto three Ounces of Sallet Oil, of
Cummin one Ounce, of Anniseeds two Ounces, of Liquorish two Ounces, beaten all
to fine powder, and given him lukewarm in an Horn to drink; having drunk it
off, let one chafe his back, from his Huckle-bone upward for an hour or more;
then let him stand warm, with good store of Litter about him; then fold about
his body a thick Blanket soaked in Water; and this will make him sweat; thus do
for a week, and you will loosen his skin.

Others prescribe blood-letting in the first place, then let him drink 4
mornings together a quart of new Milk, with two spoonfuls of Honey, and one
Spoonful of course Treacle; let his food be sodden Barley, or warm Grains, and
his Drink hot Mashes.

But the best remedy I can find, and that experimentally, is first, to let him
blood in the Neck-Vein, then give him this drink.

Take two handfuls of Celandine, (if in Summer the Leaves, if in Winter, Stalks
and Roots) and chop them small; then take an handful of Wormwood, and an
handful of Rue, and chop them also; put all these into three quarts of strong
Ale, and boil them till it come to a quart; then take it from the fire, and
dissolve therein three Ounces of the best Treacle; and being lukewarm, give it
the Horse to drink; then for a weeks space, once a day rub all the Horses body
over with Oil and Beer against the hair, and feed him with warm Mashes of Malt
and Water, and let his Provender be Barley sodden till it be ready to break.

Horses lean and unsound, how to fatten them in a Fortnight.
If your Horse be so poor and diseased that you are out of all hopes of his
life, then take Anniseeds, Cumminseeds, Fenugreek, Carthamus, Enula-Campana,
Flower of Brimstone, brown Sugar Candy, of each of these two Ounces, beaten,
and searced to a very fine powder; then take an Ounce of the Juice of
Liquorish, and dissolve it in an half pint of White Wind; then take three
Ounces of the syrrop of Coltsfoot, of Sallet-Oyl and Life-Honey, of each half
a pint; then mix these with the former powders, and with as much Wheat Flower
as will bind them all together; then work them into a stiff Paste, and make
thereof Balls as big as Pullets Eggs, and so keep them close in a Gally pot;
when you would use them, take one, and anoint it with Oil or Butter, and give
it the Horse in the nature of a Pill; then ride him a little after it, then
feed and water him as at other times, giving him this Pill for a whole
fortnight together; but if his fatning answer not your expectation, then make a
second Ball after this manner:

Take of Wheat-meal what may suffice, of Anniseeds two ounces, of Cummin-seeds
six drachms, of Carthamus one dram and an half, of Fenugreek-seeds one ounce
two drachms, of Brimstone one ounce and an half, of Sallet-oil one pint two
ounces, of Honey one pound and an half, of white Wine four pints; the hard
Simples being pu'verized and finely sierced, you must make all these into a
Paste, and having kneaded it well, make it into Balls bigger than a Turkeys
Egg; and then every morning and evening when you water your Horse, dissolve
into his cold water one of these Balls, by lathering it, and so let him drink
thereof.

The Horse at first will, it may be, be very unwilling to drink thereof, if so,
let him thirst till he drink it; for at last he will be forced to take, but
having thoroughly tasted thereof, he will refuse all waters for this only; this
is a most excellent Medicine, which not only scowreth, fatneth, but likewise
cleanses the body from all manner of ill humors.

Jaundice.
The Jaundice or the Yellows, proceeds from the overflowing of the Gall and
Spleen: of this Malady there are two sorts: if Choler overflow, by reason of
the Gall, then it is the yellow Jaundice, because of the outward appearance of
the Distemper, as Eyes, Skin, Mouth, inside of the Lips, etc. are dried and
colored Yellow: if Melancholy abound, by reason of the sickness of the Spleen,
the outward parts appear black; and therefore it is called the Black Jaundice.

Where note that whilst the matter is yellow, so long the Horse's body is in a
very probable way of recovery; but when the yellow is mastered and converted
into blackness, it is an evident s^gn of mortality. Of all the diseases in an
Horse's body this is most common, and yet most dangerous, if not timely cured;
wherefore I shall lay down the best receipts I could meet withal.

And first, phlebotomize your Horse in the Neck-vein, and let him bleed so long
till you see the blood come very pure; then give him of this Drink. Take a
quart of Ale, and put therein Saffron and Turmerick of each half an ounce, and
the juice that is wrung out of a great handful of Celandine; and being
lukewarm, give it the Horse to drink, keeping him warm, three or four days,
giving him warm water with a little Bran in it.

Another way to cure him is; when you perceive he is troubled with the
Jaundice, by the sweating at the roots of his Ears, and by the yellowness of
the Whites of his Eyes; then blood let him in in the Neck-veins, on both sides
of the Neck; then take Elder leaves, Celandine and Camomile of each an handful;
cut them small, and give them to the Horse in a pint and an half of the best
Beer, being made lukewarm, fasting; keep him warm, and give him warm water to
drink for two or three days. So much of the yellow Jaundice; a word or two of
the black Jaundice.

It is the opinion of several understanding men, that the black Jaundice is a
disease incurable; but because others are of a contrary opinion, I will give
you an account of what they prescribe for the Cure thereof.

First rake his Fundament, then give him a Clyster made of Oil, Water, Milk and
Nitrum; then pour into his Nostrils the Decoction of Mallows, mingled with
sweet Wine, and let his meat be Grass or Hay, sprinkled with water and a little
Nitre, and his Provender dried Oats; he must rest from labor, and be often
rubbed: I shall say little to it, only leave it to your own Experience.

Inflammations how to ripen; as Pustuls and Kernels which grow under the Chawl
of an Horse.
These Pustuls and Kernels, proceeding from Inflammations occasioned by colds,
etc. must be dissolved, otherwise all remedies will prove insignificant;
wherefore to bring these Pustuls to suppuration, you must take Wheat-bran two
handfuls, and a quart of Wine or Ale to thicken it with, put to it half a pound
of Hog's Grease; boil these together till the Liquour be quite consumed, and so
apply it to the place, as hot as the Horse can endure it, renewing it every
day, till it be so soft as that it be fit to be opened to let out the
corruption; then tent it with Flax dipped in this Salve.

But if the Inflammation be impostumated, you may then take of the grounds of a
Beer-barrel a Gallon, of Smallage, Peniroyal, Winter Savory, Cumfrey, Rue, and
of the Berries and Leaves of the Misseltoe of each two handfuls, chop these
very small, and put them to the Beer grounds, and add thereunto Deer or Sheeps
Suet tried, one pound, and three or four handfuls of Rye or Wheat-bran so much
as will serve to boil these to a Pou^tess; then apply it to the place, and let
it be never so much impostumated it will either break or soften it; but if it
be very hard, it will discuss and divert the humor some other way.

Kidney Infirmities.
The Kidneys are frequently afflicted with Inflammations, Obstructions,
Aposthumes and Ulcers; and these are occasioned by some great strain, by
over-riding or over-bearing.

The usual Symptoms of the distempers in the Kidneys, are discerned by his
staggering and roling as he goes, his Urine will be thick and blackish; if he
has stones, they will be shrunk up; if none, his sheath will be drawn backward.

The Cure: Bathe his Back and Loins with Oil, Wine and Nitrum warmed together,
and after he is bathed, cover him with warm cloths, and let him stand in Litter
up to the Belly; then give him to drink water wherein has been sodden, Dill,
Fennel, Anniseeds, Smallage, Parsley, Spikenard, Myrrh and Cassia, or as many
of these Simples as you can well procure. The next morning fasting, give him a
quart of Ews milk, if you cannot get that, then half a pint of Sallet oil, with
the root of Daffadil boiled in wine, and let Oats be his Provender.

If the Horse be troubled with the Stone, which you will discover by his often
straining to piss, but cannot; then take an handful of Maidenhair, and steep
it all night in a quart of strong Ale, and give the Horse to drink every
morning, till he be perfectly cured; this is an infallible Medicine to break,
in an Horse, any stone whatever.

Loathing of meat in an Horse.
This is a disease proceeding from the intemperature of his Stomach, occasioned
by rankness of blood, or overmuch travel. Daily experience makes this latter
apparent; for if an Horse be ridden hard, and put up into a Stable hot, he will
refuse his meat; and hence it is that I cannot but condemn baiting at Noons (a
vulgar ignorant custom) because a journey commonly craves haste, so that an
Horse is not admitted to take so convenient a cooling as is requisite, before
his meat, which breeds many distempers.

Now to cool him moderately, either wash his tongue with Vinegar, or give him
to drink Oil and Vinegar mingled with cold water.

But if the loathing of his meat proceed from the coldness of his Stomach,
which is only known by the standing up and stovering of the hair; then give him
Wine and Oil to drink, mixed, diverse mornings together; or Wine, Oil, Sage, and
Rice boiled together, giving him thereof a quart at a time.

Some again will give him Onions, pilled and chopped, and Rocket-seed boiled and
bruised in Wine; others mingle Wine with the blood of a Sow-Pig.

But to conclude: Take this as the best remedy for any general forsaking, or an
Horse's loathing his meat, whether it proceed from hot or cold causes in the
Stomach; and that is, when there are green Blades of Corn, especially of Wheat,
give your Horse a good quantity thereof; if it be at such a time, as that they
cannot be procured, then give the Horse sweet Wine, and the seeds of Gith mixed
with it, or else sweet Wine and Garlic, well pilled and stamped, brewing it a
good while together; this is a sovereign remedy in maladies of this nature.

Lask or Bloody Flux.
The Lask or ^ax is an unnatural looseness in an Horses Body, which, if not in
its due time stayed, will bring the Horse to great debilitation and weakness;
this disease proceeds from very many causes; wherefore I shall pass them
over, and only inform you, that as you must have a care not to stop it too
soon, so let it not run too long; both being of an equal dangerous consequence.
As long as you find the strength and good estate of your Horse continue, you
may let him scowre, but when once that begins to impair, you must put a stop to
its farther course; which you may do several ways.

As first; take of Bean-flower and Bole Armoniack, of each a quartern, mix them
together with a quart of red Wine; give it him lukewarm, but be sure to keep
him warm, and expose him to no labor for some small time.

Or secondly, you may take an handful of an herb called Shepherds-purse, and
boil it in a quart of strong Ale; then take the seeds of Woodroof stamped, and
when the Ale is lukewarm, put them thereinto and give it the Horse to drink.
Let his drink in this mean while be warmed, mingled with Bean-flower, but give
him not his full draught at a time, and when you give him any, let it be but
once in eighteen hours.

Others, and not unadvisedly, take the powder of one Nutmeg, half an ounce of
Cinnamon, and as much of the rind of a Pomegranat, and mixing these with a pint
of red Wine, give it the Horse lukewarm to drink.

But if this Disease happen to a sucking Foal, as it is frequently seen, by
reason of the fluidness of his Diet; then give him a pint of Verjuice, which
curdling the Milk, will thicken his excrement, and is, I can experimentally
assure, a speedy Remedy.

Now as to the Bloody Flux, it is undoubtedly occasioned by some sharp humor
excoriating the Guts, or from some exulceration thereof.

The signs of this distemper are very apparent, therefore I shall not need to
describe them; wherefore I shall only prescribe the Cure, and that may be
effected several ways; as by dissolving four ounces of the Conserve of Sloes,
in a pint of red Wine, and so with your Horn give it him to drink: but the most
approved Remedy in this; take half an handful of Shepherds-purse, and as much
Tanners Bark, taken out of the Fat and dried, a little Cinnamon; boil these in
three pints of red Wine, to a quart, and then straining the liquor, give it
your Horse lukewarm to drink.

Molten Grease.
If an Horse be Grease-molten, or foundred in the Body, then open the
Neck-vein, and draw away the corrupt and inflamed blood; then take a pint of
white Wine, half the quantity of Sallet-oil, of Rhubarb two drachms, and the
like of Aloes, half an ounce of Sena, three drachms of Agarick, half an ounce
of Bay berries, two drachms of Saffron, of Duck and Cordial powder two drachms;
pulverize what is to be pulverized, and having mixed them well together, add
thereunto four ounces of life Honey, give him this blood-warm; let him fast
four hours before he take it, and as many after; let him have no Oats that day,
nor any other drink than sweet Mashes, and be sure to keep him very warm.

Mourning of the Chine.
This Distemper, by the experience of such who have frequently opened Horses,
is found to be a Corruption or Consumption of the Liver; this Consumption
proceeding from a cold which is afterward converted into a Pose, that into the
Glanders, and lastly, into the Mourning of the Chine.

To avoid prolixity, or the variety of Cures, which every man, according to his
own fancy, thinks best, I shall give you two, which (instar omnium) are looked
upon by the most Expert the best Remedy for this Malady.

Take of the Bark of an Elder-tree, growing by the water side, as much as will
fill an ordinary Pipkin, add thereunto as much running water as the Vessel will
hold, and boil this liquor half away, then fill it up again, and continue so
doing thrice, after the consumption of the water; and take it off the fire, and
add thereunto a third of the Oil of Oats, or the like quantity of sweet Butter
or Hog's Grease, and being warmed again, take a quart thereof and give it the
Horse to drink; one hornful at his Mouth, and the other at that Nostril which
evacuateth the matter. Let your Horse be fasting when you administer to him
this Drink, and you will find it not only an excellent Cure for this malady,
but also for all others proceeding from any cold whatsoever. Let his meat be
boiled Barley, and his drink warm Mashes; but if the season will permit, his
best food will be to turn him to Grass: but that which I shall particularly
commend to your observation and practice is, Take two drachms of Auripigmentum,
and of Tussilage as much pulverized, then mix them into a kind of paste with
Turpentine, and make little cakes thereof, drying them before the fire; then
take of these cakes, as much as you shall think sufficient, and put thereof
into a Chafing Dish of coals, and covering it with a Tunnel; when it smoaketh,
put the end of the Tunnel into his Nostril, that the fume may ascend into his
Head; then ride him till he sweat: thus do before you water your Horse every
morning till you find his Nostrils leave running, and that those Kernels or
hard lumps at the root of his tongue be dissolved.

Nightmare.
This is a distemper which very much afflicts Horses, as well as Mankind,
seizing both so violently, that the breath will be so stopped, that it will cause
a struggling and a striving, so that an excessive sweat and faintness will
follow.

It comes only in the Night, and it proceeds from Crudities, and ill digestion;
whose ill vapors do not only disturb the head, but likewise all the sensitive
parts.

The signs are, coming to your Horse in the morning, you shall find him all of
a sweat, one drop driving the other, panting, and sweating, principally in his
Flanks, Neck, and roots of the Ears.

The Cure is, Mornings and Evenings, both before and after Water, to give him a
good moderate exercise, and having brought him into the Stable, rub him well
down, giving him Oats, mixed with an handful of Hemp Seed.

Now by the way, take notice that there are other distempers which proceed from
the same cause as does the Nightmare, viz. the Falling-Evil, Planet-Struck,
and Palsy; and these may seem to have different natures and dispositions,
whereas they are all the same, having one rise or original, which is only cold
Phlegm, or thick humors ingendered about the Brain, and benumming the Senses,
and so weakening the Members, that they cause sometimes the Horse to fall down,
and then it is the Falling Sickness; sometimes they seize and weaken one Member
only, and then this Malady is named Planet-Struck; sometimes it spoileth some
particular member by some strange contraction, and then it is called the
Palsy; and lastly, when the humor oppresses the Stomach, lying heavy at the
Heart, stopping his Breath, and making him Sweat, then it has the appellation
of the Nightmare.

As all these Distempers proceed from one cause, so I shall prescribe but one
Medicine: Take three spoonfuls of Tar, and of Butter the like quantity; beat
them well together with the powder of Liquorish, Anniseeds, and Sugar Candy,
till it be like a Paste; then make these into three balls, putting to each ball
three cloves of Garlic; then take your Horse fasting, and give them him, and
let him fast four hours after.

Over-gorged Horse.
The signs of an Horse over-gorged, are swelling and slavering, so full as if
the skin were ready to burst: as soon as you have discovered his distemper,
take a quarter of a pound of Castle-Soap, scraping it thin, and putting it in
two Ounces of Dialphera, bray them in a Mortar together, and make them up into
balls as big as an Egg, and lay them by till you have occasion to use them;
one of these balls you must dissolve into a pint and half of strong Beer
scalding hot, and give it him lukewarm; one of these balls will effect the
cure, for it will soon cause him to empty himself by Urine and scouring.

Purgations, their nature and manner of Administration.
There are five several ways by which an Horse may be purged; First, by Pills
and they are principally for the head, drawing down all peccant humors from
thence into the body; and carrying them off with the Excrements. Secondly,
Potions, which do cleanse the Stomach, Belly and Guts, throwing off all ill
humors, which are there offensive. Thirdly, Clysters, and they are of several
sorts; some to bind, some to loosen, some to heal Ulcers, and others to
mitigate the sharpness of peccant humors. Fourthly, Suppositories, which are
more mild and gentle than your Clysters are, and may be administered when they
cannot.

Now it is very requisite, that the expert Farrier know how to make choice of
his Ingredients; and when gotten, how to compound them; and lastly, for what
diseases or maladies they are most applicably proper; and that you may not be
ignorant of the nature of some Simples, know that Colliquintida, Scammony, and
Elebore are strong; Manna, Cassia, and Prunes are more gentle; those which hold
a mediocrity in their operation, are Rhubarb, Agarick, Aloes, and Sena.

Now there is a fifth way of purgation, and that is by Grass; that which will
scowr most is a new mown Meadow; for that will not only rake his guts, but keep
him from gathering flesh; and therefore it will not be prudence to suffer him
to run there above twelve or thirteen days, and then away with him to some
other Grass untouched by thy Sith, and in a little time he will belly and
recover flesh.

But as for Purgations in the Stable you must heedfully follow their precepts,
who have travailed far in this Art and Mystery; and first of all, the Seasons
of the year must be duly considered. For if you are to give your Horse in
Winter a purge, you must first prepare him by breathing a Vein, keeping him in
a day or two from feeding on any meats that are hard of concoction, as Hay or
Straw. To this intent therefore, let his meat be (for three or four days
before) Wheat or Rye Bran prepared, Beans, Pease or Oats well sifted, and let
him take his purgation fasting.

If you will purge away his ill humors engendered by surfeits, filth and slime,
then take a pint of White Wind, or a quart of strong Ale, and put herein as
much of the powder of the best Mechoacan as will lie on a shilling at four
times; having given him this lukewarm, trot him out a Mile or more, and having
stood upon the Trench till noon; give him a warm Mash.

Whether in Summer or Winter, if you perceive your Horse surfeited, full of
colds, or generally indisposed; first, phlebotomizing him, give him a purge in
this manner. Take two Ounces of Aloes Succotrina pulverized, and with sweet
butter make it up into Pills; give them to him over night, having fasted the
day before, and the next morning give him a sweet Mash, which will make the
Pills work the more kindly, and so let him fast till toward the Evening; and
in that time they will clear his body wonderfully; some Horses are of so strong
a constitution, they will not purge till the second day, and therefore be
careful in the mean time how you order him.

When you think he has done purging, give him a sweet Mash, then Oats and
Bran, and for all night Hay sprinkled with Water.

If you will purge the body of an Horse newly taken from Grass; first rake him,
and then give him this Clyster.

Take of Mallows three handfuls, Marsh-Mallow roots cleansed and bruised, and
Violet leaves of each two handfuls, Flax seed three spoonfuls, so many of the
Cloves of white Lilly roots, as you may easily hold in your hand; boil all
these from a Gallon to a Wine quart; then strain it, and put thereto of Sena
one Ounce, infusing it in the liquor three hours over the Embers, and put
thereunto an half pint of Saliet-Oyl, which being blood-warm, administer
Clysterwise.

The next day after give him this drink; Take a quart of the strongest Ale
wort, a quarter of a pint of ordinary Honey, two Ounces of London Treacle, mix
and brew all together very well.

There are several other sorts of purgations, which for brevity sake I shall
omit, referring you to the ingenious endeavors of Mr. Thomas Gray in his
Expert Farrier.

Piss, how to make an Horse vent his Urine that is troubled with obstructions,
or otherwise.
You must first draw out his Yard, and bathe it well with White Wind, and left
it should be stopped with dirt, pick it and scowr it well; then put a little
Oil of Camomile into his Yard, with a little Wax Candle, and a bruised Clove of
Garlic; if that will not effect your purpose, then take this course to force
him to stale, viz. Take two handfuls of Parsley, of Coriander one handful,
stamp them well and put them into a quart of Wine, wherein was dissolved an
Ounce of Cake Soap, and give it him to drink lukewarm: but some of none of the
least skilled in what appertains to an Horse, give only White Wind, Cake Soap,
and Butter well mingled together, making him drink it lukewarm.

But Mr. Markham by his own experience finds nothing for this distemper more
sovereign, than to take a quart of strong Ale, and put it into a pottle pot;
then take as many keen Radish roots clean washed, being slit through, and
bruised, as will fill up the pot; then stopping the pot very close, so that it
cannot admit of Air, let it stand so four and twenty hours, then strain the
roots and Ale very hard into a clean vessel, and give it the Horse in a morning
fasting; then ride him, but not violently; and having done this several times,
your Horse will be so freed from those stoppages or obstructions, that he shall
piss very freely.

Pissing of Blood.
This disease happens several ways, either by the Stone, or exposing an Horse
to a leap beyond his ability, or by over hard riding. I need not describe the
signs, since they will be very visible to the eye; we are then only to take
cognizance of the Cure, which is thus performed.

Take of Blood-wort and Shepherds Purse, of each three Ounces; stamp them
well, and boil them in fair water; and when strained, and the liquor
blood-warm, give it the Horse to drink; follow this course five several
mornings together.

Or thus; having cleansed his Sheath and Yard from all manner of filth with
broken Beer and Butter, then let him blood in the Neck and Mouth; then having
steeped green Onions in water in a vessel closely stopped eighteen hours, take
of the liquor one pint, and add thereunto a pint of White Wind; then tumble
them together till they appear slimy, and so give it him to drink; this given
him eight mornings together, will not only stop his flux of blood, but reduce
his Urine to its pristine color.

Pursiveness, how cured.
There are some Horses naturally troubled with this distemper, as being
Cock-throppled, that is to say, the Windpipe is over long, and so thereby
becoming crooked, his wind is obstructed, and vents it not but with great
difficulty; but as this infirmity is natural, so I judge it incurable, and
therefore we shall only treat of that pursiveness which comes accidentally,
and that is, when the Thropple is too much filled with fat, or over strained
upon his water, which often happens by the watering course (as they call it) of
an over confident Ignoramus; or it happens sometimes by much Galloping on a
full Stomach; and lastly, it comes by Colds and Glanders.

You need no symptoms, they are so apparent; but as for the remedy, take of new
Milk one pint, of Sallet-Oyl half as much; give him this blood-warm, and then
thrust down his throat two new laid Eggs; let his Hay be sprinkled with Water,
and his Oats washed in Ale; and by doing this four or five mornings, you will
find an amendment. If you find this does not answer expectation (for the best
of Remedies cannot plead Infallibility;) then take of Barley two gallons, steep
it in Water two days, and shift the Water every day; then take it clean from
the water wherein it was first steeped, and boil it in three gallons and an
half till it burst, adding thereto of Anniseeds, Liquorish, and Raisins of the
Sun, of each a pound; but let the Raisins be stoned; so let it boil one hour,
then take it from the fire, and strain it every dry, then put to the liquor one
pint of Honey, and of Sugar Candy powdered six Ounces; then put your liquor
into a clean Earthen bottle, keeping it closely stopped; and four mornings
together give your Horse thereof to drink blood-warm, not much above a pint at
a time; lay the Barley before him, and if he will eat he may; if not, put some
thereof into a bag, and perfume his head therewith; this Medicine has been
approved of by the most experienced Farriers in England.

Rot in Horses.
It is one thing for an Horse to be said he is rotten, and another thing to say
he has the Rot; for to be internally rotten is incurable, but to have the Rot
is to be afflicted with the Dropsy, or some other disease of near a kin.

This disease happens to Horses frequently very young, as when Colts feed in
Marshy and wet grounds; or when but newly backed, and overridden, their blood
becomes inflamed; thence comes putrefaction and corruption, thence Pustuls
engender in the Liver, which produce either Dropsy, Feltrick or Rot.

The most remarkable signs of this distemper is after a journey a swelling and
burning in his legs, and having pressed the part with your fingers, there will
remain a dint or pit, he will pant much, lift and beat in the Flanks, with a
swelling under his belly, etc.

The method of the cure must be first, to bleed him under the Tail, then take
of Mares Milk, or Red Cows Milk two quarts, then take a lump of Arement, and
then if you can get the sweat of a young black Horse, and mingle the Arement
with the Sweat and Milk; mix these well together, and divide it into three
parts, giving him one thereof each morning, but let him not drink after it in
eight hours; if the Season will afford them, give him after this the green
blades of Rye, if not, Barley steeped in new Milk. But after this, if you feel
him cold in the Pasterns and Joints, and that he ever and anon stumbleth as you
lead him, look upon him as lost and irrecoverable.

Strangury or Strangullion.
The bladder of an Horse according to the opinion of the skilful, is troubled
with three very dangerous distempers, viz. the Strangury, Painpiss and Stone.

The Strangury or Strangullion is, when the Horse has great inclination to
stale, and yet cannot void his Urine, unless it be by drops. It commonly
proceeds either from sharpness of the Urine occasioned by over much travail, or
else by exulceration of the Bladder, or finally, some Aposthume in the Liver
and Kidneys; which breaking, and the matter falling into the Bladder, the
sharpness thereof causes a continual desire to piss without ability.

For his Cure, bathe the Horses hinder loins with warm water, then take bread
and Bay Berries; and tempering them with May Butter, convey down his throat two
balls thereof for three mornings together; or take a quart of new Milk, and a
quartern of Sugar, and brewing them well together, give the Horse to drink
thereof five mornings together.

Otherwise, make a strong Decoction by boiling your first quantity of Water to
half a pint three times over with keen Onions clean pilled, and Parsley; then
take a quart thereof, and put thereunto a spoonful and half of London Treacle,
and as much of the powder of Egge-shells finely searced, and give thereof to
the Horse to drink several mornings.

Lastly, take this incomparable receipt which has been by diverse tried with
great success: You must get Saxafrage, Nettle-roots, Parsley-roots,
Fennel-roots, Sperage-roots, and of Dodder, of each one handful; bruise all
these Ingredients together, and boil them on a gentle fire with White Wind,
until a third part be consumed; then put to it of Salt one handful, of Sallet
Oil and the lard of Goats of each three Ounces, of Honey half a pound, when all
these are boiled, strain and wring them very hard; and of this liquor give your
Horse one pint every morning tasting blood-warm. But if in the standing or
boiling it become thick, dissolve it again with White Wind, and after the first
boiling, it must be only warmed.

Shedding of the Seed.
This shedding of the seed is no more than what among men is called the Running
of the Reins: the general cause from whence this infirmity does arise is from
either the abundance and rankness of the seed, or from the weakness of the
seminal vessels, which are not capable of retaining the seed till it is arrived
to its proper thickness; but there is yet one more probable cause than what is
already alleged, and that is by over much covering Mares, or by some great
strain in leaping.

There are some that take this way to cure him, by riding the Horse up to the
belly in cold water, so that his Stones may be covered therewith, bathing his
fundament with Water and Oil, then covering him warm, give him every day to
drink Red-Wine and Hogs-Dung: but if you will be better advised, and that by
long experience, take my counsel; get a quart of Red-Wine, and put therein a
little Acatium, the juice of Plantain and a little Mastick, and give it him to
drink: after this, bathe all his back with Red-Wine and Oil of Roses mixed
together; or take Venice Turpentine washed clean, and beat it well with half so
much Sugar, and then make round balls as big as Wall-nuts, and give the Horse
of these restringent pills five every morning till you have stopped the flux of
his seed.

Sudden Sickness, what to be done therein.
As soon as ever you perceive your Horse not well, according to the signs
aforementioned, bleed him presently in both sides of the Neck, to the quantity
of two quarts, and after that make this Drink for him: Take of sweet Sack one
quart, and burn it with Grains, Cloves, and Cinnamon, of each a like quantity;
having beaten them gross, add to them three ounces of Sugar, and when it is
burned, put thereunto half a pint of Sallet-oil, and two ounces of
London-Treacle; warm all these, and being well brewed together, give it your
Horse lukewarm to drink; then ride him gently, till you perceive he begins to
sweat, and so set him up well littered and clothed, making him to fast five
hours or more somewhat: after he is well rubbed down, give him clean
Wheat-straw, with clean dry Oats, some Wheat and Pease mixed therewith, and let
his Drink be a warm Mash.

Stavers or Staggers.
Though the names of this disease do seem to differ, yet their natures are all
one, consisting of a dizziness in the head, and near a kin to the Frenzy, when
it seizes the Brain.

Several are the causes of this dangerous Distemper; the common rise or
original hereof is, evil digestion and corrupted humors, whose poisonous
vapors do not only distract the head, but distemper the whole body.

The Symptoms are very evident, for his sight will so fail him, that he will
not be able to see a Post before him but run against it, besides slavering at
the mouth, and running at the eyes with filth and matter, often lying down, and
beating his head against the ground.

The Cure is, to take the seeds of Cresses, Poppy, Smallage, Parsley, Dill,
take also Pepper and Saffron of each two drachms; make them all into fine
powder, and put unto them of Barley-water two quarts, as it comes boiling from
the fire, and let it infuse therein 3 hours, and then strain it and give him a
quart thereof in the morning fasting; then walk him an hour or more, and set
him up warm, giving him Hay sprinkled with water, and let him not drink cold
water five or six days after, but instead thereof give him a sweet Mash.

Sleeping Evil.
This is a very strange disease in an Horse, and is of the nature of a
Lethargy, infesting the bodies of Mankind: and as the person thus afflicted
will sleep continually, having lost his memory quite; so will the Horse get
into a Corner and hang down his head to the very ground.

The Cure is somewhat difficult; however, thus you must do, if you intend it:
First, let him blood on both sides the Neck, in the morning fasting; also take
some blood from the third stair in his mouth; then take of Camomile and
Mother-wort of each three handfuls, cut small; boil these in two quarts of
running water half an hour, and then give the Horse a pint once in two days
fasting, and give him the rest the third day fasting, and four or five hours
after give warm water, and a Mash of ground Malt put into scalding hot water,
after it comes off the fire: keep him warm all the time of his cure, and you
will do well to fume his head, as you do in the Staggers.

Surfeits of all sorts.
Though in the Title I seem to treat generally of Surfeits, yet I shall speak
in particular; and first of that inward dry Surfeit which causes the Cods to
swell, either continually, or betwixt whiles; to the intent therefore that you
may arrive at the Cure, mind these following Instructions.

You must first purge your Horse after this manner: Take an ounce of fine
Aloes, which glitters, for that is the best, then pulverize it or beat it to
powder; then take three ounces of fresh Butter, mix these two well together,
and add thereunto so much Wheat-bran as is sufficient to make it into a Paste,
and make thereof five or six Balls; then convey one of them as far into his
mouth as you may, that he may the better swallow it, giving him an hornful of
strong Ale to wash it down; then give him a second, a third, a fourth and the
fifth, still interlining them with an hornful of Beer or Ale, to wash them
down; after this, ride him out for an hour gently, then set him up warm: keep
him fasting six hours after he has taken his Pills, giving him some Hay at
night, and not before, with warm water to drink; and the like the next day.

But the third day, after his purgation is over, give him cold water, and
immediately after it two ounces of Honey, and half a pint of white Wine a
little warmed, for that will make him stale, clearing his Bladder, and
procuring an appetite; then air him gently for an hour and an half, doing thus
morning and evening till he be well.

But if what you have given him, do neither sharpen his stomach nor purge him;
then take three pints of stale Beer, three ounces of course household bread,
mixing them together, and setting them over the fire; being well boiled take it
off, and put therein a quarter of a pound of Honey, and three ounces of fresh
Butter, give him these blood-warm, and ride him moderately a mile afterward;
then set him up warm, and let him stand upon the Trench about two hours after
it: then give him a Mash of sodden Oats till they burst with warm water and
Wheat-bran therein; this in twice or thrice giving will procure him a stomach,
and render him laxative withal.

Now if his Cods be swelled, occasioned by this Surfeit; as soon as his Purge
has done working, take the charge of Soap and Brandy, and with a stick dabb it
on his Cods (or other swelling proceeding from the same cause) as it comes
boiling from the fire; do this but once, and four days after ride him into a
River, against the stream, so deep that he is ready to swim, for near a quarter
of an hour, thus using him once or twice a day, till you find his swelling
abate.

If it be a dry Surfeit, give the Purge first, and afterward the Cordial, made
of white Wine and Honey; but if he run at Nostrils, give him a Drink made of
Anniseeds, Turmerick, Brandy, Vinegar and Beer, and three days after let him
have the Purge: in like manner do if his Grease be melted.

This aforementioned Purge and Cordial are not only good against any dry
Surfeit, but also for melted Grease, set and dried in the body, and legs
swelled, or when an Horse is Gaunt, Gut-foundred and costive.

There is another sort of Surfeit, which is moist, hot and running, that from
the Body falls into either forelegs, hind-legs, or sometimes into all four.

It proceeds from colds and heats, occasioned several ways, and the distemper
is very troublesome and loathsome, however not very difficult to be cured, if
you will observe this Method.

First, let him blood in the Neck-veins, but before you do it, keep him fasting
most part of the night before; having let him bleed freely, give him a drink
made thus:

Take of Aristilochia one ounce, of Turmerick one ounce, of Anniseeds dry one
ounce; beat the Anniseeds and Turmerick small, and grate the roots of
Aristolochia; put these together with one handful of Rue, and one handful of
Wormwood, and one handful of red Sage, one handful of green Fennel, or two
ounces of the seeds thereof; then let all these steep together in three pints
of water all night.

Now before you give him hereof, ride him out a mile or two, to warm him a
little, and then give him this water as it stood cold all night, then ride him
a mile more, and after this let him stand six hours on the bit; then give him a
little Hay, and after that warm water and Bran: he must not drink but once a
day, riding him two or three miles after it.

At the expiration of three days, give him the same drink, using him as you did
before in every circumstance; observing so to do every third day, till you have
exsiccated or dried up those humors which are so offensive to him.

Staling free.
If an Horse be troubled with any obstruction whereby he cannot stale free, I
know no better remedy than this: Take half a pint of white Wine, and infuse
therein all night an handful of Nettle-seeds, with one ounce of Ivy-berries
beaten to powder; the next morning fasting give it him cold, then ride him for
an hour moderately, and after that tie him to the rack three or four hours; do
this constantly every morning, till you perceive him stale freely, which will
be in a little time; for it wonderfully cleanses the Kidneys of Sand and
filth, dissolveth the Stone and purges Gravel.

Squinzie or Strangling.
The Squinzie is a disease both troublesome and dangerous to Horses, for it
commonly breeds the Canker in the mouth, and at the roots of the tongue,
afflicts the Stomach with a great deal of tough Phlegm, which he is not able
with all his endeavors so to cast forth, but that he is forced to swallow it
down again.

His breath will be exceeding hot, and his mouth fiery red; the Canker, if he
have any, you will find by the stench of his breath; and these are the usual
signs and symptoms of this noisome and destructive Malady.

The speediest cure is to take one ounce of Anniseeds, an ounce of Turmerick
beaten to powder, half a quartern of Brandy, a quarter of a pint of white Wine,
a pint and an half of Beer; put these into a Posnet, and only heat them
blood-warm, and give it him fasting, and immediately after he has taken it,
run the point of the Cornel-horn into the third Furrow of the roof of his
mouth, and so bleed him, then walk him a mile, and set him up; be sure you
litter him well, and keep him warm, for he will sweat excessively; give him
only warm water with Wheat-bran therein; the next morning the like, and then
suddenly after give him half a pint of white Wine, and two ounces and an half
of Honey; then walk him as before. The third day in the morning, after he has
swallowed his aforesaid Drink, give him this Cordial, which you may make thus:
Take three pints of strong Beer, somewhat stale, a good piece of
Houshold-bread, and crum it therein, four ounces of Butter; put these into a
skillet together, heat them not too much; taking them off, put in four ounces
of Honey; stir them together well, and give it him, fasting, luke warm, then
ride him a mile, afterward set him up and let him be well littered. In the
time of his Cure, ride him twice or thrice a day moderately, and it will add
very much to the restitution of his former health.

Star in the Forehead; how to make one artificially.
I have heard of many a cunning Jockey that has used this trick, either to add
to the value of his Horse, or else, suspecting his Horse stolen, he used this
project of making this artificial Star, so to disguize the Horse that the right
owner should not know his own goods: thus, I have been informed, they make this
Star: with a pair of Cissers they cut away first the hair from that place where
they would have their artificial Star to appear; then they take a piece of red
Brick, and rub it on the bare place, rubbing it till it come to the roots of
the hair; then wiping it clean with a linen rag, they make a Plaster of
Burgundy-pitch, and spread it on a linen cloth, so long and so wide as they
intend the Star, laying on an hot Iron on the Pitch to soften it, ere they lay
the plaster to the place intended: having laid on the first they apply a
second larger than the former, letting them stick on till they fall off of
their own accord, which may be five weeks first: now the craft lies in making
the hair grow white in the place of the former hair; to effect which, they take
some Butter, but more Honey, and having mingled them together, they anoint the
Star once in three days, and for that distance five or six times; having so
done, in somewhat more than a quarter of a year, the Star desired will be
visibly perspicuous. This some averr they have tried and have found it
effectual, not only as to the forehead of the Horse, but they pretend also
hereby to make such a mark on any other part of his body.

Tyring of Horses on the Road, what to be done therein.
It is no novelty for Horses to tire upon the Road, nay good Horses too, by
reason of some new indisposition of body, his Master was not acquainted with.
But let the causes of your Horse's tyring be what they will, thus you ought to
do in such a case if you will behave your self like a prudent Traveller.

Do not force your Horse beyond his ability, when you perceive him begin to
tire, but make what convenient speed you may to the next Inn, where let the
Hostler rub him well down, cloth him and litter him up to the Belly, and in
his rubbing him with fresh Straw let him observe to do it against the hair:
then take a pint of sweet Sack or white Wine, and put thereto of Cinnamon,
Ginger, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds and Fennel seeds of each one ounce,
all made into fine powder; then take red Sage, Rosemary-tops, Mints, Camomile
and wild Thyme of each a like quantity, amounting in all to half an handful;
chop the Herbs very small and put them with the Spices into the Wine, boil
these together a pretty while, then take it from the fire, strain it, and
unbitting your Horse, give it him blood-warm to drink, then bit him again; and
two hours after you may give him some Hay; but give him his Provender by little
and little, and the next day you will find him in a very good posture to
perform his journey.

Moreover, if your Horse be tired, either by journeying or an Hunting-match; it
is an excellent help to him to give him Urine to drink a little warmed, and let
him blood in the mouth, so that he may swallow some by chewing thereon; if in
your way you espy any Nettles, take an handful thereof, rub his Mouth and
Sheath well therewith; then gently ride him as he pleases to go himself till
you come to the place where you intend to set him up: where being arrived,
cause him to be well rubbed down, and before you go to bed give him four
spoonfuls of Brandy, stuffing his Rack well, with Provender in the Manger: the
next morning rub his legs well with Sheeps feet oil, and you will admire how
wonderfully it will refresh him.

Vomitings what and when to be given.
Vomits for Horses are of excellent use to cleanse the stomach, and are usually
given to Horses newly taken up from Grass, being thereby much troubled with
gross phlegmatic humors, offending both the head and stomach, and if not that
way expelled and removed, will in a little time be very prejudicial to health;
wherefore it will not be irrequisite to insert here a most approved and
incomparable receipt for a vomit, which will infallibly throw out those peccant
humors engendered by that moist feeding. Take two Polypodium roots, the
greatest you can get from the Oak; wash and scrape them very clean and tie them
to his Snuffle or Bit; then let it be steeped in the Oil of Spike a whole
night; in the morning fasting put on his Bridle with the said roots, and ride
him with it in his mouth an hour and upwards moderately. If he be troubled with
any Rheumatick humor, or filthy matter; this will force them to take vent at
his Mouth and Nostrils, and by coughing and sneezing send forth abundance of
filth, which did annoy the head and stomach, and by this means those slimy
humors will be so exhausted, and his blood so refined and purified, that the
Horse with well ordering will continue a long time full and serviceable: this is
not only good for any Horse newly taken from Grass, but for any other Horse
whose Head and Stomach is troubled with any foul and filthy humors.

Wind Cholick cured with a Clyster.
Take Penyroyal, and Pelitory of the Wall of each an handful, Mallows and
Plantane of each an handful, of Cummin-seeds and Sassafrage-seeds of each one
spoonful bruised, Camomile flowers one spoonful, and put these into a quart of
thin posset drink; boil them down to half thereof: take half a pint hereof an
dissolve therein an ounce of Electuarium de Baccis Lauri, and give it him
Clyster-wise.

Or boil one spoonful of Cummin seeds with a few Camomile-flowers in Posset
drink, and if to his Cholick he be also costive give him hereof to drink.

Wind-broken Horse.
Some are of the opinion, that a spoonful of the powder of an Hedgehog put
into Goats-milk, does infinitely help a broken-winded Horse; but others are of
opinion that this is much better: Take Boars dung and dry it to powder, and
put a spoonful of it into two pints of Milk, as it comes from the Cow, or
otherwise heat lukewarm, and give it him to drink; if that quantity make him
not sick the first day, then give him double the proportion the next day, and
so for five days together, and this will cure him.

Wind, how to preserve it in an Horse.
You would think it strange, but not so strange as true, that an Hedg-hog
should preserve the Wind of an Horse; the proof in your practice will convince
you of your misbelief: for take one of them alive, and bake him in the Oven in
an earthen pot close stopped, until he become so dry that you may reduce him
into powder, give your Horse one spoonful of this powder in a quart of strong
Ale every other day, and you will find the good effects hereof to your great
satisfaction.

Or for the certain preservation of your Horses wind, you may make this
Cataplasme. Take four pound of Wheat Flower, Enula-campana, and Gentian, of
each one Ounce; Anniseeds, Fenugreek, Cummin, Brimstone and Liquorish, of each
half a pound; reduce these into fine powder, and searce them well, to these
add of English Honey half a pound, and so much White Wind as will make all
these into a Cataplasme; then boil them to that thickness you may make Pills
thereof, give of them four at a time, for seven or eight mornings together.

Thus far I have treated of the internal diseases of Horses, with their
natures, signs, and cures, in an Alphabetical manner; but I find no inward
distemper beginning with an X, Y, or Z; and therefore I could not finish the
Alphabet; only I find a disease called the Yellows, but because it is the same
with the Glanders, I shall forbear to insist thereon, as having discoursed it
at large elsewhere.

It only now remains that I proceed to the Chirurgical part, that is, the cure
of all outward Sorrances or Maladies which are incident to Horses, and visible
to the Eye. As a necessary Introduction to this present design, I have spoken
of the Anatomy of an Horse, whereby you may understand the names and contexture
of every part and member belonging to an Horse; I shall now lay you down their
Sorrances, with their Cures, in the same method I formerly took in the cure of
an Horses internal diseases; but first take some general instructions.

CHAP. XXV.
Of External Hurts and Sorrances in general, with Caveats to be observed in
their Cures, which are the best Rules or Praecognita, to be known by every one
before he enters on the practice of Horse-Chirurgery.
YOu are to understand, that Sorrances are of two sorts; either an ill
composition of body discernible, either by number, shape, quantity, etc. or
else the division of an Unity, as when a bone is broken, and then it is called
a Fracture, in the disunion of the flesh, it is called a wound, etc. Thus
generally, now particularly.

1. When ever you intend to burn, or cauterize, or make incision, you must do
it either above or below, where there are joints, Veins, or Sinews.

2. No violent corrosive, as Arsnick, Sublimate, etc. must be applied to any
sinewy part or joint.

3. It is not so good to make an incision as it is to cauterize.

4. You must not take above the fourth part of blood from a Colt which you do
from an Horse grown to full maturity.

5. In all Tumors or Imposthumes, you must observe their rise, or beginning,
increase, perfection and conclusion.

6. You must further observe as to those swellings, that if they be not near
some principal part, you may use any thing that is repercussive in their
beginnings; in their increase use medicines that may mollify and ripen; when
brought to suppuration, launch them, and let out the corruption; in their
declination use exste^sive, cleansing and healing Medicaments.

7. If an Horses legs be swelled, depress the part with your finger, if a dent
or hole remain, you may conclude the hurt of long standing, and difficult to be
cured; but, if removing your finger thence, it fill, and rise to its former
height, then is it a new hurt, and easily remedyed.

8. Burn or Cauterize sometimes under the Sore, to divert humors, sometimes
above, to defend and withhold humors. By the way, you are to understand that
Causticks and Corrosives are called potential burnings, actually to burn is
with Instruments.

9. It is better and safer cauterizing with Copper than Iron, but Steel is
next; shun that destructive custom of blowing powders into Horses Eyes, for it
will engender blindness; and do not take up any Veins in the fore feet, for
that will cause stiffness and lameness.

10. Breath a Vein twice a year, that is, in the beginning of May and at the
latter end of December; in May, because then the blood begins to increase,
and in December, to let out the gross and knotty blood occasioned by labor or
ill keeping.

11. Let not your Stallions blood, for they expend enough in the covering of
Mares; for some are of opinion that one Ounce of seed countervails five ounces
of Blood.

12. Consider the time of the day for your blood-letting, and that must be in
the morning fasting, but not very early; next consider his age; for if young
and immature, it will hinder his growth; if old, his blood requires rather to
be repaired than wasted; lastly, look into his strength, for some can better
spare three quarts than another one.

Now the signs to know when an Horse stands in need to be let blood, are
these.

1. His Eyes will look very red, and his Veins will stand swelling high more
than ordinary.

2. He will be continually itching about his Tail, and be frequently rubbing
it, and sometimes will shed some of his hair also.

3. He will now and then pill about the roots of his ears, or in that place
where the Head-stall of the bridle lies.

4. His Urine will be red and high-colored, and his Dung will be black and
hard; or if he have red inflammations on his back, or if there be a yellowness
in the whites of his eyes or inside of his Mouth; these are signs he would be
let blood.

Lastly, when you see there is a necessity of taking blood from your Horse, for
preventing future sickness, let him be sparingly dieted a day or two before, to
the intent that his body may be undisturbed with digestion.

The manner how to let an Horse blood.
As near as you can let him stand on even ground, and if it be the Neck-Vein
you intend to breath, then take a small Cord, and throwing it over his head
bring it down as close to the setting on of his shoulder as you can, then draw
it very hard, and fasten it with a running knot; this will make the Veins
appear as big as a man's little finger.

Observe that the place whereon you are to strike the Vein is within three or
four fingers at the most of the nether chap.

When you have thus raised the Vein up, then with a wet Sponge or a little
spittle wet that part of the Vein you mean to strike, and separating the hair,
set your Fleime directly even upon the Vein, and with a smart blow strike it
in, which done, cause one to put his finger into the Horses mouth, and tickling
him on the roof thereof, make him chaw and move his chap, for that will force
the blood to spin forth; your Horse having bled sufficiently, unloose the Cord
and the Vein will stop, then stroke down the Orifice and it will divert the
course of the blood into its proper channel: after this turn him into the
Stable, and there let him fast two hours, but after that feed him according as
you please, that is to say, a sick Horse according to his distemper, and a
sound Horse with Hay, Oats or Grass.

When you bleed his Temple-Veins or Eye-Veins, you must then cord him about the
middle of the neck; but have a care you do not throttle him: if in the
Breast-Veins, then cord him behind the shoulders over-thwart his Withers.

Now know, it is not botchingly, but dangerous to strike any of these Veins in
the head or breast with a Fleim; and therefore, if you will go to it like a
Workman, breath those Veins with a sharp Lancet. As for all other Veins in an
Horses body (when to be let blood) they are not to be corded but taken up: and
the manner is thus.

First, cast your Horse upon some soft place, as a Dunghill, not too soft, or on
good store of straw in some light place, then look for the Vein which you
intend to take up; but if by reason of its smallness it is invisible, then take
warm water, and therewith chafe and rub the place, bathing therein all that
part wherein the Vein lies; then take a narrow silk string, and an handful or
two above the Vein (if it be of any of the Horses legs) tie the member very
straight; but if it be on the body or breast, then with a good Sursingle either
close behind the hinder point of the shoulder, or within an handful of the
place where you intend to take up the Vein: gird him very straight, and
presently you shall see the Vein to rise, then mark that part of the skin which
covers the Vein, and with your finger and your thumb, pull it somewhat aside
from the Vein, and then with a very fine Incision knife slit the skin through
without touching the Vein longwise, and not above an inch in length, cutting no
deeper than the skin; that done, remove your finger and thumb, and the skin
will return to its proper place, and through the slit you will perceive the
Vein look blew before your eyes; then take a smooth Cronet made of the
Browantler of a Stag, or of an old Buck, and thrust it underneath the Vein, and
lift it up a pretty distance; that done, loose either the string or Sursingle,
for they were only helps to discover the Vein.

The Vein being thus taken up on the Cronet, take a small piece of Shoomakers
thread dipped in Oil or Butter, and put underneath the Vein also, with which you
shall knit the Vein when time requires: then the Cronet standing as before,
with your knife slit the Vein long wise a quarter of an inch, then with your
thread stop the nether part of the Vein, suffering it to bleed above; then
remove your thread above, knitting a knot above the slit, and so let it bleed
beneath; having bled there sufficiently, fill up the Orifice of the Vein with
Salt, and heal up the wound of the skin with Turpentine and Hogs grease molten
together.

The benefit that redounds by this taking up of the Veins is manifold, for in
general it eases all griefs, strains and stiffness of the Limbs; but
particularly, the taking up of the Plat-Veins eases all pains in the breast,
and griefs in the chest; the taking up of the Fore-thigh Veins helps Farcies
and swellings of the Legs: the taking up of the Shackle-Veins before eases
Gourding, Quitter-bones, swelling of the joints, scabs, and scratches: the
taking up of the hinder hough Veins helps Spavens of both kinds, especially
any Farcy in those parts, and generally all swellings and Imposthumes: the
taking up of the Pastern-Veins behind helps swellings about the Cronet or
nether joints, pains, Mules, and all manner of Kibed heels. Let thus much
suffice for a prefatatory discourse or introduction; I shall now follow my
intended method, in giving you an Alphabetical account of those outward
Maladies which afflict Horses, with their cures; and first, of the Disease
called the

Anbury.
The Anbury is a spungy overgrown Wart, full of blood, having a root like a
Cocks stone; it may grow upon any part of the Horses body, but principally it
is discovered above the Eyebrows, Nostrils or Privy parts.

If it be high, take an Horses hair and tie about it very hard, making it fast,
and in eight or nine days it will so eat through it, as that it will drop off;
but if it be flat you must burn it off with an hot Iron, leaving none of the
root behind, and dry it up with the powder of Verdigrease; with this proviso,
it lie not too near any sinew; if so, eat out the Core with Mercury; then stop
the hole with Flax dipped in the white of an Egg, and dry it up with unslaked
Lime and Honey.

Accloy.
Accloying is no more than what we commonly call pricking with a Nail in the
shooing, and hereupon will halt; if you find the cause thereof to be a prick,
then take out the sole, and cut the hoof round about the place pricked; and
having removed the corruption, take Hurds steeped in the whites of Eggs, and
fill up the hole; do thus four days, and after that, heal up the sore with Salt
made into fine powder, mingled with Vinegar, and anoint the outside of the
hoof with black Aegyptiacum: or this is as good a remedy as the former, take
Sallet-Oyl, Turpentine, and Rosin-pitch, all molten together, put it very hot
into the hole where he is pricked, and then stop the hole with hurds.

Avives.
Avives is a Distemper otherwise called Vives or Fives; they are certain flat
Kernels, in likeness to a bunch of Grapes growing in a cluster; they creep down
from the Ears toward the Throat, which when they are inflamed will swell,
which swelling as it is very painful, so it will prove mortal, if not timely
prevented; for by stopping his wind it will soon suffocate him.

The common causes of this Distemper are over-heatings, or extraordinary
rankness of blood.

In the Cure you must cautiously observe, not to touch the Kernels with your
fingers; but having cut the skin long-ways so that the Kernels lie open, take
an instrument like a pair of Plyers, and pinch forth the Kernels, and so apply
thereunto hurds steeped in the whites of Eggs well beaten and bound thereon;
renew this daily seven or eight times and it will cure it. This is Mr. Greys
way of curing the Avives. The common way of curing it, is to draw down the sore
with an hot Iron just in the midst so far as the swelling goes, and then under
the Ear draw two other strokes of the fashion of an Arrows head; then open the
skin and with a small pair of Plyers pull out the Kernels and cut them off, but
have a care you injure not the Veins; that done, fill the place with Bay Salt
made into fine powder, and after that heal up the sore with a green Ointment.

The cure of latest practice is to let him blood on both sides of the Neck;
then clap a pair of Barnacles on his nose, and take a red hot Iron, with the
Edge as thick as the back of a Knife, and with it make a strike from the root
of the Ears upon the middle of the swelling downwards to the lowest part of the
swelling, then burn it till the skin be yellow; being thus seared, anoint the
swelling with a little butter or Hog's Grease; according as the searing is less
or more deep, anoint him seldomer or oftener, but four or five times is
sufficient.

But the most approved Medicine for this Malady which will cure it without
burning, or any such violent means is: take a penny worth of Pepper beaten to
fine powder, Swines grease a spoonful, the juice of an handful of Rue, and of
Vinegar two spoonfuls, mix these well together, and convey it equally into both
the Ears of the Horse, then shake the Ears that the Medicine may sink
downwards, and after that tie them up; when you have done this let him blood in
the Neck-Vein and Temple-Vein.

Arraists or Rat-tails.
This Distemper proceeds from too much rest, or from being not well rubbed
about the heels, for by this over much ease and pampering the blood corrupting
in his body falls down into his hinder legs, and is much more venomous and
malignant than the Scratches.

The Cure must be wrought by taking half a pound of green Vitriol, and boil it
in a pottle of running Water with Allom, Mustard, Sage and Hysop, of each an
handful. The night before you apply this, anoint the sores with strong Mustard
after they are made raw, then the next day wash them with the Water aforesaid,
made of Vitriol, etc. and you need not doubt the Cure.

But the most approved remedy I can find for this Malady is to let the Horse be
ridden till he be warm, whereby the Veins will be more apparent: then let him
blood in the Fetlock-Veins on both sides, suffering him to bleed a good
quantity; then the next day wash the sores, with warm Water, clipping away all
the hair about the sores, and after this anoint them with an Ointment made
after this manner: take green Coperas and Verdigrease, of each two Ounces, and
of common Honey four Ounces; beat the Coperas and Verdigrease very small, and
work them up with your Honey to a perfect Unguent, and herewith daily anoint
the sores till they be well.

Attaint upper and nether, and in the heel.
The upper Attaint is a painful swelling of the Back-sinew of the Shank-bone,
occasioned by overreaching, and striking that Sinew with the Toe of his
hinder-foot, making him halt downright.

The signs are apparent, and the cure not very difficult; to the perfecting
whereof, take a Plaster made of Wine-lees and Wheat Flour laid hot thereon;
or else take of Black Soap and Boars-grease of each a like quantity, scalding
hot, and make thereof a Plaster of Sear-cloth, and clap it over the sore place.

Others will only take a live Pigeon, and cut him in two, and clap it to the
sore, which they affirm will speedily abate the swelling.

Others again take of Frankincense, of Rozin, of Tar, of Euphorbium, of
Turpentine and Fenugreek of each a quarter of an ounce, of Suet one ounce, of
Oil an ounce, of Wax three ounces, and three quarters of an ounce of Myrrh;
melt and mix them altogether, and Plaister-wise lay it to the place grieved
till it be whole.

The nether Attaint or overreach, on the midst and in the hollow of the
Pastern joint, is a little Bladder full of jelly, like to a wind-gall; this is
not very apparent to the eye, but may easily be felt, and will make an Horse
halt exceedingly.

Cure this malady thus: take a small Cord and roll him somewhat strait, from
the Knee to the nether joint; and then in the Pastern, between the Hoof and
the joint, with a Fleim strike him in the midst of the Swelling, and so let out
the corruption; then take the white of an Egg, and beat it with a little Salt,
and then dipping Flax therein lay it unto the swelling; then unrowl his leg,
and renew this Salve twice a day, till it be fully cured.

There is yet another Attaint or overreach, and that is upon the Heel, caused
by an Horses striking the Toe of his hinder shoe into the Heel, just upon the
setting on of the Hoof: this, if not timely looked after, will endanger the
loss of the Hoof.

If you intend to cure him, you must cut away hair, skin, hoof and flesh, till
without hollowness you have made the sore caven; then take Beer and Salt, and
therewith wash it well; then take Flax, dipped in the white of an Egg, mingled
with a little Bole-armoniack and bind it to the sore; renew this once a day for
four or five days, and the cure will be effected.

Burning with Shot, or otherwise.
If your Horse be shot, after you have drawn the Bullet, take Varnish and
Water, and beat them well together; then pour away the water from the varnish,
and with a feather anoint the place burned.

This following Ointment is good for any burning whatever: Take a stone of
Quick lime, well burned (which you shall understand by the lightness there of)
and dissolve it in fair water, when the Lime is settled to the bottom, strain
the clearest of this water through a fine linen cloth; then add thereunto as
much Oil of Hempseed as there is water; beat these well together, and you will
have a most precious Ointment for all burning whatsoever

Brittle-hoof.
This proceeds from two several causes, first naturally or hereditary, when
the Mare or Stallion was troubled with the like infirmity; or secondly,
accidentally, by reason of a Surfeit that fell down into the feet, which caused
a dryness in the hoofs, or else by some former founder or heating in his feet.

The Cure must be in this manner: after with a Rape or Drawing-iron you have
thinned the Coffin of his hoof, and have pared his Soles finely, then apply to
the Coffin and Soles this following charge.

Take Rye or Wheat-bran, Oxen or Cows-dung an indifferent quantity; then take
sheeps-suet, and Hog's Grease tried, Tar and Turpentine of each half a pound;
let the Sheeps-suet be minced very small, and melt it on the fire; add
thereunto some Hogs grease, and when they are melted, put in your Ox or
Cows-dung, stirring them well together; then gradually put in your bran,
continually stirring them; lastly, put in your Tarr and Turpentine; when you
have so incorporated these together, as that they are become like a paste; then
take it from the fire, and preserve it for your use. With this dress him every
day for twenty days, or more, together, not letting him touch water with his
feet, and his hoofs will be restored to their former toughness and firmness.

Bone-spaven.
This Bone or Dry Spaven is as big as a Wall-nut, growing under the inside of
the hoof, hard under the joint, near to the Master-vein: it is but tender at
first, but if it be neglected, it will be an hard Crust, nay as hard as any
bone, and sticks to the Bone as close as the bark of an Oak to the body, and
causes lameness in the Horse.

The Cure is very hard and difficult, however I will prescribe you the best
remedies I can procure. In the first place, take Vnguentum Apostolorum and of
white Mercury of each a like quantity, mix them well together, and after you
have cast your Horse, make a slit, the length of the Spaven, but be careful you
touch not the Master-vein; having opened it, and laid the Spaven bare with a
sharp instrument, scale the Spaven a little; then make a plegant of lint as big
as the Spaven; then spreading Salve thereon, lay it upon the Spaven; then with
dry lint defend all other parts, especially the Master-vein, from the
Corrosive; then lay a Plaster of Pitch, Rozen, Turpentine and Hog's Grease
round about his hoof, and so let him rest four and twenty hours; then open it
again, and if you find the Corrosive has not eaten enough, apply a fresh one,
and that will be enough, and then take of Turpentine, of Deers-suet and of Wax
of each a like quantity; melt and mix these well together, and being warmed
dress therewith the sore place; in four days time you shall find the Spaven
come clear away, and then with the same Salve heal up the wound.

You may also apply to the Sorrance, after the aforesaid Corrosives, a Plaster
of strong Aegyptiacum, till it has fretted off the ^lesh upon the Crust, so
bare as possibly may be, and so you may the better attempt the taking away of
the said Crust, or by rubbing it with a Rolling-pin, anointed with Petroleum,
till the Crust be converted into a softer substance, or into such thin
corruption as may be easily drawn away.

Now if you find a swelling in the Spaven place, to prevent it from running
into a Spaven, shave away the hair about the swelling; then take natural Balsam
and anoint the place therewith two or three days; then repress the humors, by
taking three ounces of the Oil of Roses, Bole-armoniack one ounce, Wheat Flour
half an ounce, and the white of one Egg; make all these into a body, and having
first anointed the part with Balsam every day, lay on this charge.

Back-swankt, or for a strain in the Kidneys.
Take a skin, just as it comes from the back of the sheep, both hot and fat;
then take a Groats worth of Turpentine, and as much of Nerve-oil, and mingling
them together anoint the inside of the sheep-skin all over, and clap it on the
back of the Horse, where the grief lies, which commonly is in the Navil place
of the backbone; having thus laid it on, make a Crupper to go under his tail
to keep it on, and a breast plate before, and fasten them together: thus let it
lie upon him for a month till his back be knit and strengthened.

Burning of an Horse by a Mare.
This frequently happens, by the great heat and foulness of a Mare, and may be
called the Horse-pox; which is known by mattering of the Yard within.

For its cure, take a pint of white Wine, boil in it a quartern of Roch-Alom;
when boiled and cold, take thereof, and with a Syringe squirt it into his Yard,
as far as you may, and in a short time he will prove very sound.

Button-Farcy.
This Malady proceeds from great heats, and Corruption of blood, whose Symptoms
are apparently visible; for the Horse will be all over full of Bunches and
Knots, some little as Pease, others big as Nuts.

For the cure of this Sorrance, you must bleed him well on both sides of his
Neck; then take Housleek, beat it and strain it through a fine linen cloth,
and put it into his ears; then take an ounce of Aristolochia, and grate it
small, the tops of Rue, one handful, the quantity of an Egg of Hog's Grease;
beat these three last till they be like a Salve. As soon as you have put in the
Housleek into each ear alike, divide the other in two parts, and equally
distribute it into each Ear, putting some Wool after it to keep it in; then
stitch up his Ears that he may not shake it out; then with the point of your
Penknife make a little hole in his forehead, and after that, with your
Cornet-hor^ raise the skin from his forehead, the breadth of your hand; then
take a red Dock-root and cut it into three pieces, and put them into the hole,
which will draw our abundance (...) corruption, which corruption will (...) the
hair off; when the virtue or strength of the ro^^ is vanished, it will drop out
of its own accord: then anoint the place with a little fresh Butter; then lay a
plaster of Burgundy-pitch over it to keep out the wind and the cold; after
this let him stand on the Trench seven hours, in which time you shall observe
him to slaver, champ and foam, as if he were ridden. At night give him warm
water and Bran; what you conveyed into his Ears, let it remain two days; then
take it out, and in a little time his knots and bunches will disappear, and his
hair come again on his forehead.

Bunches of all sorts, Knots, Warts and Wens, how infallibly to take away in a
short space.
Such Maladies or Sorrances have commonly their original from rankness of bad
blood, which is engendered of malignant humors, and those peccant humors from
naughty Diet.

The way to cure them is thus: first, shave away the hair about them; then take
up those veins which you imagine give these Sorrances sustenance; then let him
blood in the heels, to draw away the humors downwards; then wash and bathe him
very well with hot Vinegar; then take a quart of the Oil of Nuts, and
Verdigriese powdered two ounces, and a quarter of a pint of Ink; mix all these
well together, and apply it cold to the places afflicted, rubbing them well
therewith; if at the first doing these excrescences do not dry up, then
continue in so doing every fourth day till they disappear.

Another way is this: Take Vinegar and Mutton suet, the Gum of the Pine Tree,
new Wax and Rozin of each a like quantity; melt these together, putting in your
Gum last, and so anoint the Sorrances with a feather every day till they be
whole; but omit not the taking up of such Veins as you verily believe do foment
and give nutriment to those Sorrances, with shaving away the hair, etc.

Back-swelling, a speedy and easy Cure.
If by any casualty whatsoever, the back of your Horse be swelled, presently
take a little flax, the whites of Eggs and Wheat Flour; and having beaten them
well together; lay it to the place aggrieved, and it will quickly remove the
swelling.

Blood-spaven.
Of the Bone-Spaven we have already treated; we now come to speak of the Blood
or Bog spaven; it is also called the Wet or Through-spaven, which is much more
easy to be cured than the former.

This Malady grows on the Hough, with a swelling full of blood, which the
Master-vein continually supplieth it with; this great Vein runs along the
inside of the Thigh, and so comes along the inside of the Hough, and so down
the leg to the Pastern, and from thence to the bottom of the foot; this causes
the swelling to be greatest in the inside, although it be apparent enough in
the outside.

Now the blood being, through over much heating, too much stirred, it
engenders a fluxible humor, which being very thin, runs downwards toward its
Center; but it is stopped in its passage in the Hough, where it resideth, and
by that means swells, and so becomes a Sorrance called the Blood-spaven.

For the Cure the most expert follow this course; after they have shaved off
the hair and taken up the vein, they then take Mustard Seed, great
Mallow-roots, and of Ox-dung a like quantity, and as much strong Vinegar as
will mix them together like a Salve; then beating them well together, make
thereof a soft Plaster, and lay it on the Spaven, let it morning and evening
be changed, taking care that it be so bound on as not easily to come off; when
the Spaven is absolutely removed, then lay on that place a Plaster of Pitch
very hot, and take it not off, but let it fall off of its self.

But certainly the best remedy that can be applied to the blood-spaven is;
having taken up the Vein (letting it bleed as long as it will) take two or
three handfuls of Linseed, and bruise it well in a Mortar, then take new
Cows-dung and mingle with it; then put it into a Drying Pan, and heat it well
on the fire, and so very hot apply it to the Spaven, renewing it twice a day,
till it bring the Spaven into the nature of a Boil or Impostumation, and then
break it; after it has run two days, only lay on a Plaster of Pitch, which
you must not remove till it fall off of its own accord.

Barbs or Papps underneath an Horses Tongue.
These Barbs or Paps, which grow in an Horses Mouth underneath the Tongue, are
no ways detrimental to him (as growing there in all Horses naturally) till they
become inflamed, extending themselves, and swelling with corrupt blood,
proceeding from naughty humors, and frequently these Paps will become raw, and
then they will be so troublesome that the Horse will not be able to feed
without a great deal of pain and anguish.

All Farriers agree in one particular Cure, though there is an other, but with
little alteration: the first is, absolutely to clip them away with a pair of
Sheers close to the Jaw, and then to wash the Sore, either with water and Salt,
or else with Tartar and strong Vinegar mixed together.

Or else, take a pair of Cissers, and clip them away (which will appear under
his Tongue like two Paps) then prick him in the Palate of his mouth with your
Fleim, that he may bleed the better; then wash the places with white Wine
Vinegar, Bole-armoniack and Bay Salt, as much as will suffice, and for four
days after see that no Hay-dust stick upon the places so clipped, and the Cure
will be effected.

Belly-Gaunt how remedied.
Though I here prescribe a Cure for an Horse Belly-Gaunt, yet my advice shall
be, not to keep any such Horse, but dispose of him with what convenient speed
you may; for he will never thrive well, being washy and very tender; and if he
come once to labor hard, he will be always diseased and unhealthy.

However, if you perceive your Horse to have his Belly shrunk up toward his
flanks, becoming as Gaunt as a running Horse that is Dieted for a course; then
conclude he is very costive, and is afflicted with much unnatural heat in his
body.

In order to his Cure, you are to understand that every Horse has about his
Cods two small strings, which extend from his Cods to the bottom of his Belly,
viz. on each side one; which strings you must endeavor to break with your
fingers, which is not difficult to do; then anoint that place every day with
fresh Butter and Vnguentum Populeon mixed together; this in a little time will
make him Belly-well.

Botches in the Groin.
Botches in Horses do commonly proceed (especially if they are gross and full
of humors) from sudden and violent labor, which will force those humors into
the weakest parts, and there engender a Botch, most commonly in the hinder
parts, near the Cods, betwixt the Thighs.

As soon as you shall perceive this swelling (which you shall find, if you will
feel it, hard and round;) mollify or ripen it with a Plaster made of
Wheat Flour, of Turpentine and of Honey of each a like quantity, stirring it
together to make a stiff Plaster, and so lay it on the swelling; renew it
every day till it break or wax soft; if it break not, Lance it, and cleanse it
from its corruption; then tent it with Turpentine and Hog's Grease, renewing it
once a day, till you have cicatrized the orifice.

To conclude; take this one more, which is a most certain and approved Cure for
the Botch in the Groins, or for any Impostumation.

As soon as the Swelling appears, lay upon it a Plaster of Shoe-makers Wax,
spread upon Alom Leather, and let it lie till the sore grow soft: then open it
with a Lancet, or let it break of its own accord; when the filth has issued
forth, wash the sore very well with strong Alom-water; then tent it with an
Ointment called Aegyptiacum till it be well and sound.

Canker in the Mouth.
The Ingredients which make up a Canker in the Mouth, are a many sore Blisters,
rawness of Mouth and Tongue, with a sharp hot humor proceeding from thence,
which frets and corrodes, nay rots the flesh wherever it passes.

The Original of this disease is commonly some unnatural heat arising from the
stomach; sometimes the Venom of filthy food is the cause thereof.

Some prescribe this as an excellent Remedy: Take of the juice of
Daffadil-roots seven drachms, of the juice of Hounds-tongue as much, of Vinegar
the like quantity, of Alom one ounce; mingle these well together, and wash the
Canker once a day herewith till it be well.

Others use this remedy: Take half a pint of the best white Wine-vinegar, and
half a pound of the best Roch Alom, and an handful of red Sage, and boil them
all together, and therewith wash the Horses mouth and tongue.

If the Canker be in the Tongue only, then take of Roch-Alom the quantity of an
Egg; boil it in four or five spoonfuls of white Wine-vinegar, with a spoonful
of English Honey, and an handful of Columbine-leaves cut small, and therewith
wash his Tongue once a day, and it will be quickly whole.

But the best of all remedies comes at last: Take of Ginger and Alom of each a
like quantity, finely pulverized; then with strong Vinegar so mingle them that
they be as thick as a Salve; then with Alom-water or Vinegar wash the Canker
clean, and then anoint it with this Salve, which in twice or thrice doing will
kill the Canker, and after heal of it self.

Canker in the Head.
This Canker frequently seizes the eyes, and sometimes the Nostrils, causing
those parts it invadeth, to be raw and running with yellow water.

For the Cure, take half a pint of Sallet-oil, one ounce of the Oil of
Turpentine, three ounces of Burgundy-pitch, and one penyworth of Verdigriese
beaten fine; put all but the Verdigriese in a Pipkin together, and let them
boil a pretty while, then remove it from the fire, and put in the Verdigriese,
and let them all boil together to a Salve; but have a care the Verdigriese make
not all run over into the fire.

Be sure you stir it all the while it boils, and having boiled sufficiently,
take it off and set it by for your use.

When you would make use of this for a Canker in the Nostrils; first, tie a rag
about a sticks end, and dip it in some white Wine-vinegar and Salt, and run it
up his Nostrils to mundifie and cleanse them; then take a feather and dip in
the cold Salve, and run it up his Nostrils also, not oftener than once a day.

If the Canker be in the Horses eyes or face, with Tow rub the part till it
bleed, and when it has done bleeding, anoint it with a feather dipped in the
aforesaid Salve; dress it once a day constantly till you see it begins to
heal, after that, once in three or four days will serve turn.

Cords or Strings in Horses.
There are two strings like threads, which are therefore called Cords, because,
lying betwixt the knee and the body, it goes like a small cord through the
body to the Nostrils; making an Horse to stumble much, and sometimes to fall.

It proceeds commonly from an extreme cold which lodges in the stomach, which
causes the Cords to shrink up in so great a measure, that sometimes he can
neither lift his head to the rack nor put his head to the ground, nay, not so
much as to his knees.

The only signs of this Malady are his often stumblings and stiffness without
any visible Sorrance.

To cure him you must take the end of a crooked Hearts horn that is sharp, put
it under the Cords, and twine it a dozen times about, till the Horse be
constrained to lift up his foot, then cut the cord asunder, and put a little
Salt into the issue; or cut it first at the Knee, then at the end of his Nose,
and so draw it upwards a span length, and cut that off. Others only open that
Vein that descends on the inside of the leg by the breast, taking away at
least a pottle of blood; and after seven days wash him with Beef broth; and
they say it is a speedy cure.

But the newest way of curing this Distemper, is first to make him this
comfortable Drink: take half an Ounce of Diapente, one Ounce of Anniseeds
beaten small, three penny worth of English Saffron, dry it by the fire, and
crumble it small with your fingers, two Ounces of Honey, two Ounces of fresh
Butter, a pint and an half of strong Beer, a quarter of a pint of
White-Wine-Vinegar; set these over the fire till the Butter and Honey be
melted, and no longer; then take it off and give it the Horse lukewarm
fasting, then walk him till he be warm, and then set him up; five hours after
give him a little Hay, and then a Mash, the next morning another Mash, and thus
keep him five days; then cut the cord as you were instructed before; and then
walk him twice a day for a week together, and the Horse will prove as sound as
ever.

Curb.
A Curb is a long swelling a little below the Elbow of the hoof of the great
sinew behind, hard above the top of the horn, which causes the Horse to halt
after any exercise: labor puts him to a world of pain, but rest very much
eases his grief; sometimes this Distemper comes hereditary from the Stallion
or Mare, but more frequently it comes by carrying great burdens when he was
young, or by some strain by leaping etc.

The remedy for it is to take a broad Incle to bind the hoof strait a little
above the Curb, then with a smooth hazel stick beat, rub, and chafe the Curb,
then thrust out the corrupt blood, and afterward upon the point of your knife
put into every hole as deep as you can thrust it the quantity of two Barley
corns of white Mercury, and so let the Horse rest for four and twenty hours;
after that only anoint the sore place with hot melted butter once a day at
least till it be whole.

Or you may use this Medecin: take Wine-Lees one pint, a porringer full of
Wheat Flour, of Cumin in fine powder half an Ounce, mix these well together,
and being made warm, apply it to the place, renewing it once a day five days
together; when you perceive the swelling so much abated that it is almost gone,
then draw it with your hot Iron, and charge the burning with Pitch and Rozen
molten together, and applied warm that it may the beter stick on, then clap on
Flocks, and let it remain till it drop off of it self.

Here note, that whatever is good for a Splent or Spaven is good for a Curb
also.

Crest fallen and shedding of the hair.
The falling of the Crest, manginess in the Main and shedding of the hair are
all diseases proceeding from poverty or over riding.

The best cure for the falling of the Crest is, phlebotomy with good keeping;
for it is strength and fatness that must raise the Crest. If the Main be mangy
anoint it with Butter and Brimstone: if the hair fall away, take Southern-wood
and burn it to Ashes, and mix these Ashes with Sallet-Oyl, and anoint the
defective place therewith, and it will speedily produce hair, which shall be
both fair, smooth and thick.

Casting the hoof.
This is a Sorrance that is both troublesome and somewhat difficult to be
cured; it proceeds from several causes, as Foundring, Accloying, Pricking,
Gravelling, or by a Stub, or Quitterbone, which breaking out above round about
the cronet, the hoof soon breaks, and falls from the foot,

The hoof thus fallen off, or being broken or loose, with a Rape or Drawing Iron
file or draw away the old hoof somewhat near, then anoint the foot with this
Ointment: take Hog's Grease three pound, Pach-grease two pound,
Venice-Turpentine one pound, new Wax half a pound, Sallet-Oyl one quart, mix
these together by melting them over the fire, and herewith chafe, rub and
anoint the Coffin of the hoof up to the very top, and this will quickly produce
a new hoof.

Now as your new hoof comes on, you must heedfully take notice whether it
grows harder or thicker, more in one place than another, or whether it
grows disorderly; where you find the fault rectify it presently with your
Rape, and so reduce your hoof to good fashion.

If your Horse be hoof-bound this following receipt is most sovereign for it:
take half a pound of Turpentine, half a pint of Tar, half a pound of new Wax,
one pint of Sallet-Oyl, mix all these, besides the Turpentine, together, and a
little before you take them from the fire put in your Turpentine (for should
you put it in with the rest before they would be melted, the Turpentine being a
Drug so subtle would consume to vapor) I say, having put in your Turpentine,
stir it till it be cold; but before hand make a Buskin of Leather with a thick
sole made fit for his hoof, and wide enough that it may be tied about his
Pastern, and dress his hoof with this Medicine, renewing it every day till it
be whole, not forgetting to lay Tow or hurds on the hoof.

Crown-Scab.
This sorrance is a Scab which grows on the Cronet or top of the hoof next to
the hair; it is a cancerous and stinking Malady, very troublesome and painful
to the poor creature; it happens usually in the Winter whilst in the Stable,
proceeding principally from his first feeding in moist and cold grounds; all
Horses so bred up are subject to this distemper, and to the scratches also.

The only sign hereof is that the hair will stare about the Cronet, and become
thin and brisly.

In the Cure hereof you must wash very well and bathe the scab as far as it
goes; and having clipped away the hair, then take Turpentine, tried Hog's Grease,
and Honey, of each a like quantity, a little powder of Bole-Armoniack, the
yolks of two Eggs, with as much Wheat Flour as will thicken it to a Salve,
and apply this Plaster wise, with a linen, cloth, to the Sorrance, renewing
it once every day till it be whole.

Or you may try this, which is as good as the former: take soft Soap, tried
Hogs grease, of each half a pound, and a quantum sufficit of Bole-Armoniack
powdered, Turpentine four Ounces, make all these into a body, and apply it to
the place Plaisterwise in such manner, that it may not easily fall off,
renewing it daily till it leave running; then wash and bathe it with warm
Vinegar.

Camery.
The Camery which is also called the Frounce, are small pimples in the midst of
the Palate, being both soft and sore; they are sometimes to be seen in the lips
and tongue; some are of opinion that they are occasioned by eating of frozen
grass, or by drawing frozen dust with grass into their mouths; others think
they come by eating moist Hay, on which Vermin have pist.

The Cure is, first, to let him blood in the two greatest Veins under his
tongue, and then wash all the pimples with Vinegar and Salt, then give him some
new bread, but let it not be hot, but let the quantity of bread you give him be
but small to prevent surfeit.

Lastly, others use to take out his tongue, and prick the Veins thereof in half
a score places, as also under his upper lip, then rub well every sore place
with salt, and the next day wash them with warm White Wind, and refraining him
three days from cold drink he will be restored to his pristine soundness.

Cronet hurt any ways, a Cure therefore.
Take Salt and Soap, of each a like quantity, and mix them together like a
Paste; then having cut out the overreach, and laid it plain, first, wash it
with Urine and Salt, and with a cloth dry it, then bind on the mixed Soap and
Salt, not renewing it in twenty four hours; thus do three days together; the
venom being drawn forth, take a spoonful of Train-Oyl, and as much white Lead,
and mix it to a thick Salve, lay on a plaster hereof morning and evening till
it be whole, which will speedily be effected.

Canker in the Withers.
A Canker in the Withers often happens thus: the Withers of an Horse having
been violently wrung, and afterward for some time neglected, though which
means the violence of the Distemper breaks upward; yet most of the matter or
corruption discending, and rotting still downwards, it will suddenly prove a
cankerous and foul Ulcer, and as full of danger as any Fistula whatever.

The signs are very evident, for the humor which issues from the sore will be
sharp, hot, and waterish, corroding or fretting away the hair wherever it
comes, and the hole of the sore will be somewhat choked with a kind of
spongious dead flesh, so that the gross matter will be somewhat obstructed in
its passage.

The ancient Cure hereof was to take a keen Razor, and cut open the hole of the
Ulcer, so that you may look into the cavity or profundity thereof; and having
cut out all the dead flesh from the quick, then take a quart of stale Urine,
and add thereunto some Salt: then boil it well, and having first cleansed the
sore very well with a wisp of Hay, then wash it with the Urine and Salt boiled
together: then take the yolks of four Eggs and a penny worth of Verdigrease,
with a spoonful of flower, and make a Plaster thereof, applying it to the
sore, renewing it once a day till it be whole.

Casting of an Horse, how to do it.
In the first place you must elect a convenient place, such as is some soft
green Swarth, Dunghill not over moist, or in a Barn upon good store of straw;
and having brought him to any of these places, then take a double long rope,
and cast a knot a yard from the bought, then put the bought about his Neck, and
the double rope betwixt his fore Legs, and about his hinder Pasterns underneath
his Fetlock, then put the ends of the rope under the bought of his Neck, and
draw them quick and they will overthrow him, then fasten the ends, and hold
down his head, under which lay good store of straw.

Now if at any time you would brand your Horse in the buttock, or do any thing
about his hinder legs, take up his contrary fore-leg, and that will secure you
from his striking.

Defense for Horses against Flies in the heat of Summer.
Your Horse-fly especially, but there are other offensive Flies in heat of
Summer, which are a great trouble and perplexity to Horses, stinging them in
such manner, that they will run themselves off their legs, thinking to free
themselves that way: to prevent the biting of these Flies when he is at grass,
anoint his body all over with Oil and Bayberries mingled together; if in the
stable, take a Sponge dipped in strong Vinegar, and bind it unto the head-stall
of his Collar. These are very good preservatives, but there is nothing better,
both when he is abroad and at home, than to take Rue, and make it into a pretty
big wisp, and therewith rub the Horses body all over, then take another wisp of
the same, and do the like, till you think you have imbittered his coat
sufficiently; and then your own experience will find no fly will fasten upon
him; this has been always tried effectually.

Drying up of Humors.
If you would dry up, stop, or stay any flux of humors: take Rozen, Affalto,
and Myrrh, of each an Ounce, and dissolve them in Vinegar; of red Wax half an
Ounce, and of Armoniack half an Ounce, mingle them well together in the
boiling, and make thereof a Salve, which you will find to be a great dryer, a
binder of loose members, and a comforter of weak parts.

Or you may take Oil or soft Grease beaten to a Salve, with Vitriol, Galls and
Allom, the powder of Pomegranats, Salt and Vinegar; this dries and binds
sufficiently.

There are many forms of drying and binding which are published in all books of
this nature, wherefore referring you thither I shall only instance this one
more, and that is the Bark of a Willow Tree burnt to Ashes, which I can assure
you is as great a binder and dryer as any simple whatsoever.

Dangerous Sickness, and how it comes.
This dangerous sickness in general proceeds from many and particular causes,
having each of them peculiar signs, and therefore must have distinct remedies.

The causes may be ranked under these four heads: first, dangerous Maladies may
proceed from heats occasioned by over much labor or exercise; hence comes
molten Grease, the heart overcharged, and its pores so obstructed, that it
cannot perform his function; by which means the spirits are detrimented, and
the whole body put out of order; and the signs hereof will be dullness of
countenance, swelling in his limbs, scouring, and loathing of his meat. The
second original cause of dangerous sickness, are Colds from indiscreet keeping
after violent exercise, or otherwise, and the symptoms of this are heavyness of
countenance, with sleepiness, Pustuls, inflamed Kernels and swellings, a rotten
inward Cough, after which he cheweth some filthy phlegmatic matter between his
teeth.

The third cause of dangerous sickness is surfeit by food, either by over
eating or under eating of that which is good, or eating of what is unwholesome:
by the first all ill humors ascend into the head, from which are bred the
Stavers, Phrenzies, with other deadly diseases. From the second proceeds the
putrefaction of the blood, converting all the nutriment into corruption; hence
come the Yellows, Farcy, Fevers, Mange, with other such like pestilential and
loathsome Distempers. The signs hereof are a dullness of the face and eyes, in
such sort as the Horse will be unable to lift up his head as high as the
Manger, his upper lip and sheath cold, his pace staggering, etc.

Lastly, dangerous sickness may come accidentally, as by receiving some
desperate wound or hurt in some vital part, whereupon, nature being highly
offended gives leave to many mortal diseases to seize the body of an Horse. The
general signs hereof are sweatings at the roots of the Ears, in the Flanks, and
behind the shoulders, his mouth will be dry and hot, his tongue furred, and
lastly, he will have a loathing to his meat.

Dangerous sickness how to cure.
The best way to cure dangerous sickness is to meet with it in the Bud, before
it has got too great an head, but send it packing before it be deeply rooted
in an Horses body, and to this end you must have a strict eye over your Horse,
frequently prying into his present condition: if you see by any symptom the
least appearance of an approaching sickness, instantly breath a Vein, and three
or four mornings together give him some Diapente to drink, keeping him warm,
and well rubbed, giving him warm mashes during that time and some days after;
but if you have not Diapente or Diatessaron, then take an handful of Celandine,
both roots and leaves w^ll picked and washed, Wormwood and Rue, of each an
handful, boil all these in a pottle of strong Ale to a quart, then strain it
well, and take half a pound of sweet Butter, and put into the liquor, with two
spoonfuls of ordinary Treacle, and so give it him blood warm, and this will
restore him to his former health, and sound estate of body.

Drawing of a Stub or Thorn.
If a Stub, Thorn, Iron, Splinter, Nail, or any other sharp thing run into your
Horses foot so far that you cannot pull it out with your fingers or a pair of
Plyers, then take black soap, and lay it to the foot of your Horse all night,
and by the morning the soap will so draw it forth as that you may lay hold on
it with your instrument: but sometimes a thorn or nail will enter so far into
the flesh that the Soap will prove ineffectual as to its extraction, then by
incision you must lay the flesh open, so that you may come to use your Plyers,
in the drawing out what to the foot is so offensive; having so done, heal up
the wound with this most excellent green Ointment, which for the rarity I shall
here insert the right way of making it.

Take a clean Skillet, and first put therein of Rozin the quantity of a Walnut,
which being molten, add thereunto the like quantity of Wax; and when that also
is molten, put to them of tried Hog's Grease half a pound; and that being
melted, put to the rest one spoonful of common English Honey; when all these
are molten and well stirred together, then put in half a pound of ordinary
Turpentine, and so soon as it is dissolved, take it from the fire, and put into
the Skillet of Verdegriese made into fine powder one ounce, then stir it all
together, but have a care it run not over; then set it again on the fire, till
it begin to simper; then straining it, keep it for your use.

This Ointment cleanses a wound, be it never so foul, or troubled with dead or
proud flesh; it heals wonderfully sores either old or green, Ulcers,
Fistula's, Polevils and the like; an Horse or Mare-Filly, that is cut, guelt or
splaid, anoint but the place, and it will neither swell nor fester. Lastly, and
for this purpose, I here place this Green Ointment; it will, after a wonderful
manner, draw forth Thorns, Splinters and Nails which have taken deep rooting in
the flesh.

Dislocation of Joints.
If any joint be dislocated, it must be first reduced to its proper place, and
being sure thereof, bind it up with this Plaster: Take Wheat-bran and
Hog's Grease, of each an indifferent quantity; incorporate them, and make
thereof a Plaster of Hurds; having laid it to the place, bind and swathe it up
well; but let the Horse have rest and he will be quickly sound in that part.

Enterfering.
This happens to an Horse through a natural straitness in his pace, or through
evil shooing he goes so narrow with his hinder feet, that he cutteth the one
with the other upon the inside of his legs, and by reason of this Cutting there
grows Scabs hard and mattery, by the soreness of which the Horse often
halteth.

The Cure equally consists in the prevention, as well as the medicine: For the
prevention, it concerns the Smith to look after that in the making of his
hinder shoes, whereby he may go winder.

Now for his feet, thus hurt by hewing, make this Salve: Take of May Butter or
fresh Grease, Nerve-oil and Rozin a like quantity; then fry them well together
in a pan; then take it off the fire, and put thereto some Cows-dung; let it
cool, and put it into a pot, and when you would use hereof, apply it
Plaister-wise, and it will not only heal the sore, but any prick in the foot
whatsoever.

Or you may help, or at leastwise hide for a small time, enterfering, thus:
Fasten a new Cord to his Dock, and having made diverse hard knots thereon, draw
it between his legs, and fasten it to his Girths; or otherwise rub good store
of Starch between his Thighs.

Eating away of Knobs, or any superfluous dead flesh.
Sometimes it so happens that an Horse may have a bone growing on some part of
his body, more than what is natural; sometimes Lumps and Bunches of superfluous
flesh, and this is called an Excretion, which does proceed from rough and
phlegmatic substances, stirred up either by most sore bruises or wounds
imperfectly healed; that is, when Causticks or burning Corrosives are applied
to wounds that are near the bone; as when the wound is either in the Leg, or
about the Pasterns; for that the flesh being extremely burned and mortified by
such Causticks and Corrosives, it does cause an Excretion to grow upon the
bone; now oftentimes the Wound is healed up, but the Excretion remains still
upon the Bone, which occasioneth a new Cure, which must be in this manner. With
an Incision-knife first scarifie the Excretion, then apply Sulphur and Bitumen,
or Coloquintida burnt and sifted; and having quite eaten away the Excretion,
then heal it up with drying Salves, as the powder of Honey, Lime, or
Bole-armoniack. Others are of opinion that this way is best: first make the
Excretion to bleed well; then take 2 ounces of Vine-ashes and as much unslak'd
lime mixed with 6 ounces of strong Lie, first strained, then sod till half be
consumed, and so consolidated; apply this to the Excretion and it will soon eat
it away, then heal it up as aforesaid.

Others approve of this last way as the best: Take Elecampane-root, newly
gathered, and having cleansed it from its Earth, wrap it up in a brown paper,
and cover it up in the hot Embers till it be fully roasted, like pap; then take
it, and as hot as your Horse can endure it (for you must not scald him) lay it
to the Excretion (after you have rubbed, knocked and chafed the Excretion,
binding this roasted root close thereunto, letting it remain completely a day
and a night before you remove it) the third dressing, after this manner, will
rot and consume the Excretion to nothing.

Now for the eating away of any proud flesh, which* you shall perceive to grow
in any Wound, Ulcer or Sore, which dead flesh you shall know by the
insensibility thereof, being of a spongy hollow substance; you shall take fresh
grease and Verdegriese, and boil them together, of each a like quantity, and
being well boiled tent or plaster the Sore therewith, which will quickly bring
the dead flesh to a consumption.

There are great variety of medicaments that are good for the eating away any
dead flesh, as Precipitate Simple is alone sufficient, Spongia Marina and
powder of Risagallo are of like power and virtue, but that the last is too
great a fretter.

But by reason there is such choice of medicines of this nature, to avoid
prolixity, I shall only propose this last as the best.

Take white or black Heleborus, Ink, quick Sulphur, Orpiment, Lithargy,
Vitriol, unslak'd Lime, Roch Alom, Galls, Soot or the Ashes of Avellan, of each
half an ounce, and they will expeditiously consume all manner of dead flesh.

Eye of an Horse hurt with a blow.
The causes and signs of this Sorrance are perspicuous enough, wherefore we
shall only insist on the Cure; and as to that, you must first bathe the part in
warm water, next shave off all the hair about the swelling: then take the tops
of Wormwood, Pellitory and Branca Vrsina of each half an handful; chop the
Herbs very small, and then beat them to an Ointment with old Boar's Grease,
quantum sufficit: then put to it of live Honey and Wheat Flour of each one
spoonful, and of Linseed oil three spoonfuls; boil these very well, continually
stirring them; when boiled enough, strain it into a Gally-pot well stopped, and
keep it for your use: when you have occasion to make use thereof, only anoint
the place grieved therewith.

Eye-film, Pin and Web.
These distempers are commonly engendered by distillation of bad humors from
the head to the eyes, by a stripe, or some Hay-dust getting therein; the signs
are visible.

The Cure must be thus effected: Take Camphire, Sal Armoniacum or Sugar Candy,
any of these pulverized very fine and blown into the eye, are most sovereign
for these diseases in the Eyes of the Horse.

If a Film or Pearl grow without a Pin or Web: then take the tops of red
Nettles, and, having stamped them well, put them into a clean linen cloth; the
Nettles being in the rag, dip them into Beer slightly; then wring forth the
juice of the said Nettles into some clean Vessel; which done, put thereto a
little Salt made into fine powder; the Salt being dissolved, conveigh but one
drop at a time into the grieved Eye, morning and evening, and this will totally
remove the Film.

If it be a Pin and Web that afflicts the Eye of the Horse; then take
Cuttle-bone, Tartar, Saltgem of each the like quantity, and make them all into
fine powder and mix them, and with a quill blow of some of this powder into the
Eye of the Horse twice or thrice a day, and you will find it a speedy remedy.

If it be an Haw in the Horse's Eye; I would not advise you to take it away, as
Smiths usually do, from the outside of the Eye, but from that part which lies
next of all to the Eye, and this way will better preserve the sight of the Eye,
as also the Wash which is the ornament thereof; for if that be taken away, the
Horse will appear blear-eyed; so soon as you have cut away the Haw, wash the
Eye with white Wine and the juice of Celandine mingled together, of each a like
quantity; for this not only heals the Sorrance, but keeps the Eye from
ranckling.

Eye-Canker.
If a Canker happen to be in your Horses Eye, (as it is a thing very usual)
then take your true Ground Ivy, and stamp it well in a Mortar, and if it be
very dry, then moisten it with a little white Rose Water, or the water of
Eyebright distilled, and so strain it into a clean Glass, and therewith wash,
anoint and tent the Sorrance, and it will speedily cure it: this is also very
good for Blood-shotten Eyes.

If any Wart or spungy Excretion grow near to the Eye of the Horse, which
usually proceeds from a condensed phlegm that descends to the Eyes, and will
in a little time much prejudice them: Take Roch Allom and burn it, and then add
to it as much white Coperas unburnt; grind them together into very fine powder;
then lay a little of this powder on the top of the Wart; but be cautious that
none fall into the Eye, for it will corrode exceedingly.

Let the Wart be thus dressed every day once, and in a very little time it will
so eat away the root of the Wart that it shall never come more.

Eyes Lunatic or Moon-blind.
The only reason I can gather why an Horse is called Moon-blind is, that at
certain times of the Moon he will see well, at other times a little, and
sometimes not at all: and therefore this Malady is called Lunatic or
Moon-blind.

This kind of blindness is held the worst of all other; you may know by the
color of his Eyes, when he sees, and when he does not; when he does see, his
Eyes will appear dim and yellowish; but when he is blind, then will his eyes
look red and fiery.

This distemper comes sometimes hereditary, either from his Sire or Dam:
sometimes again from ill humors descending from the head and taking up their
abode in and about the Eyes; and this usually happens by exposing the poor
Creature to more labor than nature could perform.

The Cure must be by taking Pitch, Rozin and Mastick, of each a like quantity;
melt them together, and having beforehand provided two Plasters of Leather,
the breadth of an half Crown-piece, spread the medicine hot upon these two
Plasters, and apply them to his Temples, letting them stick thereon till they
fall off of their own accord; then rowel him on the face, just under his Eyes,
with a small French Rowel, the breadth of three pence at most, and let it be
turned every day once, the space of fourteen days: then take forth the Rowel
and heal up the orifice with the green Ointment I prescribed in treating of
drawing a Stub or Thorn.

By the way take notice, That if your Horse be weak sighted, when ever you draw
blood from him, the less you take the better it is for his sight.

Eye broken, and beaten out by some stripe or unlucky stroke.
As soon as this unhappy accident has befaln your Horse, that his Eye is
absolutely broken and beaten out by some unhappy stroke: Take Alom and first
burn it in a fire-pan; then put it on the hot coals, and let it burn there till
all the moisture be consumed, so that it becomes as light as a feather, as
white as snow, and so brittle that it will break with the least touch; then
take of this powder and mix it with live Honey, and stir them well together, so
that you reduce them to an ointment; then take a feather and dip it herein, and
morning and evening put thereof into his Eye; then lay your hand upon the
Eye-place a pretty while, that the Unguent may not issue out of the hole; by so
doing in few days the hurt will be cured, though it be impossible for the Eye
to be restored.

Eyes troubled with any sores, an incomparable Water for them.
Take the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, and heat it red hot in the fire, then
quench it in half a pint of white Wine, so doing twelve times together: then
add unto it half the quantity of the juice of Housleek, and with this wash and
bathe the Eye twice or thrice a day; this is good for any infirmity whatsoever
belonging to the Eyes.

Here follows another Water not inferior to the other.

Take a pint of Snow-water, and dissolve therein four drachms of white Vitriol;
wash the Horses eyes herewith at least four times a day, and the effects will
be admirable.

Eye-bitten.
This frequently happens as Horses stand in the Stable, one Horse biting the
other, where he can best or next fasten his teeth: if so then it fall out that
your Horse be Eye-bitten, take a little Honey with a little grated Ginger;
mingle them together and put them into the Horses Eye with a feather three
mornings together.

Ears Impostumated.
This disease proceeds from several causes; either from some violent stroke
about the Ears or Poll, or else by being wrung too hard with a new hempen hard
Halter, sometimes by a cold in the head, or by other ill humors, which strive
to get a vent or passage through the Ears.

The signs are apparent: for the Ears will burn, glow and swell; besides, the
Horse will be very unwilling to be handled thereabout.

The Cure is thus: Take Linseed and make it into fine powder, then take
Wheat Flour of each half a pint, ordinary Honey one pint, tried Hog's Grease
one pound; mix all these well, and warm them on the fire, continually stirring
them; then spread this Unguent upon a Linen cloth or Leather, the breadth of
the swelling, and lay it thereon very warm; once in a day and a night renew it,
till it break, or be so ripe as that it may be convenient to lance it, which
must be downwards, that the corruption may have a more easy passage; then heal
it thus:

Take Mel Rosarum, Sallet-oyl and ordinary Turpentine of each two ounces, make
these into a body; then make a Nightcap to keep on the Plaster; tent the sore
to the bottom with this Ointment, and make a Plaster thereof and lay it on the
place grieved: once a day you must lay on a fresh Plaster, and tent anew till
it be whole.

But if the Ears be only inflamed, then take Oil of Roses, Venice Turpentine
and common Honey of each a like quantity; mix them well together, and making
them blood-warm, dip some black wool therein, and stop the Ears therewith,
renewing it once a day, and it will remove the Inflammation.

Foul and old Sores how to cleanse and mundifie.
This following Water has been often tried, and upon trial found to be be a
most excellent cleansing and healing Water for all old and rotten Sores.

Take of green Coperas and of Saltpeter of each half a pound, Bay Salt and
Salt-gem of each three ounces, Arsnick one Ounce, powder all these finely, and
put them into a stillitory Glass, the pot or bottom thereof well nealed, add
thereunto one pint of the strongest White-Wine-Vinegar; set the pot on the
fire, and put on the head, closing it with Cute of Hermes; and being thus
placed in the Furnace, make under it a strong fire for the space of five or six
hours, and with your Receptory take the first water that comes; after an hour
the fire will be out of the water, then stop up the Glass very close, and
preserve it for your use.

When you are to wash any sore with this water, have a care that you do not let
any fall upon either Vein or Sinew, for it will burn them in twain: but where
Ulcers and foul old sores are in the flesh, this water will work wonders.

Falling of the Fundament.
The falling of the Fundament is a Distemper proceeding most commonly from over
much laxativeness and flux of blood, who growing exceeding weak, by the voiding
thereof straineth to bring forth something, and instead thereof the fundament
comes out; sometimes it comes by Colds or mere Poverty.

Cure it thus: take white Salt made into very fine powder, strew a little upon
the Gut, then take a piece of Lard, and first having boiled Mallow leaves till
they be soft, take of these leaves and beat them well with the Lard, and when
sufficiently beaten, make it up in the fashion of a Suppository, and apply it
fresh to the place once a day.

Fetlock hurt.
The Fetlock may be hurt by casting the Horse with the double rope, or
sometimes by a bite of a Dog: if by either of these this Sorrance happens, take
unslaked Lime and the Yolk of an Egg, of each a like quantity, beat them
together to an Ointment, then mix therewith the juice of one head of Garlic
and a little soot, and anoint herewith the sore till it be almost well, but
skin it over thus: take Sallet Oil and Oil of Roses, of each one Ounce, of
Turpentine three Ounces, and of new Wax one Ounce, melt them well together, and
add to them the fourth part of the powder of Verdigrease, and herewith anoint
the sore, in few days it will skin over the sore, and heal it.

Foundring in the feet, if new, a sudden Cure.
If your Horse be foundred in his feet, but of no longer standing than seven or
eight days, with this following remedy you may restore his feet to their former
soundness.

First, let him blood in the Neck, Breast, and Spur-Veins, taking from thence
two quarts, and receive it in a clean vessel, and therewith make this ensuing
charge.

Take the blood, and put into it eight or nine new laid Eggs, shells and all,
and beat them well with the blood, put to them of Bole-Armoniack pulverized
very fine half a pound, strong White-Wine-Vinegar one pint, Sanguis Draconis
three Ounces finely pulverized, make this up thick with Wheat Meal; with this
charge his Back, Reins, Breasts, Thighs, Fetlocks, and Soles, and apply two
cloths Plaisterwise to the Coffin of his hoofs, and bind the forelegs above
strait with broad filletting, then ride him two hours upon an hard way, if
paved best of all, then set him up.

This Foot-foundring in an Horse is a certain numbness, pricking or tingling
within his hoofs, and I can compare it to no more proper thing, than when any
of us by cross sitting do cause our feet to be asleep as we say vulgarly,
during which time we are so disinabled from going that we cannot stand but with
some difficulty; so it fares with an Horse, the course of whose blood being
stopped, those obstructions cause that torment.

Several are the causes of this Malady; briefly, it comes sometimes by taking
off his Saddle too suddenly after a great heat, or by standing still in the
cold unwalked, or by standing in some shallow Water after he has been ridden
no higher than his Fetlock, or by too strait and uneasy shoes.

Now though I have already prescribed a remedy for this foundring, I cannot let
this one more pass, which for its excellency can hardly be valued, and is good
for all sorts of Foundrings new or old.

In the first place, you must with a very sharp drawing knife draw every part
of the soles of the Horses feet as thin as possibly you may, even till you draw
water and blood from him, and part every part alike: then at the very sharp end
of the frush of the Horses foot you shall see the Vein lie, then with your
knifes end lift up the hoof, and bleed the Vein; which it will do indifferently
plentiful as long as you hold up the hoof, when it has bled somewhat more than
a pint, close up the hoof, and so stop the Vein: then fasten on his hoof an
hollow shoe made for that purpose; having so done, clap a little Tow dipped in
Hogs Grease, and Turpentine very hard: then take two or three Eggs roasted
very hard, and coming burning hot from the fire, break them on the sole of the
Horses foot; then pour upon them Hogs grease, Turpentine, and Tar boiling hot,
and as much flax dipped therein as will fill up the hollow shoe; then lay on a
piece of Leather to keep all in; in this manner dress as many of his feet as
are foundred: dress him thus thrice in a fortnight, and you need not question
but that your Horse will be as sound as ever he was.

Frettizing.
If an Horse be frettized (or as some improperly term it foundred) by reason of
an uneasy strait shoe; then you need do no other than take off his shoe, and
blood-let him on the toes, then stopping the place with bruised Sage, fasten on
his shoe again, and stop it with Hogs grease and bran boiled together as hot
as he can endure it; do this twice in a fortnight and it will be a perfect Cure

Frothy or weeping Hoof.
This Frothy or weeping hoof is commonly occasioned by some Channel Nail, or
bruise by treading on a stone, and afterward rankling: if so, you must first
raise the skin with your Cornet-Horn, and lay upon the Sorrance Wheat Flour
and Bores grease well incorporated, and dress him with this two days together;
then take the powder of quick Lime, Soap and Tallow, and mix them well
together, and for four days apply that to the sore.

But I have a better opinion of this ensuing receipt, and therefore I shall not
much commend the former.

If you observe the hoof to weep or froth by evacuating thin, watery or frothy
stuff, then open the top thereof with your Cornet, so as the wound may become
hollow all about the extremities thereof, so that you may come to the Master
Vein, and breaking it a sunder, let it bleed what it will; when the Vein has
left bleeding, fill up the Wound with Salt very finely powdered, then take
hurds and steep them in Vinegar, and so stop the wound therewith, and bind
thereto a cloth to keep the same from falling away: this is an approved remedy.

I shall close my discourse of Founders with this one receipt more which is a
Sovereign Medicine for all sorts of Founders, Frettizes, Surbaits, or any
imperfection whatsoever in the feet.

First, pa^e them, open the heels wide, and draw good store of blood from the
Toes, then tack on a shoe somewhat hollow; after this, take of the best
Frankincense, and rolling it in a little fine Cotton Wool or Bombaste, with an
hot Iron melt it into the foot betwixt the shoe and the Toe, till the hole
from whence issued the blood be filled up. Then take half a pound of Hogs
grease, and melt it on the fire, then mix it with Wheat bran till it be as
thick as Pultess; then boiling hot stop up the Horses foot therewith, then
cover it with a piece of an old shoe and splent it up, and so let the Horse
stand for four or five days, and in that time you may expect the cure to be
effected; if not, renew it again, till he be sound.

False quarters.
A false quarter takes its denomination from the situation of the Sorrance on
the hoof, making that part of the hoof look as if it did not properly belong to
the whole, but was artificially set on; it most commonly afflicts the inside of
the hoof, because it is the weakest part, and these insides are called
quarters, thence a false quarter, which is no more than to say a sick and an
unsound quarter.

The false quarter happens frequently from evil shooing, ill paring, and
sometimes by pricking with a Nail.

The common Symptoms are, the Horse will halt much, the rist will bleed, and
when the shoe is off there is nothing will interpose between the Sorrance and
your sight, but that it will be palpably apparent.

The cure whereof is to cut away the old corrupt hoof, and then take the whites
of nine Eggs, the powder of Incense, of unslackt Lime, of Mastick, of
Verdigrease, and of Salt, of each three Ounces, mingle these well together,
then dip in as much hurds as will cover the fore hoof, lay it on, and all about
it lay Swines grease an Inch thick, or more; do this also below it; bind this
on in such wise that it may not be stirred for a whole fortnight at least; then
apply it fresh again, and the Horse will require no other dressing to
accomplish the cure.

Now if any corruption be gathered together within the false quarter in such
manner that the Horse will go halting with much pain and difficulty, which
matter you shall know if there be any there, by laying your finger on the false
quarter, at which the Horse will start or shrink if it be ripe; if so, open it
with a drawing knife, and let out the corruption, then lay thereon Horse dung,
Oil, Salt and Vinegar, mixed together in the manner of a Plaster, this will not
only heal the Sorrance, but consolidate the hoof, and make it firm: at first
after the cure is wrought be careful in shooing him till his hoof be thoroughly
hardened.

There is yet another way to cure this Sorrance which by Mr. Gray is accounted
the best he ever met with, and was taught him by a very skilful French Farrier,
which is this.

Take a piece of wood that is flat, and form it an inch broad at least, making
it so thin and slender that it will bend like an hoop, which must be long
enough to come twice about the Cronet of the hoof; get also an indifferent long
piece of Filletting in readiness, and cut it in two pieces; then having brought
the hoop about the Cronet with one piece of the filletting bind fast the top of
the hoop, making it fast behind against the heel: then take the other piece of
filletting, and fasten it to the top of the first filletting, sowing it as well
on the one side of the hoof as on the other.

But I should have told you that before you fasten on the hoop you must draw
the Sorrance of the false quarter with a drawing Iron, so close, and near that
you come to the very quick, which you know by the flowing of a certain kind of
dewy moisture, let that be your sign for binding on your hoop, having before
prepared this Salve in a readiness to fill up the chinks of the said quarter.

Take of the roots of Lingua Bovis green* and newly gathered, of the roots of
Conso^ida Major and the root of Mallows, of each half a pound; wash them and
scrape them clean, and cut them into small pieces; boil these in two quarts of
Aligant till the liquor be consumed, and the roots become soft, then pound them
very well, and strain them through a fine Searser, reserving a little of the
wine to moisten it that it may strain the better: then take of Venice
Turpentine, new Wax, Burgundy Pitch, of each half a pound, of black Pitch four
Ounces, of the oldest Oil Olive one quart, put these together with the former
recited ingredients into a clean Kettle, after this manner; first the roots,
then the other ingredients in their order by themselves, but not the Turpentine
till all the other are melted; let these boil together till all the Wine be
consumed, and the ingredients be well incorporated, then take them off the
fire, and put in your Turpentine; then let it have one walm or two over the
fire; then take it off, continually stirring it till it be cold, and so
preserve it for your use.

With this Salve anoint and rub well the place where the hoop and filletting is
to be bound on; and having fastened them, take Hurds, and roll it up into a
Roll, the full length of the rist of chink of the quarter; and having first
anointed the Hurds very well with the Salve bind it thereon.

When you dress him, which must be once in three days, unty all, as well the
hoop as filletting, and continue so doing till you find an absolute cure.

Fig.
The Fig is a disease which derives its denomination from the shape of the
Sorrance, which is naughty and superfluous flesh, growing on the frush or heel
in the likeness of a Fig, being full of little white grains, as you may
perceive in a Fig opened; and this Malady is occasioned either by stub, great
nail, thorn, bone, splent, or stone, either in the sole, or any other part of
the foot.

The old experienced Farriers were wont to cut the fig away with a hot Iron,
and keep the flesh from rising with Turpentine, Hogs grease, and a little Wax
molten together, and laid on with a little Tow, stopping the hole very hard,
keeping down the flesh, and applying this fresh every day till the sore be
healed.

But latter experience finds this to be much better: after you have cut away
the Fig close with an Incision knife, but it is much better to burn it off with
a red hot Iron; if so, then lay for two days together tried Hogs grease to draw
out the fire; then take the tops of the most angry young Nettles you can find,
pound them very small, and spread them on a linen cloth just the bigness of
the Fig; then take the powder of Verdigrease, and strew it on the plaster of
(...) before you lay it to the Sorrance (...) thereon, laying fresh every day
(...) grow perfect and sound; this is (...) you.

Frush running or rotten.
The running Frush is a Sorrance called by some Country Smiths the Frog;
because it breeds in that spongy part of the Heel, which they call the Frog.
I know not for what reason they should give it that appellation, since it is
formed and fashioned like a forked Arrow-head, and is the tenderest part of the
Hoof toward the Heel; this is that part which when Farriers cut, they say they
cut forth the sole of the Horses foot.

The causes of this Sorrance are several; as first, when the Smith
inconsiderately pareth that part to the quick, which afterward becomes sore
and often turns to the Running Frush; which will so stink as not to be endured,
by reason of the Gravel getting into it through travel, causing a rankling and
impostumation; sometimes it happens by an evil humor, falling down into the
legs, and making its way out through the Frush, being the softest and tenderest
part of the foot: now though hereby the legs are kept clean from Wind-galls,
and all other tumors and swellings, by reason that the humors have passage
that way, yet by reason of the corruption gathering into that part, I look upon
the mischief of this Sorrance much greater than the advantage it brings with
it, making the Horses foot so weak and tender, that he is not able to tread on
any hard ground.

The signs are; he will ever go best on green swarth; but when he comes into
hard and dry dirty ways he will halt, by reason of the Gravel getting in,
fretting and paining him to the quick; and you shall observe that when he
rests, the Frush will weep, sending forth a watery stuff, which will so stink
the scent will be insufferable.

The Cure: Take stale Chamber-lye, and boil it with a quantity of Alom, and
keep it close stopped in a Glass; then take of red Nettles two handfuls, the
strongest and most angry; dry them well, and reduce them to powder; and what
quantity of this powder you have, join to it as much beaten Pepper, and mix
them well together, and keep it in a dry Bladder for your use; when you have
occasion to make use thereof, take off the shoe, and open the Frush; then wash
the sorrance to the very bottom, with this water and powder mixed together and
warmed; then hollow the shoe that it hurt not the Frush, and so put it on; but
before you do it, the foot being well washed and cleansed from all putrefaction
and gravel, fill the hole with the aforementioned powder, and stop it with
Hurds, and splent it, that the Hurds may keep in the powder, and that nothing
may come to prejudice the Sorrance; and thus renew the washing with filling up
the hole with the powder every day once, and in seven or eight days it will be
perfectly cured, provided you suffer no dung to come to the place afflicted,
and that he tread not on any wet during the time of the Cure.

Fistula.
A Fistula is a running Ulcer, deep, hollow and crooked, being much straiter at
the mouth or orifice than at the bottom, occasioned by some wound, bruise, sore
or canker not thoroughly healed, sometimes proceeding from malignant humors,
sometimes from a stripe, which being strongly laid home, and bruising the flesh
to the bone, it afterward putrifies inwardly and turns to a Fistula; or
lastly, it comes by being wrung by the Tree of an ill-made Sadle.

The sign^ hereof are so apparent they need not an Ecce in their discovery;
therefore let us pass to the Cure, which must be thus.

First, take some pliable thing, as a Goos-quil, a small piece of Lead or a
rod, and therewith probe or search the bottom thereof, making your Probe to
bend which way soever the crooked cavity of the Fistula leans. Having found
the bottom thereof, make so large an incision that the corruption may have a
free passage downwards; but have a care you do not cut in sunder any
Master-Sinew or main Tendon, then tent it two or three days with Hog's Grease to
the intent the hole may be the more dilated.

This being done, make this Injection: Take of Sublimate and Precipitate of
each as much as will lie upon a groat, Alom and white Coperas of each three
ounces; burn all these in an earthen pot, but let not the bottom burn, which
you may prevent by first rubbing thereon some Oil; then take two quarts of fair
water, and having boiled it alone and scummed it, put therein, having first
taken it from the fire, as much of this powder as will lie on a Crown-piece;
inject of this water in a Syringe, and it will not only kill but heal the
Fistula in a very short time.

Some, not inferior in skill to any, take this course for the Cure; viz. Take
one pint of the best Honey, of Verdegriese one ounce made into fine powder, and
so boil them together near an hour upon a soft fire; having so done, strain it
into some Vessel that is clean, and preserve it for your use: this is an
incomparable Ointment wherewith to tent any Fistula or Polevil; for it
descends to the bottom, and speedily eats away all dead flesh, whereby that
which is carnifying may heal the better.

If the matter or corruption be plentiful, then dress him herewith twice a day;
but continue so doing no longer than one day, then dress him after this manner:

Take of Turpentine, Swines-grease, Sheeps-suet of each a like quantity; and
being molten together make a Salve thereof, and dress him therewith six days
together, observing to make your tent of very fine soft linen cloth and fine
flax, not making your tent too big after the second dressing; then lay upon and
about the sore this Pultess: First, take two gallons of fair water, and having
boiled it, scum it well; then take three handfuls of Mallows, and the like of
the leaves of Violets, with two of Oat-meal or more; put these into the former
water with Hogs-mort and fresh Butter of each a pound, and let it boil till it
become thick, like paste, and so apply it hot to the sore.

Now some, on the other side, will make use of no other thing for the cure of a
Fistula than this: Take the outermost green shells of Walnuts, and put them in
a Tub, strowing three or four handfuls of Bay Salt upon them on the top, midst
and bottom, and so keep them all the year; and when they have occasion to use
them, they take a pint thereof with a little Bay Salt, two ounces of black
Soap, half a spoonful of May-butter, or instead thereof fresh Butter, and
incorporate them well together, and with this they tent or plaster the
Fistula, anointing the Sorrance with Turpentine two hours before they lay on
the Plaster; observing thus to do till the Fistula be perfectly healed.

Lastly, let me prescribe you two Remedies more, not inferior to any
afore-recited, and I have done.

Take Verdigriese, Butter and Salt; mingle and melt these together; having so
done pour it, scalding hot into the sore; and thus use it till all the flesh be
red; after this, tent it with Verde-griese, burnt Allom, Wheat Flour and the
Yolks of Eggs, well beaten and mingled together; and lastly, skin it with Barm
and Soot mixed together.

Take a pint of the strongest Vinegar you can get, and having made it hot on
the fire, add thereunto of the Lome of a Clay-wall, which has no lime in it,
but pick not out the straws therein, and so boil them together till they become
a Salve; being indifferently hot spread it over the Sorance, especially such
places as feel hard; do thus twice a day, and it will not only ripen but heal
the Fistula: this is also a sovereign Cure for any galled or bruised back, how
grievously sore soever.

Frets.
A Fret is not much unlike an Ulcer, only it is more hard and knotty, not
spreading but residing in one place, sometimes between the skin and flesh
(Fa^cy like) and will not break.

The best and most approved Cure is, to make a strong Lie with old Urine,
Ash-ashes and green Copperas, and bathing the knots herewith, it will not only
kill but heal them. Others take a Snake, and throwing away the head and tail,
roast the rest of the body cut into pieces, and preserving the grease that
droppeth, anoint the place aggrieved, healing thereby this malady in a short
time; but in anointing the sore they always are very cautious they touch no
sound place therewith; for the venenosity thereof will poison.

Now if your Horse be fretted or galled under the belly, as it frequently
happens, when the Girths are crumpled or knotty, and there withal drawn too
strait; then take of Oil de Bay and Oil of Balm two ounces, of Pitch two
ounces, of Tar two ounces, and one ounce of Rozin; mingle these well together,
and anoint the fretted place therewith; then take chopped Flax and lay thereon,
not removing but letting it fall off of it self; this will infallibly cure him.

Gravelling.
An Horse comes to be gravelled by sand getting in between the sole and the
hoof, or the sole and the shoe, sometimes on the inside, sometimes on the
outside; and sometimes on both sides of the heel, settling at the quick, and
there fretteth and festereth. Sometimes it happens by the calking or spong of
the shoe, which by much labor and travel does eat through the hoof into the
quick of the foot, and so much the sooner, by how much the Horses heels are
soft and weak; or that the shoe, lying too flat to his foot, the gravel
getting in can in no wise get out again.

His grief will be soon discovered by his halting and complaining on the same
foot; which as soon as you shall discover, take up that foot he endeavors to
favor, and you shall find it more hot than usual, and warmer than the rest of
his feet.

Then take off his shoe, and with your Drawing iron draw the place till you
come to the very quick, and having picked forth all the Gravel, and crushed forth
the blood and corruption, then wash your sore clean with this Copperas-water:

Take two quarts of fair water, and put it into a clean Skillet or Posnet; then
put thereto half a pound of green Copperas, and of Salt one handful, of
ordinary Honey one spoonful, and two or three bunches of Rosemary, boil these
together till one half of the liquor be consumed; a little before you take it
from the fire, add thereunto of Alom the quantity of a Wallnut; taking it from
the fire let it stand till it is cold, and then put it in some Vessel for your
use. After this, pour on your sore Sheeps-tallow and Bay Salt molten together,
scalding hot; then stop up the hole with Hurds, and so set on the shoe again.

Dress it thus twice or thrice and it will be whole; but let his foot be
thoroughly well before you either travel him, or let his foot touch water.

Now you are to understand, that if a Graveling be not well stopped, to keep down
the flesh, it will rise higher than the hoof, it will cost you much more labor
in bolstring and abating that ill-grown carnosity.

Some of our late Farriers are of opinion, that this following receipt is an
excellent remedy for any Gravelling, viz. First, you must so pare the hoof that
the sore may be visible; then take an ounce of Virgin-wax, and a quarter of an
ounce of Rozin, and as much of Deer-suet, and half an ounce of Boars-grease,
and beat them all very well in a Mortar, and after that melt them together over
the fire; that done, dip good store of Flax therein, and so stop up the sore
close and hard; after this you may travel your Horse whither you please.

Now to the intent that your own experience may pick one out of many, which may
surpass all others, let me add this one more: Take of Virgin-wax one ounce,
Rozin and Deer-suet of each two ounces, Boars-grease half an ounce, and of
Housleek one head; incorporate all these together in a Mortar, then melt them
over a gentle fire, and so apply it hot to the Sorrance, stopping it up with
Hurds, and so tack on the shoe, a very few dressings will effect the Cure.

Gourged or Gourded Legs.
This Gourge is a very bad Sorance, being an ugly and dangerous swelling in the
nether part of the legs, proceeding from melting of grease by immoderate
labor, or from hard beating in dry ways in the Summer time; which first
causes Wind-galls, which offending the Sinews, make them to swell; and this is
the worst Gourding.

The signs are, a lesser swelling in his Legs when he is upon travel than when
he stands still in the stable; this swelling is most usually attended with
scabs, which commonly run into the Scratches.

The Cure is to draw him with an hot Iron, and handful above the Knee; then
rope his Legs with soft Hay, wet in water that is cold, and letting it remain
twenty four hours, it will allay the swelling: I cannot approve of this Cure so
well as what Mr. Markham prescribes, which is this:

Take up the Veins beneath the Knee, and let him bleed well, then knit the Vein
both above and below; having so done, anoint his legs with this Ointment: Take
of Frankincense, Rozin and fresh Grease of each a like quantity, and having
boiled them well together, strain it, and use it once a day as you shall have
occasion. Have especial care in taking up the veins, lest you make your Horse
go stiff ever after.

Gelding of Horses or Colts.
There are three things to be observed in the Gelding of Horses, and they are
the Age, Season of the year, and state of the Moon.

First, as to the Age; all Colts you may geld at twelve days old, or a little
sooner, which I rather approve of than of fifteen or twenty days old; for the
sooner a Colt is gelded, if his stones are come down, the more it will improve
his growth, shape and courage; and though many have obstinately affirmed, that
a year and a half or two years old, is the best time for gelding, yet such have
been at last forced to confess the contrary by woeful experience.

An Horse you may geld at any age whatsoever with this Proviso, that great care
be taken in the Cure.

The Time or Season of the year for Gelding, the best I hold to be at Spring
and Fall, that is to say, from the latter end of March till the beginning of
October.

Lastly, as to the state of the Moon, then is the best time when she is in the
decrease; and this is not only the opinion of all ancient Farriers, but is
confirmed by the experience of those of later practice.

Now as to the general manner of Gelding, whether of Foal, Colt or Horse, it is
thus: Let the place you choose to cast him on be Straw or a soft Dunghill, not
too moist; then taking the stone between your foremost finger and your great
finger, with a fine Incision-knife slit the Cod, so that you may only press the
stone forth; then with a pair of small Nippers, very smoth, clap the strings of
the stone between them, very near to the setting on of the stone, and press
them so hard that there may be no flux of blood; then with a thin
Cauterizing-iron red hot, sear away the stone; then take a hard Plaster of
Rozin, Wax, and washed Turpentine, well molten together, and with your hot Iron
melt it on the head of the strings, and having seared the strings, lay a good
quantity of this Salve thereon; then loose the Nippers, and as you did with one
stone so do with the other.

Having thus done, fill the two slits of the Cod with white Salt; then take
Hog's Grease clean rendered, and anoint the outside of the Cod, as also his
Thighs and Belly over, and so let him rise.

If after his gelding, you perceive any extraordinary swelling either in his
Sheath or Cod; then chase him up and down, making him once a day to trot for an
hour, and it will remedy it perfectly.

Garget in Horse or Beast only.
I conceive that there is little difference between the Garget and Plague,
Pestilence or Murrain, being all malignant and Pestilential distempers, the
Infected being infectious to those Horses which stand by them; it is present
death to open a Vein in this disease.

You may know this disease by these signs or symptoms: He will hang down his
head very much, gumming thick atter at the eyes, as big as the top of a man's
finger, his pace will be weak and staggering, with swelling oftentimes in his
head, but his body will very much decay on a sudden, and yet have a good
stomach to his meat.

For the Cure take this Prescription: Take of Diapente, Dialphora,
London-Treacle, Mithridate and Saffron of each the quantity of an Hasel-nut, an
handful of Wormwood, as much of red Sage, Rhubarb the quantity of an Hasel-nut,
two Cloves of Garlic; boil all these together in two pints of good Beer, till
it has consumed one half, then give it him to drink lukewarm fasting, and
keep him very warm: the very next thing you give him, let it be a warm Mash
made of ground malt, and let him drink warm water for a week, giving him
sometimes some bursten Oats, and clean sweet Hay; it is sweating that must
effect the Cure. Now forasmuch as Cows also are troubled with this distemper,
know that about half the quantity of what, in this Receipt, is prescribed for
an Horse, is an excellent Remedy for a Cow. Probatum.

A Garget sometimes seizes the throat of an Ox, Cow or Bullock, causing a
swelling in the sides, and often comes for want of water.

For the Cure, you must cast the beast; then cut the skin through on the midst
of the swelling, fleaing the skin on each side, as far as the swelling
extends; then take fine white Wood-Ashes sifted, and mix them with mould
stale old Piss; stir them well together, and wash the sore therewith, and it
will dissipate the swelling.

If the Garget be under the root of a Cows or Bullocks tongue, there swelling,
causing his head and face to swell also, frothy at mouth, and forsaking his
meat; then must you cure him by first casting him so, that by the fall he
bruise not his body; then with your hand pull out his tongue as far as you can,
and with the point of a Lancet or sharp Penknife, slit down the middle Vein
under his tongue about an Inch, and from thence will issue black blood and
water, proceeding from the gall; then with Salt and Vinegar mingled together,
wash or rub the place therewith and the Cure is wrought.

But if the Garget be in the Guts, the signs will be like the former, viz.
running at the eyes, slavering at the mouth, etc. and for the remedy, take an
Egg-shell filled full with Tar, and put it down the Cows or Bullocks throat,
then take two handfuls of Salt and put it into a pint of Verjuice; then with a
Horn convey it down the throat of the beast; then drive him to and fro till he
dung, and let four hours after be the time of his fasting.

Galled Back that comes by the Saddle, or Shackle.
For an Horse to have a Galled back is very common, and happens so many several
ways, that it would not only be tedious but endless to describe them. I shall
therefore only insist upon the most material, and that is either by the Sadle,
Panel, Pack saddle, or Male-pillion, which frequently injure the back of an
Horse, either by evil stuffing or want of stuff, or the Tree may be so faulty,
that all the art of an ingenious Saddler shall not be able to correct the
error; and that is, when at first it is not rightly shaped, or afterward by
accident either cracked or broken.

You need not enquire after the signs, for they are commonly visible; as great
swelling, hair fretted off, skin broken, and the back raw with inflammation;
but if none of these symptoms appear, and yet the Horses back is certainly
wrung by the Saddle; you may find it out by stroking your hand all along his
back when the Saddle is off; if hurt, he will shake his head, winch with his
tail, shake, he will offer to strike or bite, etc.

If you find that his back is swelled without impostumation, clap on the
swelling some of his wet Litter, and setting on his Saddle again, so let him
remain with his Saddle on all night, and by the next morning his swelling will
be so abated as not to be discerned.

If the hair be only galled off, and the place be not impostumated, then only
anoint the part with a little Butter and Salt melted together, and you need
dress him but twice to make it perfectly whole.

But if the Back be so galled, that not only the hair is fretted off, but the
skin too, and the place appears palpably raw, then take three parts of new
Sheeps-dung, and one part of Wheat Flour, and mingle them well together,
kneading into paste and flatting it, bake it a little; then take some of the
powder hereof warm, and lay it to the place; this is a speedy Cure.

Now if your Horse be galled by Lock, Cord or Shackle, then, believe me, this
is a sovereign remedy: Take of live Honey seven spoonfuls, of Verdegriese half
an ounce, and boil them together till the Honey be half consumed, and that it
become red; then put it into some clean pot, and anoint the Sorrance therewith,
made warm twice every day; and when you have anointed the place, cast thereon
hurds cut very short, to keep on the Ointment, and this will heal it speedily.

Next to this we must consider an Horses back that is so galled, that it is
withal so inflamed, that there is no expectation but that much impostumation
will follow, before it be cured; then you may do well to take Barm, and so much
Soot as will thicken it; not so thick as Paste, but somewhat fluid like Tar,
and therewith make a Plaster, and lay it to the Sorrance:

Now, besides what is already spoken of, there are many more things which will
cure a Galled back; as the powder of Briar leaves well dried; the Powder of
Honey and unslak'd Lime; the powder of wild Cowcumbers, dried in an oven, will
effect this cure, so that the Sorrance be first washed in Vinegar; the bone of
a Crab-fish pulverized, or the powder of Oister-shells will do the like; but
that which may serve instead of all the rest is; Take Hay and boil it in strong
Urine, and lay it to the swelled place, and it will assuage the pain and bring
it to suppuration; then lance it, and let out the corruption; then stop the
Orifice with Rozin, Wax and fresh Grease all molten together; but if you
perceive that dead flesh grow within the sore, then eat it out with Verdigrease
pulverized or Precipitate, strowing thereof on the proud flesh; when that is
effected, the powder of Rozin is sufficient to dry it up perfectly.

Gigs.
Gigs are Bladders are small soft swellings with black heads, afflicting the
inside of the Horses lips, immediately under his great Jaw-teeth; they will
sometimes grow very big, about the size almost of a Pigeons Egg, and then will
prove so painful, that the poor Beast is forced to let the meat drop out of his
mouth, or else he will not be capable of chewing it; so that by consequence he
cannot be in a condition of thriving: their common Original is from eating
either too much grass, or else proceeding from prickly hay or provender: when
you feel them, as easily you may, then slit them with an Incision-knife, and
having thrust out the corruption, wash the sore places with Alom-water; or burn
the swellings with a small hot Iron, and then wash them with Beer and Salt,
which will instantly heal them.

Grief in the Withers.
The Wither of an Horse, as well as his back, are subject to very many
Sorrances, proceeding from causes both internal and external, the first from
corrupt and putrified humors, the second from galling, pinching, wringing,
etc. The old Practitioners of this Art were wont, as soon as ever they espied
any swelling on the Horses back or Withers (especially if it were great) to
pierce it in several places with an hot Iron, and then tent it with linen
cloth, dipped in Sallet-oil warmed, and afterward they dried and healed it up
with powder of Honey and Lime mixed together.

Those of later experience rather chose to lay wet Hay thereunto; for that will
either drive it away or ripen it; and being broken, they then applied a
Plaster of Wine-lees, renewing it as often as it grew dry. But by reason I
have already treated at large of a galled Back, it will be a Tautology to
discourse further of the griefs appertaining to the Withers of an Horse.

General Scab or Leprosy.
This general Maunge or Leprosy diffuseth it self over all the body of an
Horse, and happens by much Melancholy blood abounding.

For this Malady or general Scab you must first let him blood in the Neck-vein,
on the one side, and the next day on the other, two days after that in the
Flank veins, and after the same distance of time in the Tail; then take Brine
and wash therewith all the sore places, rubbing them hard with a wisp of straw
till they bleed soundly and are raw, then anoint his body with an Unguent thus
prepared:

Take of Quicksilver one ounce, of Hog's Grease one pound, of Brimstone
pulverized three ounces, of Rape-oil a pint.

Mingle these well together, until the Quicksilver be imbodied with the rest;
and having laid this Ointment on all the raw places, cause it to sink into the
flesh, by holding close thereunto a hot bar of Iron somewhat broad.

For diversity sake, and that you may not be stinted in your choice, to every
disease I give you several Cures, and that I may follow my former method, I
shall lay you here down one more no way inferior to the former.

After you have let your Horse blood, take an old Wool-card, and rub all the
Horses sores till they bleed; then take a pottle of stale Urine, and add
thereunto a quarter of a pound of green Coperas; mix and stir these well
together, then boil them a while; then as hot as the Horse can endure it, wash
it all over herewith; about an hour afterward, take of Quicksilver two ounces,
of Oil one ounce and a half, of white Heleborus one ounce, with a good quantity
of Swines-grease; mingle these so well together that none of the Quicksilver
may be visible, and therewith anoint the Horse; let the Horse, during the time
of his cure, be dieted sparingly; and then, if the first dressing cure him not,
the second will do it infallibly.

Hurl bone disjointed.
The Hurl-bone is situate much about the middle of the buttock, and upon a
slip or strain is very subject to dislocation.

For the cure, take of Oil of Turpentine and strong Beer, and put these into a
glass bottle, then shake these well together, and having so done, as near as
you can pour a little hereof right over the socket of the Hurl-bone, the
breadth of an ordinary Saucer, and rub it in with your hand. It will make the
skin to swell up, and it will be very sore; then anoint him on the brawn and
thick part of the Thigh, and so down to the stifle. In the time of the cure
drive in a wooden wedge between the toe and the shoe, and so let him stand
day and night; as you see your Horse mend, so you may ride him accordingly.

Horse-spice, how to make it, with the uses thereof, a most excellent and cheap
Medicine.
Those poor Country people who cannot go to the charge of dearer Physic for
the cure of their Horses distemper, may make use of this following receipt, and
may for ought I know receive as much benefit thereby as by a Medicine tending
to the same purpose six times the price; and thus it is made: take half a pound
of Anniseeds, and the like quantity of English Liquorish, also half a pound of
Grains, and the like proportion of Fennel seeds, likewise half a pound of the
Flower of Brimstone, and a pound of dried Enula Campana; slice the Liquorish,
and dry it, and so pound them all together in a Mortar very small.

An Ounce of this Horse spice with a spoonful of Sallet-Oyl, and two spoonfuls
of Jean Treacle, and all put together into a quart of strong Beer, is an
excellent Drink for a Cold, to make an Horse thrive, and an Antidote against
most Diseases.

If upon letting blood you would give your Horse a Drink, take an Ounce of this
spice in a pint of strong Beer, and making it lukewarm, give it him to drink
fasting.

Hide-bound.
This Distemper commonly proceeds from unreasonable Travail, disorderly Diet,
and multiplicity of Surfeits. It is easily discernable by a general Consumption
of the flesh, as leaness, so that you cannot pluck with your fingers his skin
from the flesh: he will likewise be disaffected to his meat.

You must in the effecting of a cure first let him blood, and then let him
drink five mornings together a quart of new Milk with two spoonfuls of Honey,
and one spoonful of course Treacle; let his meat be either Barley boiled, warm
Grains, or Beans, and his drink Mashes.

Hayr, how to make it grow speedily.
Take the new Dung of a Goat, ordinary Honey, Allom powdered, and the blood of
an Hog, sees these together, and what places in the horse you see destitute of
hair, rub them herewith every day, this will restore hair wonderfully.

Now since it often happens that either by reason of a dry Mange, or some
evil humors resorting to those parts, the hair of both Main and Tail do often
shed and fall away, it is requisite that we here prescribe a remedy; and to
that end, first, take blood from the Neck-Vein, then slit the skin of the
inward part of the Tail (if both are affected with one Distemper, viz. the
shedding of the hair) next to the Tuel, from the buttocks to the fourth joint,
and there with your Cornet you shall find a hard Gristle, raise it up
therewith, and take it forth; having so done, fill up the cavity with Salt
finely beaten, and then with an hot Iron steeped in Buck-ly, burn the Tail in
sundry places, and then anoint the places with Hogs grease till they be whole:
this has been found true by the experience of several.

Headache.
It is commonly observed among Horses as well as humane Creatures, that their
heads will ache, and that grievously, rendering them incapable of performing that
service which is expected from them; to the intent you may remove this
troublesome distemper, first, take blood from him in the mouth, rubbing it with
Salt to cause the greater quantity of blood to come from thence; then take a
small stick, and wrap about it a linen cloth; having so done, anoint it well
in the Oil of Bays, and thrust it to and fro his Nostrils, which will open and
purge his head; then take the stalks of Garlic broken into small pieces and
make a perfume thereof, or you may perfume his head with Frankincense, Storax
and Benjamin, grossly beaten, and well mixed, of each a like quantity; you must
this while feed him but sparingly, and exercise him but moderately; this will
reduce his head and brain into a quiet disposition.

Heel Scab, or Heels that are scabbed.
Those little scabs that I have often seen growing about an Horses heels, which
are more an eyesore to the master than a trouble to himself, engender
frequently from the laziness of his keeper, and not from malignant humors, and
therefore I would advise the groom or hostler to anoint them daily with
Elbow-grease.

But if these scabs do proceed from some evil humors, and do run, then morning
and evening let the Horse be rid up to the belly in water, to the intent they
may contract, and then cauterize them near the joints.

The heels of an Horse are sometimes Kibed, and is a kind of Scratches; you
must cauterize the middle of the swelling both long and cross wise; that done,
take Ox dung just as it falls from him, and putting Sallet-Oyl thereunto set
it over the fire, and apply it to the kibed heels, and it will cure them.

Heels of an Horse that are troubled with the M^llet.
This Mellet is a dry scab sometimes growing on the one heel and sometimes on
the other, but most commonly on the heel of the fore foot, this proceeds from
corrupt blood, or negligence in dressing after travail.

You must cure him thus: having first nearly clipped away the hair, apply this
Medicine plaisterwise to the Sorrance; take of ordinary Honey half a pint,
black soap a quarter of a pound, five spoonfuls of Vinegar, and the quantity of
an Hens Eggs of Allom unburnt, of Rye flower two spoonfuls, mix these well
together, and making a Plaster hereof lay it all over the Sorrance, thus let
it lie six days; at the expiration of which time, wash the whole leg as well as
Sorrance with powdered Beef-broth, then rope up his legs with soft Hay wet, and
the cure will be perfected.

Honey charge, how made, and for what good, as all sorts of Slips,
Dislocations, and for all sorts of Scratches.
This Honey charge I am about to give you an account of, as to the ingredients
it is compounded of, is excellent good for any slip or wrench in the shoulder,
hip, or other member, for all sorts of Scratches, stiffness of Sinews,
hip-shut, dislocation, weariness in travail, discussion of evil humors, and
the asswaging all swellings and tumors.

The way of making this Honey charge is thus: take of Wheat Meal two pound, and
put a little Wine to it, then mix it well, and put it into a Kettle, then add
thereunto half a pound of the powder of Bole Armoniack, of common English Honey
one pound, it being on the fire, keep it continually stirring, till it be
thoroughly boiled; in the boiling put in half a pound of black Pitch, when
almost enough, put in half a pound of ordinary Turpentine, of Oil de Bay,
Cummin, Althaea, Sanguis-Draconis, Bay Berries, Fenugreek, and of Linseed Meal,
of each two drams; boil all these together again, still stirring them, the
better to imbody them; this is an excellent charge for any ordinary Sorrances
whatsoever.

Hurts in the Shoulder.
If the shoulder of your Horse be hurt, or any other member; then take Oil de
Bay, Dialthea, Fresh Butter, Oil of Turpentine; of each three Ounces, boil and
stir them well together, so that they be well incorporated; then take hereof
very hot as much as ever the Horse can endure, and anoint twice or thrice a day
the place grieved, and this with moderate exercise will prove a speedy remedy.

Now if the shoulder of the Horse be pinched, as it often happens by straining
the Horse too young, or by carrying too great a weight; then you must first
rowel him, then lay this Plaster over his Breast, Shoulders and Withers.

Take of Pitch and Rozen, of each a pound, of Tar half a pint, boil these
together, and when it is indifferent cold, take a woollen Cloth bound to the
end of a stick, and dip it into the charge, and daub therewith all the shoulder
over, then take Flocks as near as you can of the color of the Horse, and lay
thereon, and once in two days make your Rowels clean, and put them in again;
continue thus doing twelve or fourteen days; after this, take out the Rowels,
and heal up the wounds with tents of Flax dipped in Turpentine and Hogs grease
molten together, renew this once a day till it be whole; you may let him run to
grass till he be twice or thrice frost-bitten, and it will be for his future
advantage.

The wrench in the shoulder comes from a slip either abroad or at home, or
when an Horse is too suddenly stopped in his carrer, or by too sudden turning,
and sometimes by the stroke of another Horse.

The only sign that I know of is his trailing of his leg upon the ground close
after him.

The remedy is this; first, take away three pints of blood at least from his
Plat Vein; having saved the blood in a clean vessel, then put thereunto a quart
of strong Vinegar, with half a dozen Eggs broken, and their shells, and so
much Wheat flower as will thicken all the liquor; that done, put thereunto a
pound of the powder of Bole-Armoniack, Sanguis-Draconis two Ounces, and mingle
them so that the flower may be invisible; take this, and with your hand daub
all the shoulder from the Main downward, and betwixt the fore bowels, all
against the hair; this done; tie him up to the rack, and let him not lie down
all that day, then diet him but sparingly for thirteen days, and refresh the
shoulder point with this charge once a day, and after this let him have a
months rest at least, and his shoulder will be reduced to the former sound
condition.

Such as are of late experience prescribe this method for the cure:

They first let the Horse blood in the Breast-Vein, and then Rowel him from the
nether part of the Spade-bone down to the point of the shoulder; having so
done, they take a Patten shoe, and set it on the sound foot, and so turn him
to grass for a month, not forgetting once in two days to remove the Rowels, and
so thrust out the corruption: As soon as they perceive that he goes sound,
they take off the Patten shoe, and pull out the Rowels and let him still run
at grass, till he have taken a frost or two.

I cannot discommend this method, for I have made trial thereof with very good
success: I shall speak no further of hurts in the shoulder in this particular
place, because I reserve them for another more proper.

Heat in the Lips, and Mouth of an Horse.
There is a certain unnatural and violent heat in the stomach, which ascending,
does frequently breed Cankers, at least an inflammation of the mouth and lips,
causing in them a burning and swelling with so much anguish and pain, that the
Horse will utterly decline his food.

The cure is facile and easy, for you need do no more than turn up that lip
which is most swelled, and jag it so that it may bleed, then wash his lips,
mouth and tongue with Salt and Vinegar.

Hidden griefs in an Horse how to discover, for want of the knowledge whereof
several pretended crafty Jockeys have been deceived and cheated.
Some Horses are of that nature, that if moderately ridden they will conceal
their infirmities, going very seemingly sound, partly by being of a strong
constitution, and by being long at grass wear out their distempers, and partly
again out of a certain awe most Horses have to their Riders, whereas these very
Horses may be unperfect and unsound.

Now that you may not be mistaken and abused herein, first take the Horse out
of the stable in a long string, causing one to run him in his hand the length
of the halter; especially observe how he sets down his legs, whatever leg is
defective, that leg to be sure he will endeavor to favor: if he favor none,
but go upright, then mount him, and ride him roundly in some rode; after this
alight, and let him stand still an hour or better, then run him again in your
hand at the halters length, and then assure your self if he have the least
grief he should not be able to conceal it.

If you find him infirm you shall know thus whence his grief proceeds; if from
an hot cause, then the Horse halteth most when he is much exercised or
travailed; if from a cold cause, then he halteth most when he has stood still
a while.

Hipped Horse, or an Horse that is hurt in his Hips.
An hipped Horse is so properly called, when the hip-bone is dislocated, or
removed out of its natural seat or place. This Malady is as difficultly cured
as any whatsoever; for if it be not instantly taken immediately after the
dislocation, there will grow in the pot of the huckle bone a callous, or hard
substance, that it will exclude the bone absolutely from ever possessing its
natural habitation, and so the Sorrance becomes incurable.

The symptoms of this Sorrance are halting much, and going sidelong, trailing
his legs somewhat after him, the grieved hip will be somewhat lower than the
other, and the flesh will fall away from his Buttock.

You must work his cure thus: first cast him on his back, and then having a
strong Pastern on his grieved leg, with a rope draw that leg upright, and with
your hands on each side his thigh bone guide it into the pot; that done, let
him down gently, and raise him up with as little stirring or disturbance to him
as you can, and so lead him softly into the stable; after this, charge all his
hip and back with Rozen and Pitch molten together, and laid on warm, and upon
that some Flocks of the color of his own hair, and so turn him to grass.

If there be no dislocation, but only a hurt in the hip, and that newly, then
take of Oil de Bay, of Dialthea, of Nerve Oil, and of Swines grease, of each
half a pound; melt them all together, stirring them till they are thoroughly
incorporated, then anoint the Sorrance therewith against the hair, every day
once for fourteen days, and that it may well sink in, hold an hot bar of Iron
over the place you anoint, waving your hand to and fro, and this will soon cure
him.

Hough-Bonny.
Hough-Bonny is a round swelling growing on the very Elbow of the hoof, and
proceeds from a bruise by beating his hoof against the post which stands
behind him, or otherwise.

The remedy must be by taking a round Iron somewhat sharp at the end, like a
big Bodkin, and let it be somewhat bending at the point, then holding the sore
with your left hand, pulling it a little from the sinew, pierce it with the
Iron made red hot, thrusting it beneath in the bottom and so upward into the
jelly; having thrust out all the jelly, tent the hole with Flax dipped in
Turpentine and Hog's Grease molten together, and also anoint the outside with
warm Hog's Grease; doing this every day, making the tent lesser and lesser, till
the Sorrance be cured.

Though this may be looked on as none of the meanest remedies for this
distemper, yet it comes far short of this following; which frequently I have
experimented successfully.

First, take Hay boiled in old Urine, and so bring the swelling to suppuration,
or discuss it if you can; but if it comes to putrefaction, then lance it in the
lowest part of the swelling or softness with a thin hot Iron, and so let out
the matter; then tent it with Turpentine, Deers-suet and Wax of each a like
quantity molten together, and be sure that you lay a Plaster over of the same,
that you may keep in the Tent till it be perfectly cured.

Haltings of all sorts, coming either by stroke, strain or the like, with their
Cures.
For an Horse to halt is so common a thing, that no Traveller but is very well
acquainted with the trouble thereof; if the malady be so well known, there are
few, I think, should be ignorant of the Cures, which I shall orderly set down.

If the Halt proceed from stiffness of Sinews, strain or stroke, and that the
malady lie in his leg; then take Smallage, Oxe-eye and Sheep-suet of each a
quantity alike; chop them all together and boil them all in man's Urine, and
bathe the whole leg therewith; then with Hay-ropes wet in cold water roll up
his leg, and you shall find him the next morning in a very good posture, either
to begin or continue his journey.

Another as good as the former.
Take Nerve-oil, Oil de Bay and Aqua vitae; mingle these together, then warm
it; having so done, take it and chafe it in, upon and about the strain; this
will remove the pain.

If the grief be in the shoulder or hinder-leg, then burn it upon the very
joint, by taking up the skin with a pair of Pincers, and thrust the skin
through with an hot Iron overthwart; if you find this do him but little good,
then you may conclude his pain to be between the skin and the bone, which then
must be Roweled.

Another for a strain or swelling, according to the practice of the most
experienced Farriers now living.
Take a pint of the best Vinegar, of sweet Butter four ounces, and set them
over the fire; then with fine Wheat-bran make it into a Pultess over the fire,
and lay it as hot to the Sorrance as the Horse is able to endure it; do thus
morning and evening, and it is excellent good to assuage any strain newly taken.

But if the strain be of some standing; then take Mallows and Chickweed, and
boil them in strong Urine, and so lay them very hot to the strain. Now if your
strain, by length of time, or abused by Medicines, seem to the eye of all
understanding men incurable, the sinews and swelling being bony, hard, and
knotted; then take Piece-grease, and melting it on the fire, anoint and bathe
the strain therewith very hot, chafing it very much with your hand, and
afterward holding a broad bar of Iron hot against it, to make the Ointment the
better sink in; then with a fine linen Rowler, roll up the leg softly;
continue thus doing once a day, and there is no strain, how great soever and
desperate, but it will remedy in a little time.

Helps for all Sores and Ulcers.
Old Sores or Ulcers have a threefold distinction: the first are Fistula's,
being Sores which are deep, hollow and crooked: the second are Cankers; this
Sorrance is known by its shape, which is broad and shallow, and by its nature
spreading and increasing: the last are old Sores or Ulcers, which are
differenced from the two former, by being deep, black about the sides and
bottom, neither increasing nor healing.

The causes are either bruise, wound or impostume abused in the cure; or else
the cause may arise from the negligence or unskilfulness of the Farrier,
suffering ill humors to slow down into those parts.

The signs are (according to Mr. Markham's judgment) the long continuance of
the Sore, the blackness thereof with inflammation, and the thinness of the
matter flowing from it.

Observe this in the Cure; first mundifie or cleanse the sore well with white
Wine; then take Lilly-leaves and Copperas, and beat them well in a Mortar with
Swines-grease till they turn to a Salve; then with flax lay it on the Sorrance,
covering it also with a Plaster, as in the cure of wounds, and it will
speedily be a Cure; this must be renewed once a day.

But as for an old Ulcer in particular, I never found any thing by experience
better than this: Take Frankincense, Mastick, Cloves, green Copperas and
Brimstone of each a like quantity, twice as much Myrrh as any of the former;
beat it into powder, and burn it on a Chafing dish and coals, but let it not
flame; as the smoke arises, take an handful of Lint, and hold it over the
smoke, so that it may receive the fume thereof into it; then close this Lint in
a Box, and keep it.

It is to be supposed that this Lint (or you may use fine Hurds instead
thereof) is thoroughly persumed; and observe before you use it, purify and wash
well with Urine, or Vinegar either, made warm, the sore, and then having dried
it, lay on some of these Hurds or Lint, continuing so doing twice a day; take
this from experience to be a speedy and never failing Cure.

Ives.
The Ives grow in a roll betwixt the hinder part of his Jaw Bone and his Neck;
if they should chance to reach the roots of his ears the Horse is in a
dangerous condition.

If you will work a Cure, you must first let him blood in both the Neck-veins;
having thus done take Vinegar, Pepper and Hogs grease of each a like quantity;
having wrought them well together, divide it into two equal portions, putting
the one part into one ear and the residue into the other; then clap in after it
wool or flax to keep it in, and then stitch up his ears close with a needle and
thread, for a day and a night. In the time of the Cure let him stand in the
house.

Inflammations, Pustuls and Kernels under the Chawl of an Horse.
These inflammations have most commonly their rise and original from either
cold or Glanders, which must be dissolved or discussed, or the Horse will never
be sound; to this purpose therefore take two handfuls of Wheat-bran, a quart of
Beer or Ale, or so much as will thicken it; then add to these Hog's Grease half
a pound; boil these together till the liquor be quite consumed; then take
thereof and lay it to the place as hot as it can be endured, doing thus every
day so long, till it has either broke the swelling, or softened it in such
manner as that it is in a fit condition to be opened; having cleansed it from
its filth and putrefaction, then tent it with flax dipped in this Salve
following:

Take of Turpentine and Hog's Grease of each a like quantity, of Rozin or Wax
somewhat more; melt all these together and your Salve is made; put hereof into
and upon the wound once a day till it be whole.

Inflammations in Horses Eyes.
These inflammations happen often by an Horses long standing in a Stable,
whereby motes fall into his eyes; or they may come by foul feeding and no
exercise, or by corrupt or rank blood.

The signs are plain; the Cure must then follow: first phlebotomize him on the
Temple-veins, and upon the Eye-veins, and then wash his Eyes with Milk and
Honey mixed together; or you may wash his Eyes, after you have bled him, with
Milk and Aloes Hepatica.

Impostumation in general how to ripen.
If any swelling does impostumate you shall discern it by the heat, for if you
lay your hand thereon, you will feel it burn exceedingly; when you have
discovered the nature of the malady, your next care must be to ripen it, so
that it may be fit to be opened; for that purpose take Mallow-roots, and white
Lilly-root of each a like quantity; bruise them and put unto them Hog's Grease
and Linseed-meal; boil these till they are soft, and then lay them in manner of
a Plaster to the Swelling.

Before I give you any more receipts for the ripening or softning an Impostume,
give me lieve to tell you first what an Impostume is; which may be thus defined.

It is a gathering or knitting together of many and most corrupt humors in any
part or member of the body, making that part to swell extremely, and growing
into such violent inflammation, that in the end, they rot and break out into
foul, mattery and running sores, having their original, either from corruption
of food or corruption of blood.

Now let me proceed to give you a farther account of what will ripen them.

Some take Swines-grease, red Wax and the flower of Euphorbium, and mixing them
well on the fire lay it to the Impostume.

Others say this is better, to take two handfuls of Sorrel, and lapping it in a
Dock-leaf, roast it in the hot embers, and so lay it very hot to the Impostume,
renewing it once a day.

But in my opinion this is best: Take of Sanguis Draconis, of Gum Arabic, of
new Wax, of Mastick, of Pitch of Greece, of Incense and of Turpentine, of each
a like quantity; melt these together, and having strained them, make a Plaster
thereof, and lay it to the Impostume, and this will both ripen, break and heal
it; so much in general.

Now you are to understand there are two sorts of Impostumes, the one hot, and
the other cold.

If the Impostume has its original from any hot cause, as extraordinary
travel, or inflamed blood; then, according to the judgment of the most knowing,
take Liverwort and stamp it, and mingle it with the grounds of Ale, Hog's Grease
and Mallows bruised. Or you may take Lettice-seed or Poppy-seed, and mix it
with the Oil of red Roses, and lay it on the Sore plaister-wise, if it be done
at the beginning of the swelling, it will take it clean away.

But if the Impostume be engendered by any cold cause, then take Balm and
Hog's Grease, and stamp them well together, and apply it as aforesaid.

Or open the Impostume in the lowest part, with a hot Iron; then wash it with
warm Urine, after that anoint it with Tar and Oil well mixed together: Note by
the way; if you make your Incision in the form or manner of an Half Moon, it
will be more advantageous for your purpose.

Or Lastly, take an handful of Rue, and stamp it well with the yolks of Eggs
and Honey, and applying it Plaster wise, it will cure any old Impostume.

Itch in the Tail of an Horse.
Corrupt blood, rank feeding, or over-heating do cause this Maunge in the Tail;
yet not always, for sometimes it is occasioned by Truncheon-worms in the
Fundament, which are bred there in the Spring, which will cause them frequently
to rub their Tails; in this case you need do no more than anoint your hand with
Butter or Soap, and pull out the Worms, and the cure is effected.

But if you find the Tail grow bare, by reason of shedding the Hair, which is
occasioned by some small worms which grow at the root thereof, or otherwise by
some small fretting Scab; then anoint his Tail throughout with Soap, and after
wash it with strong Lie: this will both cleanse him from the Scab, and kill the
Worms,

Sometimes there will grow a Canker in the Tail, which by degrees will eat, not
only the flesh, but seize on the bone; so that it shall drop joint by joint:
against this Malady you must take this course: Take of green Copperas and Alom
of each two pound, of white Copperas half a pound; boil these in five quarts of
running water, in a strong earthen pot, till one half be consumed; then with a
little of this water lukewarm wash his Tail every day once, with a little Flax
bound to a stick, and it will quickly be well.

Interfering.
Interfering or Enterfering signify both one and the same thing; this infirmity
comes sometimes naturally, the pace being very strait, or sometimes by broad
shooing, so that in his going he heweth one leg against the other, whence come
hard scabs, and very mattery sore, causing the Horse to halt downright.

The Cure is thus; Take of May-butter, or fresh Grease, and mingle it with
Nerve-oil and Turpentine; fry these in a pan, and then add Cow Dung and apply
it Plaister-wise.

You need not trouble your self about the cure hereof, if your prudence and
discretion would look after his shooing, so that he might go so wide as not to
touch.

However, if you will play the Horse-courser, you may take a sharp and knotted
Cord, and draw it from his Dock, between his legs, to the Girths, and so ride
him.

Joints grieved with any Ach, Numness, Weakness or Swelling whatsoever which
proceeds from a cold Cause.
The causes of this Ach, Numness and Swelling, are either a strain or a cold,
taken by violent exercise, labor or immoderate riding.

The Signs or Symptoms are so visible to the Eye, they need no description.

The Cure is: Take Aqua vitae, and warm it on the fire; then take it and bathe
the part grieved, and rub it very well, holding before it a broad flat hot
Iron, which will cause the spirit to sink in the better; then take a ragg or
piece of Flax, and dip it in the Aqua vitae; then take Pepper, and having
beaten it well, fierce it in a fine fierce, and lay it on the rag or flax, and
bind it to the grieved member; then swathe it well with a Linen Rowler; do
thus once a day, and this will soon recover him.

There are others, who take Acopum and mingle it with sweet Sack, and therewith
rub and chafe the grieved joint; this is an excellent Medicine, though not
altogether so good as the former.

Increase of an Hoof lost or torn by some accident.
If your Horse has lost his Hoof, or if it be any ways impaired; then take the
Oil of Hempseed, of Wax, of Venice Turpentine, Rozin, Pitch, Bay-seeds, dried
and powdered, of each half a pound, Roch-alom two ounces; incorporate these well
together, and let them sees over a soft fire; having thus boiled some little
space, take it off and strain it through an hair cloth; thus you may preserve
it till you have occasion to make use thereof.

Once or twice a day take of this Unguent, and anoint the Hoofs of your Horse,
and this will make them grow exceedingly, and so sound, as that hereafter they
will not prove brittle.

Knots or Knobs how to remove.
If you perceive that your Horse has growing on any part of his body any
unnatural Knot or Knob, which by Artists are called Excretions, caused by
putrified blood, or by wounds not well healed, which Excretions are not only
perspicuous to the Eye, but plainly felt by the hand, I say, in such a case you
must endeavor to remove them with all expedition, which may be done thus.

Take an Incision-Knife and scarifie those Excretions, then lay thereon
Coloquintida burned and sifted; having eaten away this Knob or Knot, then heal
it up with some drying Medicines, as Honey, Lime or Bole armoniack.

Or take the strongest sort of Aegyptiacum, and with Cotton lay it thereon, and
in four or five times doing it will utterly destroy or eat away the Excretion.

Kernels under an Horses throat how to discuss, suddenly, safely and with
little Expense.
In the first place you must take a lighted Candle and therewith sear the
Kernels; then take Butter, it matters not whether fresh or salt, and lay a
piece thereof on a red cloth, and rub it well in therewith, and in less than
fourteen days the Knots will vanish; and if the Nose run by reason of them, it
will stop as soon as they are gone.

During the Cure, if it be in Winter, he must be kept warm in the Stable,
otherwise he may run at grass; but neglect not to anoint his Knobs or Kernels
once a day at least.

Or you may take Soap and mingle it with Brandy-wine, and having a red hot Iron
in readiness, hold it somewhat near the part, as you apply the Soap and
Brandy-wine, to make it sink in the better; this Medicine will suddenly bring
them down or break them.

Now if your aforesaid Knobs be of a long standing, and be extremely hard, then
in this manner you must work the Cure.

Take an ounce and an half of the Oil of Turpentine, and join thereto the like
quantity of strong Beer; put these into a glass, and so shake them that they be
well mingled together; with this bathe the Knob, clapping it in well with your
hand, and using an hot Iron to make it sink in the more; four days after apply
the charge of Soap and Brandy-wine; Five or six days after you may ride him
whither you please.

Knees broken, of a long standing, perfectly cured.
If your Horse have old broken Knees, much swelled and hard, and have been a
good while healed up, only take the Oil of Worms and anoint the places grieved,
for this is a great mollifier of any hard and bony part; if this answer not
your expectation, then may you use the aforesaid Remedy, which I prescribed for
hard Knobs of a long continuance.

Legs that are swelled how to cure.
As to the swelling of an Horse's Legs, you must consider whether it be before
or behind; if in his forelegs, then the cause hereof was some over violent
labor, by reason he was fat, and the Grease, which was melted, fell down in
his forelegs, which, had it staid within, and not fallen outwardly, would have
ingendered an Anticor, or some other distemper which would have endangered his
life.

The signs are palpable to the eye, viz. a rising of the flesh or swelling; and
therefore in the first place, it would not be amiss to anoint it with Acopum.

The Cure is, to take of Pitch and Virgins-wax, of each three ounces, of Rozin
half a pound, of the juice of Hysop and of Galbanum of each half an ounce, and
of Mirrah-secondary half a pound, Bdellium Arabicum, Populeon and the drops of
Storax of each half an ounce, and of Deer-suet half a pound; boil these
together in an earthen pot, and when it is cold take Bitumen half a pound,
Bole-armoniack and of Costus of each one ounce and a half; make all these into
fine powder, then mingle them with the former boiled Ingredients, and boil them
over again very well; then take it off the fire, and pour this commixture into
cold Water, and afterward make it into rowls, like ordinary Salves.

When you have occasion to make use of this Salve, spread hereof on Leather,
proportioning the piece, so that it may cover the swelling all over, and so lay
it on; this will not only assuage the swelling, but corroborate the Nerves and
Sinews; let it stick on as long as it can: If this will not do, I know not what
will, having tried this medicine often, and having always found it to work its
cure, in bringing a swollen horses Leg to its pristine smalness, when all other
applications proved ineffectual.

The French take this course for Legs that are troubled with swellings.

They take a piece of strong Woollen cloth, very course, and thereof make an
Hose to the shape of his Leg, a pretty deal larger; so that it may reach from
the lower part of his Pastern up to the Cambrel, making it strait at the
Pastern, but wide above at the Knee; they then take a pottle of Wine-lees
(Beer-lees will serve) and boil them well; then put to them a pound of
clarified Hog's Grease, when melted and well stirred together, adding thereunto
as much Wheat-bran as will thicken it, reducing it to the body of a Pultess, as
hot as the Horse can suffer it; having filled the hose or hosen herewith, they
then close it a top: thus letting him stand two days, and on the third they
open the hose at the top, and pour therein molten Hog's Grease, very hot, as
much as it will hold, because they say this will renew the Pultess; then close
up the hose again, and let him stand three days more; after this, having rubbed
the Horses leg down very well, if they find the swelling is not quite gone,
they will let him stand other two days, otherwise the Cure is effected.

Now the hinder legs of an Horse are occasioned to swell many times by the
uneavenness of his standing, the floor being higher before than behind; or else
by setting up the Horse in the Stable too hot, and then taking cold, the blood,
grease and humors fall down into his hinder legs.

For this I shall propound a cheap Cure: Take Train-oil and warm it on the
fire, and therewith twice a day, that is morning and evening, anoint his Legs;
but if there happen to be a stiffness with the swelling, then take
Violet-leaves, Strawberry-leaves and Primrose-leaves of each an handful; boil
all these in new milk till they become very soft; then taking it off the fire,
add thereunto of the Oil of Nerval, of Petroleum and of Pamphillion of each an
ounce; stir these together till they become blood-warm, and herewith anoint the
Legs, Nerves, sinews and Joints of the Horse six or seven days, chafing and
rubbing in this Ointment very well, and you shall work the Cure in a little
time.

Leprosy.
The Leprosy is a moist maunge proceeding from very great surfeits occasioned
by immoderate riding, and is a disease not only dangerous to the afflicted, but
infectious to other Horses that shall come near the thus diseased Horse.

You need not much enquire into the Symptoms of this distemper, being so
visible to the eye, but rather look after the Cure of a disease so dangerous
and infectious.

The cure must be effected first by bleeding him in the Neck, then take an old
Card or Curry-comb, and scrape away the scurf, so that the sorrance look raw
and bloody, then tie him up to the Rack so high that he may not be able to
bite, rub or lick himself; then anoint him with this Ointment following: take
Arsnick or Resolgar and Hogs grease tried, the aforesaid ingredient being first
beaten into fine powder, mingle these well together, and thereof make an
Ointment; and that your Ointment may sink in the better, hold a hot bar of Iron
near the Horse when you anoint him; having so done, be sure you wash away clean
this Ointment, so that none remain, with the strongest Chamber Lie you can get;
after this, untye him, and give him meat as formerly; thus you must do once
every day till he be perfectly cured.

Or you may use this remedy, which is not only good for a Leprosy, but also
any Farcy, Scab, or Maunge in any part of the body: first, let him blood in the
Neck, then take half a pound of Tobacco, and infuse it in a quart of old stale
Urine, and then put it over a soft or slow fire, so that it may only simper,
and thus let it stand a whole night, then may you herewith wash the part
grieved, and this will prove a very certain remedy.

Or you may use this means for the cure aforesaid, which does both draw, heal
and make the hair to grow.

Take a quart of Tar, and set it on the fire, then add to it half a pound of
Bores grease, an Ounce of Copperas, a quarter of a pound of Rozen, two Ounces
of Verdigrease, a quart of Linseed Oil, a quarter of a pound of Salt peter, two
Ounces of Wax, a quart of Honey, boil all these together till half be consumed;
then strain it, and keep it in a pot for your use.

When at any time you have occasion to make use of this Ointment, you must take
thereof, and making it warm, anoint therewith the Sorrance: you shall not need
to use it often before you shall make a perfect cure.

If the Leprosy be universal, then first open his Neck Vein, and draw good
store of blood from thence, then with an Oyster shell, Hare-cloth, or some such
like course thing curry off the scurf, then take of Verdigrease and Vinegar,
Cow-piss, Train-Oyl, and old Urine, of each a pint, adding to them an handful
of wild Tansie, and an handful of Bay Salt, a quarter of a pound of Brimstone,
and as much Allom, two Ounces of Verdigrease, and four Ounces of Bole
Armoniack, boil all these well together, and it will not be amiss to put
thereto a pint of that blood you took from him: wash the Horse herewith very
well, making it very hot when you apply it to the Sorrance; this will cause a
cure in four or five times so doing.

Lice in an Horse, how to kill them, or free him from them.
For Lice to afflict Horses in great quantities is as common as to have them in
childrens heads, especially if the Horse run in the Winter time in Coppices,
and among Trees where the drops continually fall from the Trees upon his back;
these drops with his own poverty will breed them infinitely; as long as he is
troubled with these Lice, which are very like Geese Lice, which breed
principally about the Ears, Neck, Main, Tail, and will spread over all the
body; I say, as long as they infest him, so long will he be low, and in a
languishing condition.

The signs are, an Horse will be always scrubbing, scratching or rubbing
himself against walls, posts or doors, or any thing else that will serve for
that purpose, fretting away thereby the hair of his Mane and Tail; when the Sun
shines you will find then perching on the top of his hair, and now although he
should eat never so much, he will neither thrive nor prosper.

To cure him of this Itch, and free him from these Vermin, you must take
S^aves-acre and boil it in running water, and wash him all over herewith, and
it will destroy them.

Or take Soap and Quicksilver, or soft grease and Quicksilver, and beat them
together till the Quicksilver be killed, and anoint the Horse all over
therewith, and it will destroy the Lice instantly.

Or take Tobacco, and shred it very small, and with Alom powdered put it into
small Beer, and when the Alom is dissolved, wash him herewith; this is an
excellent and speedy Remedy.

Some say that Hog's Grease alone, anointing the Mane and Ridge-bone of the
back, will instantly burst them; But this (to conclude) I have tried with
desired success; that is, take a broad woollen List, as broad as your hand,
that will go round about his Neck; then wet or dip the List in Train oil, sow
it about his neck; this will cause the Lice to gather to it, which will kill
them as fast as they come: you may daub some hereof about other parts of his
body to save them from a greater march, and it will destroy them in like
manner; nay this will also keep flies in Summertime from Sores; and this is
not only good for an Horse alone, but for any other sort of Cattle.

Lampas.
The Lampas is a swelling or growing up of the flesh, over-growing the upper
Teeth which are the shearers in the upper Chap, which said swelling is a very
great impediment to his feeding. It commonly proceeds from abundance of rank
blood, resorting to the first Furrow or Bar of the mouth.

The Symptoms of this distemper are very visible to the eye, and therefore need
no further remonstrance.

You must cure him after this manner; Take an Onion and roast it, and being
very hot, put it upon a cloth, and with it rub the Lampas very much; this must
be done thrice a day till the Lampas be cured.

Now the Farriers, in former time, used to prick the swelling in diverse places,
making it bleed, and then with a Bistory (as the French call it) which is an
Iron at one end broad, thin and a little turned up, and heating it red hot,
were wont to burn out all that superfluous flesh which over-growed the fore
teeth, anointing the sore place with Butter till it was well, or wash it only
with Salt and Vinegar.

I would not have this Cure slighted for its antiquity, neither is it by the
most discreet and experienced Farriers of our times: Now if you find, through
too much burning, or eating of very course meat, that the sore heals not, but
rather begins to rankle; then take three spoonfuls of Honey, and twelve
Pepper-corns, pounding them in a Mortar small, and mixing them with the Honey,
tempering them up with Vinegar and afterward boil them together; with this
anoint the sore place, and it will soon be whole.

Lean Horses how to make fat in a little time.
I can assure you, from my own experience, that by this following Receipt I
have often fatned, in a short time, Horses so lean that their bones have been
ready to start through their skin, and have afterward grown so fat, that I have
been forced to use medicaments for the prevention of its further increase: thus
you must do:

Take Enula-campana dried, Cummin, Turmerick, Anniseeds of each two ounces,
Groundsel about half an handful; then take three heads of Garlic picked, and
boil these very well together in a gallon of strong Ale; after this strain it,
and every morning give him a quart thereof to drink blood-warm, as long as it
lasts; then ride him moderately, but not so as to cause him to sweat; after
four mornings are expired, turn him to grass, if the season will permit; if
not, keep him in the Stable, and you shall find him feed lustily, and improve
suddenly; but you must still observe to give him warm Mashes, seasonable
Airing, and moderate Exercise.

Lave-ear'd Horse how to remedy.
To have an Horse Lave-ear'd is as great a deformity to him as can happen; and
although the Farriers of these times have not made it their endeavor to reform
so foul a deformity; yet it is more their fault by ignorance or negligence,
than any impossibility of helping this natural infirmity, which has its
original from the very conception.

I must acknowledge my self to be somewhat beholding to Mr. Markham for the
Cure of this deformity; which must be effected in this manner.

In the first place take your Horses ears, and so place them as you would have
them stand hereafter; then take a thin Trencher, and slice two pieces thereof
as broad as three fingers, having fastened long strings thereunto; with these
bind the ears so fast, as you have placed them, that no motion shall stir or
displace them from that form; then shall you see some empty wrinkled skin,
between the head and the root of the ear, which you must pull up with your
finger and thumb, and with your Scissers clip away the empty skin by the head;
after this, with a needle and red silk, stitch the two sides of the skin
together very close; then make a Salve of Turpentine, Deer-suet and Honey,
taking of these an equal quantity, which must be melted together, and with this
Salve or Ointment you must heal the sore; then may you take away the pieces of
Trencher, and the ears will ever after, without any alteration, keep that
posture you designed them.

Moon-eyed.
To be Moon-eyed is as bad a thing as an Horse can be troubled with, being not
only noisome but dangerous: this distemper commonly proceeds from forcing an
Horse to do that he is incapable of performing; as if he be dull and lazy, to
make him trot or gallop beyond his strength or vigor; or, if over free, to
give him too much freedom, according to the Proverb, a man may soon run a free
Horse to death.

I know no other reason why they call this malady Moon-eyed, but that sometimes
in the month he will see indifferently, and sometime not at all.

The Remedy is to take a Plaster of Pitch, Rozin and Mastich, and lay all over
the Temples of the Horses head; then with a sharp knife or Lancet make a slit
under each of his eyes, about four fingers beneath, and let each slit be an
inch long; then with a Cornet loosen the skin, about the breadth of a groat,
and thrust therein a round piece of Leather, with an hole in the midst; see
that the matter run at least eight days, looking to it every day; after this
remove the Leather, and heal up the wound with flax dipped in this Ointment, made
of Honey, Wax and Turpentine of each a like quantity dissolved together, but
let it be only warm when you dip your flax therein: let the Plasters on his
Temples fall off of their own accord; being fallen off, make a Star in the
midst of each Temple-vein with your hot drawing Iron.

Malender, Low-worm or Shingles, being much alike.
This Malender or Low-worm, is so like St. Anthonie's-fire or the Shingles,
that I hardly think it distinguishable from either. It is caused (according to
the opinion of the most judicious) by a Worm that breeds in the Backbone,
betwixt the bone and skin, which extends it self along the breast to the
Brain; but as soon as it comes to touch the pannicle thereof, the Horse will
immediately fall into extreme madness and frenzy, and hardly reducible.

The Symptoms of this Disease are, first he will bend down his back and make
many proffers to stale, but cannot; and when he does piss, it will be but very
little at a time, and that in his sheath too: a little after this he will fall
distracted, not only gnawing the Manger, or what is next him, but will also
bite and strike at all that comes near him.

This disease is called by the French Ver-Coquin, by the Italians Vermiform,
who absolutely hold that this worm which is the cause of this distemper can be
no ways destroyed but by fire; but our English Farriers know to the contrary,
as for example, this ensuing Receipt is an infallible remedy.

Take of Acrement a quarter of a pound, six heads of Garlic clean pilled, of
Rue and Tormentile (bearing a yellow flower) of each one pound, stamp these in
a stone Mortar, and put thereto as much White Wind as will with the juice make
a pottle; before you give your Horse any of this liquor, let him bleed very
well from his Tail; having stancht the blood, give a sixth part of the
aforesaid liquor, and so continue doing every morning till all the liquor be
spent. This is an approved cure.

The French cure is by taking an Iron with a Button at one end, and making it
red hot, they burn the Horse on the forehead, under his fore-top, and on the
fore-top, and four other in the Neck, clean though upon the Crest, two of the
holes must be on the one side of the Crest, and two on the other, putting into
every hole to extinguish the fire Vnguentum Rosarum; after this they let him
blood in the Neck-Vein, and this they say is an infallible remedy.

Maunginess in the Main.
Main Maunginess, with shedding of the hair, happens either by Lice, rankness
of Blood, or else sometimes by scrubbing against that Post some other maungy
Horse has rubbed.

The best and speediest way of curing this Maunge is to take two pound of fresh
grease, one Ounce of Quicksilver, and the like of Brimstone, of Rape Oil half
a pint, mingle these together, stirring them so with a stick or slice till the
Quicksilver is undiscoverable; then take an old Curry-comb, and scratch away
the scurf so that the part become both raw and bloody, then anoint the places
herewith, holding a broad hot Iron against them to make the Ointment to sink
in; this in four or five days will cure him.

This disease is called by the French the Elephantick Malady, because they say
the Elephants are much troubled herewith. You are to understand that the Maunge
is infectious, and therefore as soon as ever you perceive it in one Horse,
remove him from all other, to the intent you may prevent the infecting of
others.

Our late Farriers have this Receipt in great esteem: Take of Orpin one pound,
Brimstone and Euphorbium, of each one Ounce, Cantharides twenty five; make all
these into fine powder, and with Hogs grease make it into an Ointment; apply
this to all the maungy places, rubbing it well in; after this anointing (six
days after) anoint him with Hogs grease only; when you find the scurf to fall
off, wash the Neck and other parts with Buck Lie made blood warm.

For Maunginess in general, take a Gallon of strong Ale, and a pound of Tobacco
stalks, half a pound of Allom, a pint of Salt, one penny worth of Mercury; boil
these together till one half be consumed; then first, let him blood, and
afterward wash him here with.

Now if it be a dry inward Maunge, you will know it by his hair coming off in
plats, scaling off sometimes from head to tail, leaving a dry scurfie Maunge;
this Malady proceeds from an extraordinary heat of the blood; now in this
case his body being inwardly afflicted with this Maunge, give him this drink:
take one Ounce of the flower of Brimstone, two Ounces of Rozen beaten small;
one Ounce of Turmerick powdered, one Ounce of Anniseeds pounded in a Mortar; put
all these into a quart of strong Beer made blood warm, and so give it him in a
horn fasting; after this tie him up to the rack five hours, then give him warm
water and bran, and at night bursten Oats: the next day strew two spoonfuls of
Rozen powdered among his Provender, the like the next night, and the same
quantity the next day, and you need not doubt of a cure.

Mouth-sore.
If the mouth of your Horse be sore, and that it proceeds from corruption of
blood, or cold, causing the palate of the Mouth to be inflamed, and look red,
falling from the palate into the chaps in such a manner, as when he has opened
them, he will be unable to shut them again, in this case I advise you first, to
let forth the corrupt blood, then take Verjuice and Bay salt, quantum sufficit,
and warm it on the fire, then with Flax dipped therein wash his mouth and tongue
three or four times a day.

But if it be fallen into his chaps, which you shall know by his yawning and
gaping, then take only Verjuice of the Crab, and make it luke warm, then tie a
rag to a stick, and wash his mouth therewith very well, helping him to close up
his mouth with your hand.

Mellet.
A Mellet is a dry scab that grows on the heel, sometimes proceeding from
corruption of blood, but more commonly for want of Elbow-grease in rubbing him
clean, and dressing him after he is set up wet: this Malady frequently appears
like a dry chap.

The usual cure is to take a pint of Honey, and of Soap three Ounces, and of
White-Wine-Vinegar four or five spoonfuls, as much Allom as an Egg, of Bean or
Rye flower two spoonfuls; mix all these together, and apply it to the Mellet as
far as it goes, letting it lie on five or six days; after you have taken it
away wash his leg and foot with salt Beef broth, then rope his leg with wet Hay
ropes two or three days after, and he will be very sound and well.

Morfounded.
Morfounding is no other than foundring in the body by molten grease, of which
I have already treated in that section which discourses only upon the internal
diseases which afflict the bodies of Horses; however give me leave to give you
one excellent Receipt more, inferior to none of the former; and that is this
as follows.

Take an handful of Salt, and put it into a pint of fair water; give him this
to drink, then ride him with that moderation that you cause him not to sweat;
this done as soon as you suspect him foundred, will work the cure; but if it be
of five or six days standing, then take a spoonful of the powder of Hellebore,
and of Saffron one penny worth, of Assa foetida and of Soap of Venice, of each
two dramchs, with a small quantity of the seeds of Bays; mix these, and pound
them well together, adding thereto a pint of Vinegar; give him this to drink
blood warm; then cloth him well, so that he sweat for an hour; then cool him
by degrees, and after that rub him well down, and he will be as well as ever.
Probatum.

Mules, or Kibe heels.
This Sorrance is a certain dry scab or chap, breeding behind on the heels of
an Horse, and so a little inward, even to the Fetlock, in long chaps or chinks.

The causes of these Kibed heels are either corrupted blood, negligent keeping,
or by being bred in wet and marshy grounds.

The signs are swelling in his legs, most especially in the Winter and Spring
time, going stiffly, and halting much.

As to the Cure, you must first take away the scabs, and make the Kybe raw;
then with strong Mustard, made with Wine-vinegar, anoint them all over, and do
this every night. The next morning take half a pound of green Copperas, and
boil it in a pottle of running water with an handful of Sage, and the like
quantity of Hysop, a quarter of a pound of Alom, and as much strong Mustard,
and with this bathe the sore twice every day.

Or first, wash his Sorrance clean, then dry it; after that take Linseed Oil
and black Soap of each a like quantity; boil them together till they become a
Salve, and herewith anoint the Mules or Kibes.

If these Kibes are not of long standing, take a little Soap and anoint them
daily for three or four days, and after that wash them with strong stale Urine,
and they would be whole.

But if it be of longer continuance, then calcinate Tartar, and dissolve it
into water; then congeal it like Salt, and mingle it with Soap like an
Ointment; with this dress the sore; by so doing, in two days and two nights you
shall perfectly cure the Kibes, Pains or Scratches whatsoever.

Mallender.
I have before discoursed concerning the Mallender, but it was more properly a
disease called the Low-worm; wherefore I shall particularly in this place
insist upon the Mallender.

This Malady is a kind of a dry Scab, growing overthwart the inward bent of the
Knee, and has growing thereon stubborn hairs like Swines-bristles, which will
corrupt and canker the flesh, causing him to go stiff till he is warmed by
travel or exercise.

If you intend a Cure, you must first pull out these bristly hairs; then rub it
dry with a cloth; after this anoint it with Crown Soap and red Mercury
precipitate mixed together; dress him herewith five several times, intermitting
one day betwixt every dressing; then anoint it with Sallet-oil, and you need do
no more.

Others think this way better: First wash the sore clean with warm water, then
shave off the hair and pick away the scabs; after this take a spoonful of Soap,
and as much Lime, mingle them together that it may be like Paste; then spread
on a clout as much as will cover the Sore, and bind it fast on with a List,
renewing it every day once the space of 4 days; at the expiration of which
time, take away the Plaster, and take Oil of Roses warmed and anoint the sore
therewith, and that will fetch off clearly all the scurf and crusty eschar;
having removed this skurf, wash, once a day, the place with man's Urine,
strowing the powder of burnt Oister-shells thereon; continue thus doing till it
be perfectly well.

The latest way of curing a Mallender is this; first, with your Scissers clip
away the hair that either grows upon or about it; then take an hair-cloth, or
the back of an old Knife, and rub the scabs off, which will cause a yellow
matter to run from it; then take a linen cloth, and therewith wipe the part
very clean; then take a groats-worth of the Oil of Riggrum and mingle it with
Stercus humanum; then lay on this with a flat stick upon a piece of cloth, not
woolen, and bind it to the sore, letting it lie on six days; then cleanse it
and dress it once more, and there needs nothing else to perfect the Cure.

Lastly, some only wash and shave the Mallender, and then rub it with Piss and
Soap till it be raw; then lay to it Nerve-oil, Honey and strong Mustard until
it be whole.

Where note, that some Horses will have two Mallenders upon one Leg, one above
the other, and sometimes one a little above the bending of the Knee, and
another a little below the inward bending of the Knee; but as to the Cure it is
all alike, what being good for the one may be applied also to the other.

Mourning of the Chine.
This disease, called the Mourning of the Chine, is also called the moist
Malady; it is supposed by most expert Farriers that this disease is a foul
consumption of the Liver; and this consumption proceeds from a cold, which
afterward turns to a Poze, then to the Glanders, and lastly to the Mourning of
the Chine.

The sign is, that corrupt matter which runs from his Nostrils will be
darkish color, thin and reddish, with little streaks of blood in it.

The Remedy is thus: Take of Auripigmentum two drachms, of Tussilage as much,
made into powder; then mix them with Turpentine till they be as thick almost as
Dow; then make thereof little Cakes and dry them before the fire; then take a
Chafing Dish of Coals, and lay a couple of the Cakes thereon, covering them
with a Tunnel; when the smoke arises clap the end of the Tunnel into the
Horses Nostril, so that the smoke may ascend into his head; after you have so
done, ride him till he sweat: do this every morning before watering and he will
quickly be cured.

Or else you may use this Remedy: Take clear water and a quart of Hydromel,
adding thereto three ounces of Sallet-oyl, and every morning pour it into his
Nostrils for the space of four days; if that answer not your desires, then give
him every other day a quart of old Wine mingled with Tetrapharmacon, to be had
in every Apothecaries Shop.

I would have treated more largely on this distemper, but that I have spoken of
it already, in that Chapter which contains the Cures of internal Diseases, in
that Section which speaks of the Glanders.

Malt-long or Malt-worm.
The Malt-long is a cankerous Malady above the Hoof, just upon the Cronet,
which always breaks out into knobs and branches, and from thence will run a
sharp watrish humor, which will poison the whole foot.

The signs hereof are visible to the sight, viz. the Sorrance it self, and the
continual issuing of a waterish matter from the same.

The Cure is somewhat different, according to the season of the year: If it be
in Summer, take black Snails and Burr-roots and pounding them well together,
lay them to the Sorrance.

If it be in Winter; then take of the inner green bark of the Elder-tree, and
mingle therewith the scrapings of the bottom of a Pan or Kettle; beat these
together very well in a Mortar, and lay it to the sore, renewing it once a day.

Mollifiers, or what things will mollify hardness.
Take of Linseed and Fenugreek of each four ounces, of Pitch and Rozin of each
three ounces, of the flowers of Roses two ounces, and Pitch of Greece three
ounces, boil these together; then put of Turpentine three ounces, of Honey six
ounces, with a small quantity of Sallet-oil, applying this to any hard
swelling, and it will speedily mollify and soften it; so will also these
following ingredients.

Malvavisco well boiled and stamped with Oleum Rosatum, and applied hot. Brank
Ursine and Mallows boiled together, and beaten up with Oil and Lard. Or
Malvavisco, Coleworts, Branck Ursine, herb of the Wall, and old grease pounded
together. Wheat-meal, Honey, Pellitory, Branck Ursine, and the leaves of
Wormwood beaten together with Swines-grease. Or Grease, Mustard seed, and
Comin boiled together, and stamped into a Poultess. One Ounce of Soap, and an
Ounce and an half of unslackt Lime, and mixed with strong Lie. The juice of the
tops of Cypress and dry Figs macerated in Vinegar, of each three Ounces
strained, adding thereto one Ounce of Sal-niter, half an Ounce of Armoniack,
with a little Aloes and Opoponax, and made into an Ointment will mollify any
hardness whatsoever.

Medicament mundefying and cleansing any Fistula, Ulcer or old Sore whatever.
If your Horse be troubled with any old and foul Sore, before you heal it,
anoint it with this Ointment following, and it will sufficiently mundefie and
cleanse it.

Take Swines grease clarified, Oil of Olives, the grease of a young Fox,
Turpentine, Allom, and white Wax, boil these well together till they are
thoroughly mixed, and dress the Sorrance therewith.

Navel-Gall.
The Navel Gall takes its denomination from the place or situation of the
Sorrance, it being a bruise or hurt on the top of the chine of the back behind
the Saddle right against the Navel.

The causes are diverse, as either when the Tree of the Saddle is split or is
not well stuffed, or by any other weight or burden, by the hardness whereof the
place becomes galled: of all wrinches, bruises and galls on the back, this is
the most vile and dangerous, and if not taken in time will prove a very
difficult cure.

The signs are very apparent to the Eye, for the flesh will be puffed up and
spungy, of a dark rotten complexion.

The ancient practice in the cure of this Sorrance was first with an Incision
knife to cut away all the dead and proud flesh, then with a cauterising Iron
burn a hole about four inches lower than the Navel Gall, putting a rowel of
Horse-hair through it; then take the sole of an old shoe, or Oyster shells,
and burning them, reduce them into powder, and strew all over the sore
therewith; as you find the sore grows moist renew your application of more
powder.

Those receipts which are of later experience are these: take Oil de Bay,
Costus, Fox grease, Oil of Savin, of each an Ounce, then take a good quantity
of great Garden worms, and scour them with White Wind and Salt, put all these
several ingredients into an earthen pot, and stop them up very close, thus boil
them: having so done, add thereunto of Sallet Oil one Ounce and an half; then
set it over the fire again, and boil it so long till you have brought it to a
perfect Ointment, after this strain it into some clean vessel, and so preserve
it for your future use: when at any time you have occasion to dress therewith
this Sorrance called the Navel-Gall, take hereof, and warm it; then take Lint
or hurds, and dip therein, anointing the sore, and it will not be long before
it will be whole.

Or thus you may do: first take a sharp knife, and cut away the loose skin,
then anoint it with an Ointment made of a spoonful of Dialthaea, a pint of
Train-Oyl, and about the quantity of a Pigeons Egg of Verdigrease; this is a
speedy cure for a Navel Gall of small standing; but if it be of long
continuance, so that the flesh be hard, then cut out the Crush, and with a
Cauterizing Button sear the wound within, then take some fine Cotton, and dip
it into some of the green Ointment (the Receipt whereof I have already given
you) I say, with this Cotton so dipped tent the wound, and the cure is not to be
questioned.

If this hurt be newly gotten, and the skin not broken, then only take cold
Brandy Wine, and with a rag dipped therein dab it on the swelling, and three or
four times so doing or dressing it will dissipate or bring down the swelling.

This following receipt I have often tried, and do find it an excellent remedy
against any Navel Gall, Set-fast, or sore back whatsoever: take only a quarter
of a pint of Train Oil, and as much Verdigrease as the bigness of a Musket
bullet well beaten, mingle these together, and preserve them in a Gallipot for
your use; the Sorrance anointed herewith will speedily be healed, and that
which facilitates the Cure is, it kills all Flies whatever as soon as they taste
of this Ointment.

Notwithstanding these excellent Receipts before mentioned, there are others
which go another way to work; that is, they take the white of an Egg, Wheat
flower, Honey, Mustard, and Soap, of each a like quantity, and mingle them
together; having so done, they cut away the dead flesh, and then wash it with
Ale, Butter and Urine, and after that they lay on the aforesaid Plaster; if
after twice or thrice dressing they find the proud flesh to grow again, then
they kill it by pouring in Nerve Oil, and skin it with the powder of Oister
shells.

Lastly, take Bettony, powder of Brimstone, Ellebor, Pitch and old Grease, of
each a like quantity, and stamp them together into an Ointment, then take old
Urine and wash the sore well therewith, after that anoint it with the above
specified composition till it be whole.

Nose running.
If your Horse be troubled with running at the Nose, then take Orpin and
Brimstone, and put them on a chafing dish of Coals, and so burn them, and with
the smoke perfume his head and nose; this will cause a dissolution of thick and
congealed humors either in the head or brain.

Or for further trial: take of Auripigmentum and Tussilago, of each two
drachms, these pulverize, and make them into a Paste by the addition of Venice
Turpentine well washed; make these into flat Cakes about the circumference of a
six pence, and having dried them, take a Chafing Dish of burning Coals, and put
them thereon, and therewith perfume your Horses head every day.

Over reach, or Upper attaint.
The Over reach is nothing else but a dolorous swelling of the master sinew, or
Back sinew of the Shank bone, by reason that the Horse does sometimes over
reach or strike that sinew with the toe of his hinder foot, causing him by that
means to go very lame and halting.

The signs of this Malady are so apparent they need no remonstrance, therefore
I shall pass to the cure which is diversely performed.

First, some wash the leg with warm water, then shaving off the hair as far as
the swelling goes, they scarifie the Sorrance with the point of a very sharp
knife, causing the blood to issue thence; then take of Cantharides and
Euphorbium, of each half an Ounce, and with four Ounces of Soap mingle them
together, then spread some of this Ointment all over the Sorrance, letting him
rest at the place where he was dressed for about half an hour; then tie him up so
that he cannot come at the sore with his mouth, letting him stand without
Litter; the next day do after the like manner; and the third day anoint the
sore with fresh Butter; continue so doing seven or eight days; then make him a
Bath after this manner.

Take of Mallows three handfuls or more, one Rose cake, of Sage one handful,
boil these together in a good quantity of water, till such time as the Mallows
be soft, then put in to them half a pound of butter, and half a pint of Sallet
Oil; being somewhat more than blood warm wash the Sorrance every day till it be
whole.

Now if the swelling by no Salve will be dissolved, take a fine thin hot
drawing Iron, and draw his leg all downward with the hair in many small strikes
from the one end of the swelling to the other, and make the strikes very thick
together, and deep withal, then anoint the burning three days with black Soap,
and so turn him to grass.

Secondly, there are others which prescribe this method for the cure of an Over
reach in the heel, and that is, first cut out with your Incision knife the Over
reach, so that it may be very plain, and having washed it with Beer and Salt,
lay thereunto a plaster made after this manner.

Take Oat meal and Butter, of each so much as will make a Salve; put them in a
Mortar, and so incorporate them, then lay it to the Sorrance; continue so doing
once a day till the cure be perfected.

Otherwise search it well to the bottom, cleansing it from all manner of
Gravel, and washing it clean with man's Urine, then take an handful and an half
of Nettles, and an handful and an half of Salt; and putting them in a cloth,
lay them to the sore; thus do three mornings together, and after that set the
shoe on with a Leather under it, then pour in some Hogs grease scalding hot,
and a little after that scalding hot Rozen; and lastly, but presently after
that, put to it some Wheat bran, and no doubt of a cure.

Or you may first wash the Sorrance with water and Salt, then take two big
Onions, two spoonfuls of Pepper beaten small, of Crown soap the bigness of a
Tennis ball, beat these together into a Salve, and laying it on a linen cloth,
having first dried the foot, apply it, and remove it not from thence, but once
in a day and night, renewing it in that manner still till it be whole, but as
it heals do it seldomer.

Lastly, that which I have ever found to be an excellent remedy for any Sinew
strain whatsoever, is, take the whites of six Eggs, as much Bole Armoniack and
Bean flower as by setting it over the fire will become a Salve; take of this
when it is very hot, and Plaisterwise lay it on the Sinew-strain, and round
about the leg; you must not omit so doing till all manner of swelling
thereabout be clean taken away.

Oil of Oats, what the Sovereign virtues are, and how to make it.
As far as I can find, that skilful Artist Mr. Markham was the first inventor
of this incomparable Oil, and so Thomas de Gray, Esquire seems to acknowledge, when
writing in the praise hereof, confesses that he never could meet with it any
where else, either in England, France, or Italy; and that he would not use any
other Oil (if he could come by this) in any internal administration whatsoever,
having found the excellency thereof by his own and other men's painful
experiences: thus it is made.

Take two Gallons of Milk, and being warm over the fire, put thereunto four
ounces of burnt Allom, which will curdle it like a Posset, skim off the Curd,
and throw it to the Dunghill, but strain the Whey through a course cloth into a
clean Vessel, then take a quarter of a peck of Oats dry, and clean husked, and
put them into the Whey; but the Oats must not have been dried* and then set the
Whey over the fire, boiling the Oats so long till they swell and break; then
take them off, and put the Oats into a Cullender, that the Whey may gently
drain from them without pressing; this done, put the Oats into frying pan, and
hold them over the fire, stirring them so long till you see no fume to ascend,
then suddenly take them off, and clap them into an hard Press, pressing them
there exceedingly, what comes from them is the Oil of Oats, which you must
reserve in a glass very closely stopped.

It stands with reason that this Oil should be the most Sovereign of all others
for any internal distemper in the body of an Horse, since it is extracted and
made from the natural and most nourishing food an Horse can eat.

Take five spoonfuls of this Oil, and put it into a pint of sweet Wine, or a
quart of strong Ale, and give it an Horse to drink, pouring in some of the Whey
into his Nostrils, and it will absolutely cure him of the Glanders.

It is also the best of all Purgations, for it purges away all those malignant
and venomous humors, which are the nourishers of any incurable Farcy
whatsoever; neither is there any offensive humor within the Fomentors of
dangerous distempers which it does not suddenly dissipate and expel.

Old Sores speedily and safely cured.
Take Rock Allom, and burn it in a fire-pan, then take as much Bay Salt, and
burn that too; having so done, beat them to a very fine powder, then take of
common Honey and sweet Butter of each a quantity alike, and work all these into
a body, bring it thus into a salve, and not by the help of fire.

When you intend to use it, let it be either plaisterwise or Tentwise, or both
ways, according as occasion shall require; this will not only heal any sore
very perfectly, but will also eat away any dead or proud flesh.

Poll-Evil in the Neck.
The Poll-evil is so called from its breeding in the Poll behind the Ears, it
is a great Swelling, or apostumated Inflammation, and to say the truth, let men
give it what appellation they please, it is more than a Fistula in Grain or
formal.

The Causes of this Pole-evil are several: as first from the Horses struggling
in a new hard hempen halter, or from a blow given behind the ears, by reason of
which bruise, the flesh festering and becoming inflamed, this loathsome
Sorrance has its original; many times, bilious and malignant humors invading
that place do cause it.

The Signs are a tumor with Inflammation: where note that the putrefaction is
greater within than without, and therefore you must timely think of letting out
the corruption before it happen to break of it self.

As to the cure, you must lay unto the swollen place whatever is mollifying, and
will ripen it: as for example, take Hogs grease, and lay thereunto as hot as
may be; or else take Loam of a Mud wall, in which there is no Lime, by how much
the older it is, the better; boil hereof what you think sufficient in the
strongest White-Wine-Vinegar, and let it boil to a Pultess, and apply this very
hot to the swelling, renewing it twice a day till you have brought the swelling
to suppuration* that it is fit to be laid open, then look where it is softest,
and with a Copper round instrument (for that is better than any Iron) as big as
a man's little finger, and sharp at the end, and being hot, thrust it in two
inches beneath the soft place, so that the point of your cauterizing instrument
may come out at the ripest place; by this means the corruption will descend
downward at the nether hole, which you must keep open for the better issuing
of the aforesaid matter; to that end tent it with Flax dipped in Hogs grease
warm, laying thereto a Plaster also of Hogs grease upon the same, renew this
every day once for five days together; at the expiration of which time, take
half a pound of Turpentine very cleanly washed in several waters, which when
thoroughly dried, mingle therewith the Yolks of three Eggs and a little Saffron.

Now take your probe, and search the bottom of the wound, then make a Tent with
a piece of dry Sponge never dipped in water, so long as near upon to reach the
bottom, and so thick as it may fill up the cavity, but before you put it in dip
it in the before specified Ointment; after this lay on a Plaster of Hogs grease
made indifferent warm, changing your old Plaster for a fresh till you have
perfected the cure.

Or thus you may do; first, ripen the swelling, then open it, and cleanse it
well from its matter and corruption, then apply Hogs grease to extract the fire
your Cauterizing Iron has left behind it, then heal it after this manner.

Take of Hogs grease the quantity of a Tennis-ball, Brimstone beaten into the
fine powder, with an ounce of Quicksilver very well killed, and so mingle
these together that you have made them into an Ointment, and anoint the
swelling herewith: having so done, take a penny worth of red Tar, the reddest
is the best, of Hogs grease half a pound, of green Copperas and Bay Salt, of
each an handful, and pulverize them; then boil these exceeding well, and as it
comes scalding hot off the fire, dip therein a clout fastened at the end of a
stick and anoint or scald the sore four mornings together; for this scalding
kills the Fistula, so that its future and further progress is absolutely
hindered; after this you need only but to warm the Tar, and apply it to the
place, and the Cure is consummated.

Now there are some Farriers which cure the Poll-evil only by first opening the
sore with an hot cauterizing Iron, then taking red Lead and black Soap, mingle
them with water till they are thick, and so tent the Horse therewith till he be
whole.

But the best Remedy I have met withal, as a general Cure for any Pole-evil
whatsoever, is; first, shave off the hair from the part that is swollen, then lay
thereon a Plaster of black Shoomakers-wax, spread upon white Alom'd Leather,
letting it lie thereon till it have broken the Impostume; then take better than
a pint of strong white Wine-vinegar, and, when it is about to boil, put therein
as much Lome of a Mud-wall, straws and all, as will thicken it into a Poultess,
applying this to the Sorrance, as hot as the Horse can suffer it; and by
renewing it once a day in a little time the Impostume will be whole.

Pole-evil in the Head.
There is little difference between the Pole-evil in the Neck and the Pole-evil
in the Head, only there is a discrepancy as to their place: the Causes and
Symptoms of this distemper are much alike. As to the Cure of the Pole-evil in
the Head take this method.

As soon as you perceive a swelling, take presently half an ounce of the oil of
Turpentine, and anoint therewith the part grieved, and that it may the better
sink in, chafe it very well with your hand, and so let it alone for four days,
in which time you will perceive the skin to shrink up; seeing the swelling thus
begin to abate and come down, then take of Burgundy-pitch and black Pitch of
each an ounce and an half, and with a slice daub or spread it over the swelling
in his forehead; but first you must melt them in a Pipkin, with an ounce of
Mastich; having so done, take flocks and lay them on thick upon the place
anointed, and so let them lie till they fall off, which most usually will be
about three weeks; now when the Plaster falls off, if you see no venom nor
swelling remaining, you may conclude you have done your work; but if the
impostumation remain unbroken, then lance it, and cut out what dead flesh you
find therein, filling the cavity with Flax to dry up the blood and
putrefaction, suffering it to remain in that condition seven or eight hours;
then take it out, and lay thereon some of that generally known Receipt for a
Canker in the Head, dressing it once a day; if you make an hole at the edge of
the swelling below, it will heal much the sooner: still when you take off your
Plaster, mark (by looking on the top of the Pole-evil) how far the proud flesh
reaches, which will be white and like Jelly, and cut it out with your
Incision-knife, till you come to the sound red flesh; spare not to cut it all
out; though from the flesh and veins there flow a great quantity of blood; but
cut not, by any means, the Pax-wax, which you shall plainly discern by its
whiteness. But you shall find a white pith near the Pax-wax, which I would
advise you by all means to remove, and indeed it is no ways difficult so to do;
for if you will lay but your Pinchers to it, it will come away whole like a
plugg; having drawn it out, apply some of the Medicine aforesaid, and it will
heal it up.

Pastern-joint strained.
When I speak of a strain in the Pastern-joint, I do not mean that the back
sinews have sustained any detriment, wherefore if the Pastern-joint be only
strained; then take a quart of Brine, and boil it till it arises, then strain
it and put to it of Tansey and Mallows of each one handful, of Honey two
spoonfuls, and of Sheeps-tallow four ounces; take these and, having first chopped
them very well, pound them in a Mortar, after this put them into a Posnet and
boil them well; then take it off, and when it is but warm, put it into a cloth,
and sow it on to the Sorrance, letting it remain there six days; but if in that
time the Cure is not wrought, then wash it with warm water, shaving off the
hair, scarifie the joint, and then apply the Medicine compounded of Cantharides
and Euphorbium, and this will undoubtedly effect the Cure.

Prick on the Crownet with a Pitch-sork or otherwise.
Take a pottle of Stale Urine, two handfuls of Mallows, and half a pound of
Boars-grease; boil them together, and being indifferent hot bathe the Legs
therewith; then apply the Mallows to the Wound; but if the swelling ascend
upwards and be great, then rope the Leg up, and moisten the ropes with his
Urine: this is good for any swelling whatever.

Or take Turpentine, black Soap, Hog's Grease, great Treat and Pitch a quantity
alike, mix and boil them well together, and so apply it warm or otherwise.

Pricking in the Foot.
If an Horse by chance, or negligence of the Smith be pricked in the foot, you
will know it when he goes, by favoring that foot which is offended; when he
stands still, by standing a tiptoe on that foot.

As soon as you shall perceive your Horse to be thus abused, take off his
shoe, and pare him by degrees with the Butteriss and your Drawing-knife;
having found out the bottom of his grievance, cleanse it very well; take
Turpentine, fresh Butter with a small quantity of black Pitch, sodden together
and poured in scalding hot; then dip some Tow therein, stuffing it well between
the shoe and foot; you may take a piece of upper-leather and stuff it in
between the Towe and the shoe.

Now if it be some Nail in the streets or channel which has struck into his
foot, then finding out the Nail, pluck it out and heating it red hot, put it
again into the same hole from whence you drew it; thus searing it with the red
hot Nail will keep the hole from festering and rankling; then melt Turpentine,
Butter and black Pitch, and as it is scalding, pour it therein; then put on the
shoe, and stuff the soot with Towe or Hurds: this never fails.

Pricked in the shooing and festering afterward.
If your Horse be pricked by the carelessness or ignorance of a Smith, and after
the hurt received (you perceiving it not presently) the place rankleth and
festereth in a very great measure: then must you first open it very well to the
very bottom, letting out all the corruption therein; search it be sure as far
as the Nail did go, and then mundifie it; after this, take five or six
House-snails, a little Salt, the quantity of a Walnut of Soap, and beat these
together, and lay this to the foot that was pricked, a whole day and a night, or
longer, till you see it begin to heal, then dress it but once in eight and
forty hours: five dressings will be sufficient.

This pricking in the foot has several names, though they all import but one
thing; as Accloyed, Cloyd, Retrait and pricked; yet Mr. Markham seems to make
some difference between them, of which I shall give you as brief an account as
Imay.

But first give me lieve to recount to you the several general Causes, which
happen very commonly by the ignorance and unskilfulness of the Smith in driving
of his nails, whereby some are broken, and not being immediately drawn out,
caused the part to fester and impostumate; sometimes the Horse is injured by
the weakness or ill-pointing of the Nails.

Now if after the new shooing of your Horse you suspect him pricked, yet cannot
discover it by his halting, search his feet, and that foot which is grieved, he
will shrink up as soon as you have laid your Pinsers to the place; for their
nipping will pain him to the quick. Or by knocking with an Hammer on the top of
the Clenches, you will presently discover which Nail it is that hurts him. Now
by reason of the anguish and the pain he undergoes by this pricking, his foot
will be more hot that is hurt than the rest; so that if you take a pail of
water and throw on his feet, that foot grieved will be sooner dry about the
hoof than the rest.

Having discovered his Malady by these infallible Symptoms; first search his
foot very well; then take of Goats-grease or rather Deers-suet, if to be had,
of Turpentine, Sallet-oil and new Wax of each two ounces; melt these together,
and before you take it from the fire, put to it of ordinary Honey three ounces,
and of Sanguis Draconis one dram pulverized; work these into one body over a
slow fire, and make an Unguent thereof; take a good quantity hereof and pour it
into the Sorrance indifferently warm, then stop it up with Towe or Hurds, and
be sure that he tread in no cold water.

The French are so in love with this their own experienced Remedy, that they
will admit of none else for the cure of a prick.

Having first searched and washed the Sorrance very well, then they take Oil de
Bay four ounces, of Orfin, Cantharides and Euphorbium of each two ounces; make
them all into fine powder, and set it on a small slow fire, stirring it till it
become an Ointment, with which they dress ths Sorrance; and to speak the truth,
it is a very excellent and speedy Remedy.

Now it becomes every one that has respect for his Horse, to be careful in
the curing of this same prick in the foot; for if it be not thoroughly searched,
cleansed and healed to the bottom, it will certainly break out about the Cronet
or top of the Hoof, so loosning the hoof round about that it is ten to one but
that the hoof will come clearly off.

Now if you perceive that it begins to break out above, make as large a vent as
stands with convenience to let out the corruption; and then take of
Bole-armoniack half a quartern, and of Bean-flower as much, and with two Eggs
beat them so that they be well incorporated; then spread it Plaister-wise and
lay it round the Cronet, binding it fast on, and not removing it in eight and
forty hours; then you may take off the old Plaster and put on a new one,
continuing so to do every other day till you find it grow firm and hard above;
for this Plaster will force the humors downwards, which you must extract by
Turpentine and Hog's Grease, until it leave running; then take burnt Alom and
pulverize it, and with the powder thereof strewed on the sore, with a few
Hurds, dry and heal up the Sorrance.

Again, sometimes the thing, as Stub, Nail or so forth, is gotten so far into
the flesh, that you cannot fix any instrument thereon to draw it out; then take
a good quantity of black Soap, and lay it to the place grieved one whole night,
and it will so draw it in that little time, as that you may be able to lay hold
thereon with a pair of Nippers: the roots of Reeds stamped and mingled with
Honey will draw out any Nail or Stub, so will also black Snails stamped and
incorporated with fresh Butter: that being withdrawn which was so offensive to
the foot of the Horse, pour into the hole Oil of Olive scalding hot; when that
has lain so long there that it is cold, pour into it Turpentine every whit as
hot; after half an hours time, take powder of Sulphur and strew thereon; then
bolster the Sorrance with Hurds, and let no wet nor filth annoy it and it will
be quickly well.

The pricking in the foot is called a Retrait, when in the driving of a Nail
the point is so weak, that instead of going forward, it bends in the quick,
the Nail being sometimes hollow, and then it shivereth in twain in the driving,
whereby one part, in the drawing out, many times is left behind; so that this
Retrait is the worst of all pricks, in as much as the flaw cankereth by
remaining in the foot.

This Sorrance is discovered, as other pricks are, by groping the hoofs round
with a pair of Pincers, etc.

The Cure is little different from those which appertain to all pricks; for
what will cure one is a Remedy in general for all; however for variety take
this one: having first with your Butteriss or Drawing-knife said open the place
grieved, well-searching and cleansing it: then take of Turpentine and Tar of
each an Ounce, of Pitch and Beef Suet of each an ounce, and one head of
Garlic; boil these together, and lay it to the Sore as hot as the Horse can
suffer it; if it should happen to break out above, the same medicine will be a
Remedy.

Cloying differs from a Retrait, in that the whole Nail is stricken into the
very quick of the foot, remaining there clenched as the other Nails: the
discovery is as aforesaid.

As to the Cure you must instantly draw his Shoe, and having found out the
hole, presently take half a pound of Frankincense, a pound of Rosin, and the
like quantity of Pitch of Greece, half a pound of black Pitch, one pound of new
Wax, one pound of Goats grease, half a pound of Varnish, half a pound of
Turpentine, two ounces of Oil Olive, and having melted these all together, and
incorporated them into one body; lay it to the Hoof plaister-wise: this is a
speedy Remedy not only for any fort of Prick, whether Cloy, Retrait or Accloy,
but also for any cracks, chinks, or clefts of the Hoof whatsoever.

Lastly, first open his foot, then wash it with Salt and Vinegar; after that
take of Honey and Vinegar of each a like quantity, a little Oil, and some Suet
of an He-goat; set them over a soft fire and stir it; when you perceive it to
incline toward a reddish color, put thereunto Verdigrease and Vitriol of each
a like quantity pulverized, keeping it still stirring so long till it be not
only red but thick also; then take it off, and stop the sore every day
therewith till the Cure be wrought, which will be in a little time,

Paston what it is, how made, according to the best method, and what are its
most excellent Virtues.
Paston is a French word, and signifies no more than a Plaster; but I shall
assure you this Paston or Plaster is somewhat more than ordinary; for
according to the opinion of the most expert, it is a sovereign Remedy for many
Sorrances, especially for dissipating and dissolving all evil humors
descending into the legs, there afflicting the poor Creature after a grievous
manner.

The Receipt of making this Paston or Plaster is: take of common Honey one
pound, of Turpentine half a pound, Bole-armoniack and Frankincense finely
pulverized of each four ounces, of Mastich beaten into powder two ounces, of
Sanguis Draconis two ounces, of new-laid Eggs seven, of the strongest white
Wine-vinegar one pint, of the flower of Rice seven ounces; incorporate these
together: use this Plaister-wise, and it will work wonderful effects.

Pill for the Glanders, etc.
This Pill, which is commonly prescribed for the Glanders, is of incomparable
use for many other distempers, which I have found in my practice even to
wonder; It was a long time before I found out the Medicine, but having tried
its excellency, I would not be induced to part with it for a considerable sum
that was offered for the Receipt: thus it is made.

Take Anniseeds, Cummin, Enula-campana dried, and Carthamus of each two ounces;
pulverize these very finely, and afterward sierce them; then put to them of
the powder of Brimstone and of the juice of Liquorish of each one ounce, which
Liquorish must be infused in a pint of white Wine; then take of the Oil of
Anniseeds, and of the Syrrop of Coltsfoot of each one ounce, of Sallet-oil and
live Honey of each half a pint; mix these all together, and make it into Pills
with as much fine Wheat Flour as will make it into Paste; proportion your
Pills to almost the bigness of a Pigeons Egg, and keep them close stopped in a
Gallipot, they will keep good the whole year. The Dose must not be above one in
a morning; as it is excellent against all vehement Cold, so it preventeth
heart-sickness, purges away molten grease, recovereth a lost appetite, keeps
the heart from fainting in a long journey, and they will fatten a lean Horse in
a very little time.

Purgation defined, next its several parts.
The definition of Purgation is, to empty and evacuate all superfluous peccant
humors, which do cumber and annoy the body with their venomous and malignant
disposition.

These bad humors breed ill nutriment, by hindering good concoction, which is
called by the learned Cacochymia, which, when Nature cannot correct or amend,
then must be forced by, and so driven away and expelled by Purgation: now there
are diverse sorts of Purges, each proper for its several distemper, which I have
endeavored already to lay down each in their particular order, and therefore I
shall be the briefer here.

Purgation for great Surfeits.
Take a pint of white Wine, or instead thereof a quart of new Ale, as much of
the best powder of Mechoachan as you can take upon a shilling at four times;
mingle them together, and in an Horn give it the Horse lukewarm to drink;
after this ride your Horse moderately for an hour, and then set him up warm
upon the Trench six hours fasting; then give him a warm Mash, and a little
after some clean Oats, with Bran mingled, but give it him a little at a time,
and let his Hay be wet that night; this will cause him to evacuate the slime
(engendered by surfeit) in great flakes upon his dung: See more of these
Purgations in the letter P in the Alphabet of Internal Diseases.

Papps underneath an Horses Tongue, vide Barbes. Pain in Horses Teeth how
remedied.
The Toothache or pain in Horses Teeth is occasioned several ways; first by the
falling down of gross humors from the head into the Teeth and Gums; this
Malady most afflicts Horses of fewest years, being very young and clotish;
the swelling and inflammation of the Gums does sufficiently declare the nature
of the Distemper.

Secondly an Horse will have the Tooth ach, when his upper Jaw-teeth are so
overgrown, as that they hang over the nether Jaw-teeth, cutting and razing the
insides of his cheeks with their exceeding sharpness.

Thirdly and lastly, this pain may happen by corruption of blood, which shall
so weaken and loosen his Teeth, that through their tenderness he will not be
able to chew his meat.

The Cure of the first Toothache, proceeding from distillation of humors, is
wrought by rubbing all the outside of the Horses Gums with fine Chalk and
strong Vinegar well incorporated together: or else having washed the Teeth, as
aforesaid, take powder of Pomegranate-pills and strew thereon; then take Rozin,
Pitch and Mastich, and melting them together, lay it plaister-wise to the
Horses Temples.

If his Toothache proceed from the second cause, viz. the upper Jaw teeth
overgrown and so sharp as that they cut the insides of the cheeks, then take
your Gouge, and with a Mallet strike or cut those teeth shorter gradually by
little and little, turning the hollow side of your Gouge toward the Teeth, and
so running them along from first to last, then file them smooth from all
raggedness; having thus done, take water and salt and wash your Horses mouth
very well therewith.

Now if the Toothache proceed from the last cause, that is to say, from the
looseness of the Teeth; then you may do well to let the Horse blood under the
Tail, next the Rump; then with Sage rub his Gums, or else, (which is much
better) wash very well his mouth with Salt, Sage and Honey beaten together,
this will fasten his Teeth; then give him in his provender the tender crops of
black Briars.

Pains.
The Pains is a certain Ulcerous distemper or Scab growing in the Pastorns of
an Horse between the Fetlock and the Heel, from whence issues a fretting
waterish humor; this happens usually by the Laziness of the Groom or Hostler,
in not rubbing well the heels of an Horse after a journey in Winter time. And
there are no Horses so subject to this distemper as those which have long hair
on their Fetlocks; hence comes that your Frizonds and Flanders Mares (which are
in such great esteem, among the Gentry of England, for the Coach) are very much
and often troubled therewith by the least negligence of the Groom; for the hair
about the Pasterns being always very long, the sand and dirt gets into it,
fretting the skin and flesh and so breeds the Scab.

The signs are, a palpable Scab, with an hot waterish humor glitting from
thence, which in its passage scaldeth off the hair as it goes.

The Cure is, having first taken up the Shackle-veins on both sides; then take
the soft roe of a red Herring, Mustard and black Soap; beat these and
incorporate them together, then boil them in Vinegar till they become a Salve,
and apply it to the sore: this is an admirable and speedy Cure.

Or else you may take a pound of Hog's Grease, a penny worth of Verdigrease, two
ounces of Mustard* half a pound of Oil de Bay, a quarter of a pound of
Nerve-oil, half a pound of Honey, half a pound of English Wax, one ounce of
Arsenick, two ounces of red Lead and half a pint of Vinegar; boil all these
together till you have made an Ointment thereof: Having made the sore bare
apply this ointment thereunto very hot, renewing it once a day till the Cure be
completed.

That Remedy which I have experienced to be most efficacious is this: Take of
Turpentine, Hog's Grease, Honey and black Soap of each a like quantity, and
having molten them over a slow fire, take them off, and add to them a small
quantity of Bole-armoniack finely pulverized; then as you work these together
with a stick in your right hand, so, with your left, pour in by little
Wheat Flour, which you must have in readiness by you, to make a composition as
thick as an Ointment. Having first cleared the sore of its hair, and made it
raw, apply this Salve thereunto, spread on a linen cloth, renewing it once a
day till you have made a Cure.

There are yet other some who hold this for an excellent Remedy for the Pains;
and that is, take Pepper, Garlic stamped, Coleworts and old Hog's Grease of each
a like quantity; then beat them into a Salve, and lay it to the sore, changing
your Plaster once a day till it be whole.

Lastly, take green Copperas and Roch Alom of each half a pound, one handful of
Bay Salt; boil these in a gallon of running water; then take it off, and add
thereunto a pint of Honey; then boil them over again; anoint the Sore herewith;
then rub it with the powder of Glass, Mustard and Vinegar commixed; then take
Cream, and the inner rind of Elder tree pounded to a Salve, and skin the sore
herewith, using it twice a day.

Powder of Honey and Lime.
Take a quantity of unsleckt Lime, as much as you shall think sufficient, and
pulverize it very finely; then take a convenient quantity of Honey, or so much
as is requisite to mingle it together, and to make it into a thick Paste, and
afterward work it into the form of a Loaf; then bake it in an Oven; then when
it is well baked take it forth, and when cold, beat it into fine powder, and so
preserve it for your use; it dries, heals, and skinneth all sores whatsoever.

Quitter bone.
The Quitter bone is an hard round swelling upon the Cronet of the hoof betwixt
the heel and the quarter, and grows most commonly on the inside of the foot;
it is caused by some hurt the Horse has sustained in the foot, either by a
prick in shooing, by gravelling, which fretteth inwardly, and forces an Ulcer
to break upward, or by some stub or nail running into the foot as he
travaileth. Sometimes it comes by a blow, or by treading one foot upon the
other; this Quitter bone is the most dangerous of all outward Sorrances, and is
known by a very apparent swelling, which in less than six days will come to an
head, breaking, and then the matter or corruption will issue out of a small
hole, yet deep.

The cure is thus: cut the hoof open to the quick, then take Galbanum
Sagapenum, Pitch of Greece, Olibanum, Mastich, Oil and White-Wax, of each one
Ounce with half a pound of Sheeps suet: melt them upon a soft fire, and work
them well into a body, and dress therewith the sore until it be cured.

Or else do thus: as soon as you perceive the nature of your Horses Sorrance,
that it is a Quitter bone, open it above if you find it soft, then take
Auripigmentum pulverized, and infuse it twenty eight hours into very strong
White Wind Vinegar, then lay it to the sore, and it will so eat about the
Quitter bone, that with your Plyers you may easily pluck it away; the bone or
gristle being taken forth, heal up the wound with the Copperas water and green
Ointment, before prescribed you in a preceding Chapter.

Although a Quitter bone be far gone, and by that means difficult to be cured,
yet this is an infallible remedy. You must first take off a quarter of the hoof
right under the Quitter bone, so that the corruption may have the freer
passage; a part of the hoof being off, lay in the place thereof a piece of
Hares skin to stop the blood, and there let it lie twenty four hours without
molestation, then take it away, and wash it with Wine and Vinegar; now to the
intent you may kill the rankling, scald it with boiling hot Butter and Salt
boiled together; do this thrice, once every other day; and it will not only
hinder it from festring, but hinder all manner of dead and proud flesh to grow
in it.

Then take of Verdigrease the quantity of a Pigeons Egg pulverized, a quarter
of a pint of White-Wine-Vinegar, and as much Honey, boil these together with
the Verdigrease, all the time it boils you must be careful that you continually
stir it for about half an hour, then take it off and preserve it in a clean
vessel, and therewith every day anoint the Sorrance till it be well; having
cured the Sorrance, then must you recover the hoof* which is done by taking
Tar, Tallow, Turpentine, and Dogs grease boiled together; let not the
Turpentine be put in till you are about to remove it from the fire; if possibly
you may forbear, take not off the whole hoof because it will require a long
time to produce another, but anoint the torn hoof herewith; and if any thing
will bring a new piece in the place of the old this will do it.

The Italian cures this Malady thus: he first opens the sore, then he puts
into it Salt of Tartar, and having quite eaten away the Quitter bone, he takes
Honey and Verdigrease, and boiling them together heals it up therewith.

The French put Arsnick into the hole of the Quitter bone, letting it lie there
a day and a night, stopping up the mouth thereof very close; if after opening
it the cavity look black within it is concluded, the Arsnick has wrought its
design: then to allay the fire, and restore the mortified flesh, they take Hogs
grease and Turpentine, and having melted them together they tent the wound
therewith: being suspicious that the Core is not eaten away or removed; then
make a Plaster of Pitch, Rozen, and Wax, of each a like quantity, and of
Turpentine as much as all the rest; being sure that the Gristle is consumed,
then heal it up with this Unguent: take of common Honey and Verdigrease
powdered, of each quantum sufficit, boil these till it be red and therewith tent
the wound till it be whole; with this caution, that you keep the mouth of the
wound open till you are assured that it is healed at the bottom.

If it be your chance at any time to meet with a Quitter bone that has passed
through a great many Farriers hands, by whose want of skill it has been
poisoned in such sort, that the Pastern has been much swelled; if so, the
first thing you must do is to take up the Vein on that side of the Leg, on
which the Quitter bone grows, to keep the humor back which affords it
sustenance, then put in the quantity of a Bean of Arsnick to eat out the Core
of the Quitter bone; where note that a Quitter bone is difficulty cured if you
take not up a Vein; and when the Core is out you must first wash it well with
White-Wine-Vinegar and Salt before you heal it up.

Lastly, here follows a very good receipt, neither troublesome nor costly in
the composition; first, take Hogs grease and Verdigrease pounded together, and
tent therewith the Sorrance for a day or two, then pour into the hole scalding
hot Hogs grease, then lay a plaster of Pitch and Tar mixed over it for twenty
four hours, if the bone rise not in that time do it once more, and it will rise.

Quick Scab.
The Quick scab is both noisome and infectious, and is Cousin Germain to the
Leprosy: the reason why it goes under this appellation is because it is no
ways fixed, running from one part of the body to another, sometimes in the
Mane, and not long after in the Tail, now in the Neck, and then in the breast,

The original cause is a surfeit by overheating the blood, which consequently
putrefies, and from thence is engendered the Quick scab.

Though there are several sorts of cures for this grievous Malady, yet by
experience I know none better than this: first, breath a Vein, then shave or
clip away the hair that either grows upon or about the Sorrance: then take
Mallows and Marsh Mallows, of each a like quantity, and boil them in fair water
till these herbs be soft; preserve the Liquor, and bath therewith together with
the herbs this Quick scab three days at least together, and let the decoction
be warm; then take of common Honey one pint, Copperas, Allom, Glass,
Verdigrease, all pulverized, of each four ounces, Turpentine and Quick silver
mortified, of each two ounces; boil all these together with the Honey unto an
Ointment and herewith dress the Sorrance every day till it be whole.

Raising the Crest when fallen.
If you would have an Horses Crest that is fallen to stand as it should, then
with your hand raise it to that form you would have it; see more of this in the
letter C. the Section Crest fallen.

Red Water issuing out of old incurable Ulcers, the Cure.
This Water must be totally removed before any old Ulcer can be cured, for this
water poisons the wound; the French give this Malady the appellation of La Eu
Rouse, and I must confess that I am beholding to the French for its cure, it is
thus effected.

There is an Herb which goes by three or four names, viz. Emanuel, All-good,
Bonus Henricus, or good King Henry; take of the roots hereof, and boil them in
water, and give him a Drench hereof blood warm in an horn; this will remove the
Red water, and then you may cure the old Ulcer as you are prescribed in the
Section of Fistulas.

Repercussive Medicaments.
Repercussive Medicines are such as repel or drive back evil and malignant
humors, Farriers call them Plasters Defensative; these are to be used in
great wounds or Ulcers: the best Repercussives are Vinegar, Salt, and Bole
Armoniack beaten together, and spread round about the Sore, or else white Lead
and Sallet Oil beaten together, or Red Lead and Sallet Oil, or else Vnguentum
Album Camphoratum, with a many more your own experience will indagate and
discover.

Ring bone.
A Ring bone is at first a certain slimy humor and viscous, which resorting to
the bones of their own nature cold and dry, cleave thereunto, and become hard,
gristly, nay absolutely bony; its situation is ever upon the Cronet of the
hoof.

The causes hereof are twofold, either natural or accidental; naturally, when
either the Mare or Stallion have it from whom the Colt proceeds; and though I
never saw a Colt bring a Ring-bone into the World with it, yet Mr. Markham
avoucheth, he has seen many Foals foaled with Ring bones on the feet;
wherefore I shall advise you not to breed upon any such Stallion or Mare that
either have had or have this Malady. Accidentally, this happens several ways;
first, by some blow or stroke on the foot, or else from some evil humor
descending, and settling upon the Cronet.

The Symptoms hereof are apparent to the eye, the Cronet of the hoof will be
much swollen, especially that part which is next adjoining unto the lower part of
the Pastern, the hair thereabout will grow bristly, and stare, and the Horse
will go lame.

The Cures are several, but I shall prescribe you none here but what have been
many times experimented with welcome success. First, scarifie the skin above
the Ring bone with a Lancet, then take a great Onion, and pick out the Core,
then take Verdigrease and unfleckt Lime, and put them therein, then cover up
the hole, and in hot embers roast it till it be soft, then take it and bruise
it well, and being very hot lay it to the sorrance; do thus five days together,
you will not miss of a cure.

Another way to cure it.
First cast your Horse, or tie up his contrary leg with a strong rope, till you
strike five or six holes in the Ring bone at the very edge of it; let the holes
be equally distant from each other, then take Arsnick, and upon the top of your
Fleim put some thereof into every hole, then bind up his foot for a night and a
day.

But that which Esquire Gray prescribes as infallible is this, take unfleckt Lime
newly taken from the Kill well burned, which you may know by its lightness,
pulverize this Lime, and lay it thick upon the place swelled, with a linen
cloth bound about it to keep it on, then let him stand in cold water an
indifferent while; then taking him forth, unbind the foot, and he is certainly
cured, for the burning of the Lime does kill the Ring bone even to the very
root thereof; this is a truth thoroughly experimented.

Rats tails how to cure.
Take green Vitriol half a pound, and boil it in a pint of running water, with
Alom, Mustard, Sage and Hysop; the night before you apply this anoint the sores
made raw with strong Mustard, the next day wash them with the water before
specified, and it is a cure.

Rowels, how to put them in, whether French or English.
If you are to place a Rowel in the breast, make it lean to that part of the
shoulder which is grieved, then take a Lancet, and only cut the skin through,
not cross, but down right, then put in your finger between the skin and the
flesh, raising the skin from the flesh round about the Orifice the breadth of a
Tester, then take a piece of the upper leather of a shoe, and cut it round
with an hole in the middle, then put a Needle and Thread through it; then take
a quill, and put one end into the Orifice of his breast upwards, and so blow in
the Wind; having blown it three or four times, run the Needle and Thread once
through the Rowel, and once through the skin, and draw the Rowel into the cut;
when you have thus placed the Rowel in the cut, with the hole of the Rowel
right against the hole in the skin of the breast, so that it may not move; then
with your Needle and thread run a stitch or two overthwart the cut, to keep in
the Rowel; when you have thus done anoint it with Butter, and so let it stand
five or six days, this is the best method can be prescribed.

Saddle bruised, or Swellings on the Back.
You must first take some wet Hay, but rotten Litter is better, and lay it on
the swelling; this will make it soft very quickly, then with a Lancet let out
the putrefied matter, and let the cavity be filled with the powder of Rozen,
then lay on a Plaster of Shoomakers Wax, and it is a Cure.

Swift cut.
Take a pint of White Wind, and put to it three spoonfuls of Honey, stir these,
and boil them to a Salve; then take it from the fire, and put to it half so
much Turpentine as there was Honey, stir these all together; with this Salve
anoint the Sorrance twice a day, and it will heal it quickly.

Stanching of blood.
Some ignorant Farriers have let an Horse blood when the sign has been in that
place from whence he has taken blood, by which means there has followed so
great an efflux of blood, that by reason it could not be stopped, it has
endangered the Horses life. Wherefore if any such thing should happen by this
ignorance aforesaid, or by wounds, or any other accident, take presently some
new Horse dung, and temper it with Chalk and Vinegar, and lay it to the wound,
letting it remain there three days; or else lay thereunto wild Tansie bruised,
Sage bruised, bruised Hysop, or hot Hogs dung: but if these fail, this will
not: take of the soft Down of Hare or Conies skin, and stop the bleeding place
therewith, holding it to with your hand first a pretty while, if it be to a
great wound, then spread over it a Plaster of Vinegar and Bole Armoniack
incorporated together.

Slaves very good for the healing all sorts of Sores and Wounds.
I shall here, of some hundred sorts of Salves, only insert three or four,
which I have found the best of any I have tried in above 45 years practice.

1. Take of the buds or tenderest tops of Elder-leaves one handful, first
shred, then pound them in a Stone-mortar very well, till you bring them to a
Salve; this is for present use, and you must apply it to the Sore with a linen
cloth, binding it so on that it shall not fall off.

2. Take of common Honey two ounces, Rochalom, Verdigriese and Vinegar of each
one ounce; you must pulverize the Alom and Verdigriese, then take of Sublimate
finely powdered two ounces; boil these together a very little, and then take it
off, using it as you shall find occasion.

3. Take of hard Rozin and Perosen of each two pound, of Virgin-wax,
Frankincense and Sheep-suet of each one pound, of old tried Hog's Grease two
pound; boil the Gums and Wax in a pint of white Wine, and then put into it the
Sheep-suet and Hog's Grease, and when all is well molten and wrought into a
body, strain it, and whilst it is yet hot, put thereto of Venice Turpentine two
ounces; work all these together and keep it for your use.

4. Take tried Hog's Grease 1 pound, Verdigriese finely powdered 2 penniworth;
let these take 3 or 4 walms over the fire; then take it off, and put to it of
Venice Turpentine one Ounce, stir these all together till it be cold.

There are many more excellent Salves, Ointments, Powders, and Waters which for
brevity sake I omit, knowing that these will do as much as all the rest.

Shoulder Sorrances what they are with their Cures, and first of the
Shoulder-wrench.
The several sorts of Sorrances which happen to the shoulder, are either
discoverable by the eye, or to be felt by the hand: now as to the Shoulder
Wrench it is discoverable to both.

It comes of some dangerous slipping or sliding, or of too sudden stopping on
the Gallop, etc.

The Cure is to take Wheat meal two pound, and put it into some red Wine,
setting the Posnet, wherein they are, over the fire; then take Bolearmoniack
finely pulverized half a pound, of ordinary Honey one pound; boil all these
together and, when boiled, add to them of Pitch half a pound, and so keep them
stirring till the Pitch be thoroughly melted, and as you are about to take it
off the fire, put thereunto half a pound of ordinary Turpentine, of Cummin, Oil
de Bay, Dialthaea, Sanguis Dracunis, Bay Berries, Fenugreek, Linseed-flowers of
each two ounces; make all these into fine powder; then take an ounce of the Oil
of Aspick; boil and mix these very well together; that done, charge the
shoulder therewith down to the Knees; this is a sovereign Remedy for Shoulder
wrenches, Knees or Hips, it comfort the Sinews, it brings down swellings,
and is very good against Kibes and Scratches.

Yet if this receipt should not answer your expectation (for the best Remedies
may sometime fail) then first open his Breast-vein, after that rowel him from
the nether part of the Spade-bone down to the point of his Shoulder; which
done, set a patten shoe upon the sound foot, and so turn him to grass for
about a month, stirring and removing every other day the Rowels, thrusting out
the matter; as soon as you perceive he goes sound take off the patten shoe and
Rowels, and let him run a little longer to grass, and he will be perfectly well.

Shoulder pight or disl^cated.
Shoulder pight or dislocated is, when an Horse by some great ^all or strain
has the point of his Shoulder thrust out of joint or displaced, which is very
discoverable by the sticking out of the point of the fore shoulder farther than
the sound; besides the Horse will halt downright.

This way you may effect the Cure: First, cast him upon that side which has
not the Shoulder dislocated; then fasten with a Cord the foot of the same leg
all along a board, and that again to some tree-or post, about three paces from
the Horse; whilst this is extended, let one with a pail of cold water bathe and
wash the dislocated member with his hand, in so doing, he must take up that
member which he must chafe from the top to the further end of the leg, by so
doing the bone will be reduced to its proper place; that done, raise him very
gently, and then let him blood in the Breast-vein, on that side the member is
dislocated; then put on a patten shoe on the contrary foot, and let his
forefeet be trammelled above a fortnight afterward, to hinder him from lying
down, and let there be daily a fresh restringent Charge applied to the
shoulder; after this swim him against the stream, and then anoint him with this
Unguent, and he will be perfectly cured; the Ointment is this: take Oil de Bay,
Oil de Petra, Oil of Spike, and N^rve-oil of each an equal quantity, and anoint
his shoulder therewith: this Remedy never failed me.

But the way of late much practiced is to lay good store of straw under the
horse; then put on his forelegs a pair of Pasterns, and the like on his
hinder, then having thrown him on his back, hang him by the legs from the
ground with two ropes drawn over some beam or other thing convenient for that
purpose; this will resettle the bone in its pristine seat; then having let him
down very softly, loose the fore Pastern of the sound leg, and with a Cord
before you let him rise, tie the same leg to the foot of the manger, so short,
as in his rising he shall be forced to hold his leg before him, for fear of
putting his shoulder out of joint; let him stand so three or four days; as soon
as he is up burn all the point of his shoulder with an hot Iron Chequerwise a
full foot square at least; then charge all these burned places, and the whole
shoulder with Pitch, Rozin and Tar melted together, laid on very hot, and clap
flox of the color of the Horse upon it; then charge him again over the flox:
at three days end loose his foot, and put a pair of Pasterns on his feet; then
suffer him not to lie down for twenty days, after that walk him out, if he go
not well, give him as much more rest.

Shoulder strained.
For a Shoulder strained take of Oil of Pumpillion, Oil of Spike, and
Linseed-oil of each an ounce and an half; mix these together, and rub and bathe
his Shoulder therewith very well, and that it may sink in the better, heat a
fire-pan red hot and hold it against his Shoulder; then bleed him in the
shoulder, not forgetting to hopple his feet together, and he will soon be sound
as ever.

Another Excellent Remedy.
Take a large Earthen vessel, and fill it full of the herb A^smart and
Brrok-lime, equally mixed together; then put to them as much of the stalest
Urine as will cover them all over; then cover the pot close and set it aside in
some cool place: now when you have occasion to make use hereof, proportion the
quantity according to your discretion, and so putting both the Urine and Herbs
into a Pipkin, boil it well; then take an old Boot and cut off the foot, then
draw it over the Horses foot up almost to the Elbow of his Shoulder, keeping
the nether part of the Boot close about his Leg, but letting the upper part be
open and wide; then take your Composition as hot as the Horse can suffer it,
into the Boot, fastening the Boot so about the Mane, that the Mixture may be
about the shoulder before and behind: thus do every day till you have expelled
the grief, which will be in a short time.

Shoulder splat.
I have already discoursed of the Shoulder-wrench and Shoulder pight; it now
falls in my way to treat of the Shoulder-splat: but first give me lieve to give
you the difference between them.

The Shoulder-wrench commonly is occasioned by some slip, or by making the
Horse to make too sudden a stop upon false ground, or by some fall, or by too
short turning: Shoulder-pight comes by some brush, strain or fall, which the
Horse received by a leap, stroke or bruise against some hard thing, whereby the
member is dislocated.

Now the shoulder-splat is when by some dangerous slip or slide upon some
slippery or yielding ground, the horse has his shoulder parted from the
breast, tearing the flesh from the Brisket, leaving an open cleft in the flesh,
not in the skin, which causes a balk to be underneath the body, which will
afterward swell; hereupon the Horse will not only halt, but draw his leg after
him; that is a sufficient Symptom to know the Shoulder-splat by.

Now as to the Cure: first put a strait pair of Pasterns on his forefeet; then
take of Dialthea one pound, of Sallet-oil one pint, of Oil de Bay half a pound,
and of fresh Butter half a pound; melt all these ingredients together in an
earthen pot, and anoint the Sorrance therewith, and also round about the inside
of the shoulder; about three days after, at farthest, both the Sorrance and all
the shoulder will swell; then with a Lancet prick all those swollen places, (you
may use a sharp hot Iron) and having so done, anoint it again with the Ointment
aforesaid; but if you see the swelling will not be assuaged, but that it comes
to suppuration; then lay it open in that place where is the greatest swelling
and is softest; having so done, tent it with Flax dipped in Turpentine and
Hog's Grease melted together, you must renew the tent twice a day if you will
have a speedy Cure.

Shoulder pinched.
This Sorrance in the shoulder differs from the former, for this commonly
comes when the horse is two young, and at that age labored and strained very
much, or forced to carry too great a burden.

The Signs are, his breast will be very narrow, and by reason of the
consumption of the flesh, the sore part of the Shoulder Bone will stick out and
be much higher than the flesh.

Several men several opinions, as to the Cure of this Malady; as for my own
part, I shall only make mention of what I have a long time experienced, and
that is: first Rowel your Horse, then lay this Charge or Plaster, all over his
Breast, Shoulders and Withers: it is thus made.

Take of Pitch and Rozin of each a pound, of Tar half a pint; boil these
together in a pot; then take it off, and when it is indifferently cooled, take
a stick, and bind thereto some Flax, and dip it into the Charge, and daub all
the shoulder over therewith; after that take Flax, as near as you can of the
same color of the Horse, and lay them on the Charge, observing every other day
to take out the Rowels, and having cleansed them, place them as before; thus
you must do for at least sixteen days, at the expiration of which time, take
away your Rowels quite, and heal up the wounds with tents dipped in Turpentine
and Hogs grease molten together.

Sinew-sprung.
Sinew-sprung is when the Sinew is broken and severed from the flesh.

The Cure: Take of the leaves and roots of Solomons-seal, and of great Cumfry
an equal quantity; pound them small and infuse them in white Wine a day and a
night; then boil it, and when it is indifferent warm bathe the place grieved
therewith, and after that bind thereunto the herbs and roots also; do this once
a day till the grief be remedied.

Sinew-grieved.
If the Horse complain only of the Sinew, by being grieved some way or other,
without laceration or cutting; then take a good quantity of Mallows, and boil
them in water till they grow tender,; then drain the water from them, and so
stamp them very well, and apply them to the member thus grieved; let the
application be hot, and if you do thus over night, he will be well the next
day; however give him five or six days rest afterward.

Sinew strained.
If you would corroborate a sinew strained by an overreach or otherwise; then
take tried Hog's Grease, Horse-grease, May-butter and Sallet-oil five ounces of
each, of new Wax two ounces, and of Comphire a third part to all the rest; melt
and mix them together and so make an Ointment thereof, and so therewith anoint
the part grieved. You may double the quantity of your ingredients, or treble
them, so that you preserve your composition in a Gally-pot it will keep a
twelvemonth.

Sinew-spong.
Take a pint of Linseed-oil and boil it; then add thereto a quartern of Aqua
vitae, and stir them together, anointing your Horses leg therewith he will be
perfectly cured.

If you would cure a Sinew-strain in the fore or hinder-leg, growing above the
foot-lock-joint upon the back part of the fore-leg, and much about the
Ankle-bone upon the back part of the hind-leg; this over-straining will cause a
great swelling and knotting.

For the Cure: Take Nerve-oil and Turpentine of each a penniworth; mix these
together, and you need use it but four several times, and it will be well; let
there be an intermitting day for his dressing.

Sinew strain new or old, a most excellent and speedy Remedy, approved of by
most Farriers.
The Shackle-veins in the Pastern you must first take blood from; then take a
very fat Puppy-dog of two months old or less, kill him, and with all expedition
fley him; then bruise his flesh and bones together and lay them upon a cloth,
and bind it close to the Sinew strain as warm as you can; but be mindful to
take out all the Guts before you bruise the flesh, and be sure that after
blood-letting you bathe the sinew-strain with Aqua Vitae, bathing it in with
your hand, and then lay the aforesaid flesh thereunto; wind a cloth two or
three times about the leg to keep it on. Some are of opinion that a fat Cat
thus killed and bruised is much better, because it draws more and knits better;
I shall leave it to your discretion to make choice of which you please.

Scratches.
The Scratches may be as well called by other names as this, viz. Mules, Kibes,
Rats tails, Crepanches, Pains, etc. they being almost all of one and the same
nature and disposition, of all which I have particularly discourst, however I
would not have you judge me either tautological or impertinent if I insist upon
this Sorrance called the Scratches; a Sorrance which ingendreth about the heel
and Pastern joint, being long, scabby, and dry chaps or rifts growing
overthwart on the hinder legs, just from the Fetlock to the end of the Curb:
now this Sorrance may grow upon all the fore legs, but is very unusual, the
hindmost being the seat of this distemper.

The Causes are either dry melancholy humors engendered by outward filth, or
else by the fumes of Horses dung lying too near him.

The signs are very visible to the sight, and easily to be felt; besides, the
hair will stare, divide and curle, and the sorrance will be noisome to the
scent.

For the cure hereof, any of those Medicines before prescribed against the Pains
or Mules are good for the Scratches: yet for the better effecting the sound
healing and curing this Malady, take what follows, which are more proper for
this Sorrance.

First rub the Sorrance till it bleed, and be raw, then take Hogs grease and
black Soap, of each half a pound, and boil these together; then take of
Brimstone, Lime, and Gunpowder, of each three Ounces, beat these into fine
powder, and put therein, adding as much Soot as will thicken it; incorporate
these well together, and make a black Ointment, and therewith anoint the Sores
daily.

If the Scratches are held incurable, then first bleed him in the Shackle
Veins, Spur Veins, and fore Toe Veins, intermitting three days between the
bleeding of one Toe and the other; having so done, make the Sores raw as
before, then take a quart of old Urine, and a quart of strong Brine, and put to
them eight Ounces of Alom, boil these to a quart, whilst very hot wash the
Sores therewith, then take the sperm of Frogs and put it into an Earthen pot,
in six or seven days it will look like Oil, wherein you will see little round
things; take both one and the other, and spread it on a cloth, binding it to
the Sores, do this pretty often, and it will cause a cure.

For ordinary Scratches, take a penny worth of Verdigrease, a penny worth of
Red Lead, and the like quantity of Soap; mix these together, and apply it like
a Plaster, letting it lie three days and three nights, but you must observe to
cut the hair close, and make the Sore raw.

Or first shave the hair away, and with an Hair cloth rub the Sore till it be
raw, then wash it well with warm stale Urine; then take black Soap, Mustard and
Vinegar, of each an equal quantity, mingling therewith some of an Oxegall, stir
these together, and when wrought into a body, rub the place therewith, and bind
thereto a cloth, so doing once a day till it be whole.

I shall only recite two Medicines more and I have done, which Receipts are the
best I have met with in my life time.

The first is, take a quart of white wine Vinegar, and put therein two ounces
of the strongest Brazeel, Tobacco in the roll, opening the leaves, and
shredding it in small, boil these together till you find the Vinegar begins
to consume, then take it off, and strain it very well, then take a quart of
Wine more, common Honey and Bay Salt, of each two Spoonfuls, of Roch Alom the
quantity of a Pullets Egg, Red Sage, Rue, Honey suckle leaves, Yarrow,
Plantain, Ribwort, and Bramble leaves, of each an equal quantity, one handful
or thereabout, boil these in the Wine till one half be consumed, then strain
these also, then set it over the fire again, and let it boil a little space,
then take it off, and cool it; when you have so done, keep it close stopped in
a glass for your future use; you must wash herewith the Sorrance, and then put
upon it the powder of burnt Alom. This is an excellent remedy for the
Scratches, neither does this ensuing come much short thereof.

About the beginning of the Month of March you shall frequently find the Spawn
of Toads, in Ditches and standing Pools, take hereof, draining the Water from
the said Spawn; after this, distill it, and keep it in a Glass close stopped,
and it will be serviceable to you the whole year round: when you use it warm
it, and therewith wash the Sorrance, and it will in a very short time cure it.

Surbating of Horses.
Those Horses which are most subject to this Malady are such as have either
great round feet, or such as are flat footed, the Coffins whereof being very
weak and tender.

Now Surbating proceeds from two several causes: the first is, when the Horse
is but newly backed, and shod, the owner by his indiscretion and impatience,
immediately rides him a long journey; now his feet being but tender, and too
soon exposed to hard and stony ways, the Horse becomes surbated. The second
cause is when an Horse has naturally bad feet, or that he is ill shod, his
shoes either lying too flat, too narrow, too short, and too much worn, or
sometimes by going too long bare foot.

The signs are, the Horse will halt much, going creeping and stiff; if he got
his grief by travail, when standing in the stable he will always be removing
his feet, not knowing where to place them by reason of their great soreness:
this will cause him to lie down much, for his standing will be exceeding
painful, and if you feel the Coffins of his hoofs, you will find them very dry,
and burn much.

There are several ways to cure Surbating: some take off the Horses shoes, and
pare him a very little, then they see whether the shoes be not long, large and
hollow enough, if they be not so they make them so, for otherwise they will
never be easy, then tack them on again; and when they have so done they take
Hogs grease and Bran boiled together, and being very hot, they stop his feet
therewith, covering the Coffin round about therewith, binding all in together
with a cloth and a list fastened about the joint, renewing it once a day till it
be sound, observing to let him stand dry, and that he drink warm water during
the cure.

If your Horse surbat or solebat by going without shoes, then first pare him
pretty close toward the Toe, then with the point of a Penknife, cut a little
hole through the bottom of the hoof, about half an Inch from the Toes end,
right over the Vein, and let the Vein bleed a quarter of a pint, then set on
his shoes indifferent hollow within the feet; then boil Tar, Tallow, and
Turpentine together, and pour it into the surbated foot scalding hot, and stuff
in Wool after it to keep it in; once or twice at the farthest so doing will
perfectly cure him.

If he surbate in his journey so that you fear he will not perform it, as soon
as you perceive it, get him to his Inn with what convenient speed you may,
then take two new laid Eggs, and having first well picked his fore feet, break
them raw into the Soles, and then stop them up with Ox or Cow dung; or during
the time of his journey, if you stop his feet with Cow dung and Vinegar every
night, he will be well next morning; nay, if he be not surbated it is good to
stop his feet with Cow Dung, for it will keep them cool.

Lastly, if your Horses feet be surbated either by travail, too near paring, or
any other accident, then take a good lump of course Sugar, and with an hot Iron
melt it between the shoe and the foot; and when it is hardened, take Nettles
and Bay Salt and stamp them, and so stop up the frog of the foot.

Sinew crampt.
Cramps are the contracting or drawing together the sinews of any one member;
the cure is to rub and chafe the member contracted with Vinegar and common Oil,
and after that wrap it all over with wet Hay, rotten Litter, or Woollen cloths,
this is a speedy remedy.

Strangle.
The Strangle is not as some have vainly imagined a Quinzie, but an
inflammation of the throat, proceeding from choleric blood which issues out
of the throat Veins into those parts; and this happens by some Cold taken in
Winter, or after some excessive labor.

The Sorrance it self is an hard and great swelling between the Horses nether
chaps, upon the roots of the tongue; this if not timely remedied will endanger
the choking of the Horse.

The signs hereof are hanging out of the tongue, lolling it to and fro his
mouth, the Horses head and eyes will be swollen, and his Temples will appear very
hollow, his breath will be very short by reason of the stopping of the passage
of his throat.

The Cure of this Distemper according to the judgment of the most experienced
is to let him blood in the neck Vein: after that to bring the swelling to
suppuration they make a ripening Plaster after this manner: take of Mallows,
Linseed, Rue, Smallage, and ground Ivy, of each a quantity alike, boil these
together in the grounds of Beer, then add to it some Oil de Bay, and a small
quantity of Dialthaea, taking it off the fire, make thereof a plaster, and lay
it to the place grieved, but suffer him not in any case to drink cold Water;
this Plaster will ripen and break the swelling, then lay thereunto Bran steept
in Wine, renewing it daily till it be whole.

But of all Cures there is none experience better approves of than this.

As soon as you see the swelling rise between his chaps, then take a Wax
candle, and holding it close to the swelling, burn an hole quite through the
skin, then lay thereunto wet Horse-Litter, that will both ripen and break it;
then only lay a plaster of Shoomakers Wax thereunto, and that will both draw
and heal it.

But if it happen to break inwardly, so that the corruption issues through his
nose, there being no external running of the matter, then perfume his head
twice or thrice a day by burning under his Nostrils Frankincense or Mastick,
you may use instead thereof a Cole of fire put into wet Hay, causing the smoke
thereof to ascend into his head, or else blow the powder of Euphorbium with a
quill into his Nostrils. I shall forbear to insert more variety of remedies,
since I have insisted on a Malady called the Avives or Vives, for whatsoever
Medicine is good for the one is also as good for the other.

Strain in the Pastern joint.
The Fetlock or Pastern joint is often strained by treading awry on some Stone
or Cart-^ut, nay, sometimes when the Floor of the Stable is uneven he may get
it there.

The signs hereof will be very apparent, for the joint will be swollen, and the
Horse will halt downright.

There are three Cures which I only approve of for their safety and expedition,
and therefore I shall nominate no other; the first is,

Take three pints of stale Urine, and sees it about a quarter of an hour; when
you find that the foam does rise apace, then take it from the fire and strain
it, and add thereunto an handful of Tansie, one handful and an half of
Mallows, and about three spoonfuls of Honey, with nigh half a pound of Sheeps
suet, then set them on the fire, and let them boil together till the herbs
become soft; being very hot, lay this Poultess to the joint, and bind it on
with a cloth; a fourth dressing will perfectly cure the strain.

The Second is, first to take of Dialthaea half a pound, the like quantity of
Nerve Oil; chafe this Oil well in with your hand, continuing so to do, till you
have none of the Ointment left; if this should chance to fail your
expectations, reinforce the cure, by taking Nerve Oil, black Soap, and
Pompillion, of each an equal quantity, and only warm them over the fire, and
therewith anoint the joint; I never knew this Medicine deceive me.

Now the last is this: take a Mastive sucking Whelp which is very fat, kill him
and take out his guts, then take gray snails and black snails as many as will
fill the belly, and sowing it up, roast him at an indifferent soft fire, then
baste him with Oil of Spike made yellow with Saffron, with the Oil of Wax, of
each two Oils let there be five ounces; let the Dog continue at the fire as
long as any one drop will fall, and preserve the droppings in a Gallipot; with
this Ointment anoint the joint morning and evening, working it in very hot,
holding a red hot flat Iron, to make it sink in.

Sive-bone in the socket of the hoof, or a strain in the Coffin-joint.
If you are doubtful whereabout the grief lies take up the foot in your hand,
and turn it this way and that way, and by his shrinking you will soon find it
out; when you have sound it, thus you must cure it.

First, take off his shoe, and pare him thin almost to the quick; then make a
Pultess of these ingredients following, and lay it hot to his foot: Take a pint
of Brine, wherein Beef or Pork has been salted, and four ounces of
Kitchin-stuff; boil these together near half an hour, then add thereunto some
Wheat Flour, and make thereof a Pultess of an indifferent thickness; then set
on the shoe again; put into the sole of the foot a good deal of this Pultess
as hot as can be endured; then stuff the sole with Towe, and splinter it with a
flat stick to keep it in; thus let it lie two days and two nights: then take a
linen cloth that is long enough, and spread it all over with this Pultess
scalding hot, wrapping it about the top of the Hoof, the Pastern and up the Leg
as far as the swelling goes, and let this lie as long as the other: do thus,
after this manner, four or five times, and he will not after complain of that
grief.

Stifling and its hurts how cured.
That Horse is said to be stifled, when the stifling bone, by some accident or
other, is thrust out of its place. Now you are to understand, that the
stifling-bone is about two inches in length, lying between the nether end of
the Thigh Bone and the upper end of the great Hough-bone of the hinder-leg. Now
every hurt in the stifling-bone, whereby the Horse halteth, is not said to be
stifling, unless the bone be out, but only hurt in the stifle.

The symptoms of his being stifled are, the bone will stick out more on the one
side than the other, and in his halting he only dare touch the ground with his
Toe.

Cure him thus: Set a Patten-shooe on his sound foot, and so turn him to grass,
that he may be compelled to tread upon his lame foot: thus straining his foot
will reduce the Stifling-bone to its proper place.

If a Patten-shooe is not in readiness, take a plain Surcingle, and with it
garter up the Horses sound Leg three fingers above the Hamm upon his main great
Sinew, so strait as you with another assistance can draw it together, then
turn him loose where he may have freedom to walk; thus in forty hours his Leg
will be as sound as ever. Now by reason that the place will be much swelled,
rub very well the gartered place with fresh butter.

Or thus you may do; as soon as you perceive the Stifling-bone is out of its
proper place, then take your Horse to some deep Pond, Mill-pool or River that
has an easy entrance, and swim him up and down for half an hour, till he
sweat behind the ears, at which time, or before, the bone will be reduced to
its natural place. Thus you may do if your Horse should chance to be stifled on
the Rode, and that your occasions will not permit you to stay for any longer
Cure.

Or thus you may do: after swimming, peg him as soon as he comes into the
Stable, and do so always as long as he stands in the house; and when he is
dry rub in an ounce of the Oil of Turpentine and as much strong Beer shaked
together in a Glass; it will cause it to swell for the present, however it is
an admirable and most approved Remedy for the Stifle.

Note that swimming is not good for any strain, but only to bring a Stifle-bone
right into its place again.

If it so happens that your Horse is not stifled, but only hurt in the Stifle,
so that the bone is not out but only swelled thereabout; then take a pound and
a half of Bole-armoniack, three pints of red Wine-Vinegar, eight Eggs beaten,
shells and all, three penniworth of English Honey, and as much Venice
Turpentine, three pints of flower, and more than a good handful of Bay Salt;
incorporate these well together and put them into a pot, keeping it close one
night, the next morning dress your Horse therewith, and continue so doing once
a day for eleven days together. Probatum est.

Shedding of Hair in the Mane.
There are a certain sort of little worms which breed in the Mane, which
feeding on and fretting the hair thereof, cause it to shed and fall from the
Horse.

I know no better Cure than to take black Soap and therewith first anoint the
Mane and Crest; after that, make a strong Lie of stale Urine and Ash-ashes and
wash the Mane and Crest therewith, and it will infallibly kill them.

Scrupin or a through Splint on both sides the Leg.
You must in the first place cast your Horse, then take a Bed-staff or a stick
of that bigness then beat and bruise therewith the Splint on both sides; having
beaten it soft, take 12 penniworth of the Oil of Riggrum, and rub it on no
other place but the Splint; then raise him, and tie up his head three or four
hours to the Rack, tying up also his contrary leg, for the smart and pain
thereof will make him very unruly; this will take off the hair for the present,
but it will quickly grow again without alteration of color.

Let the Splint be never so big, and dress him after this manner, in seven days
the Cure will be accomplished: for a small Splint or a Blood-splint, once
dressing will serve the turn: this is approved of by all for an excellent
remedy.

Stumbling.
Stumbling in an Horse is so ill a property, that I know not what well can be
worse; for a man continually rides in fear of breaking his neck. This infirmity
happens many ways, and those either naturally or accidentally.

Natural^y, when the sinews of the forelegs are somewhat strait, so that the
Horse is incapacitated to use his ^imbs with that dexterity and agility he
ought.

Accidentally an Horse is given to stumbling, by a Splint, Ridg-bone,
Wind-galls or some hurts in the foot, as soundred, pricked, gravelled,
sinew-sprained, shoulder-wrenched, or pinched in the Withers.

The best Cure for natural Stumbling is to cut a slit upon the very top of the
Nose, and with your Cornet take up the two great Sinews, which there reside,
and cut them asunder, and after heal up the place with some healing
medicaments; this will give him the perfect use of his legs in so ample a
manner, as that he will never trip or stumble after, unless by some great
chance.

Neither will you do amiss, if you breed a young Horse or purchase one,
immediately after backing him, to cut him of the Cords, that is, these two
great Sinews, and you will find the benefit ever after, mentioned in the
aforesaid Cure of Stumbling.

But if his stumbling happens accidentally, according to the Causes already
declared; then take of Hog's Grease one pound, of fresh Butter, Althaeae and of
Oil de Bay of each eight ounces; mix these, and work them together, and
therewith anoint and chafe the legs and sinews of the Horse thrice a day, every
third day, and be sure that his shoes be wide enough, especially at the heels.

The sinews being well suppled, you may put him also out of the Cords.

Where note that these Cords are flat white Sinews lying under a red film,
extending themselves from the top of the nose to the hind-legs, which when you
shall take up with your Cornet, and having hold of them, if you will pull hard,
you may almost pull the Horses hind-legs to his forelegs.

Stars artificial how to make of all sorts, and first of the white Star.
If your Horse be well colored, and, for a further ornament to his body, you
would have a Star that is white in his forehead, you must make use of Art in
this manner: Take Sheeps-milk and set it over the fire, when it is well sodden,
take a cloth and dip therein; then take it out of the milk boiling hot, and
clap it to the Horse's forehead, doing it so often till you can rub off the
hair with your finger; after this, every day, lay some milk to the bald place
lukewarm, till the hair grow again.

If that will not do this, use this infallible experiment: Take a sharp long
Bodkin, and as long as you would have the Star, so far upwards thrust the
Bodkin between the skin and the bone, hollowing the skin as you thrust it; then
take some Lead, and make it into the same form the Bodkin is of, and having
withdrawn your Bodkin, let the Lead in the same hole supply its place; then
thrust in the Bodkin cross-wise underneath the Lead, and put in some more Lead
into that place, in such sort that it may represent a perfect cross; then take
P^ck-thread and put it underneath the four corners of the Lead, and by drawing
it strongly you will contract the hollow skin to a purse; having drawn it well
together, let it rest a day and a night, in which time the skin will be so
deadned, that it will not, when loosned, return to its former place; after this
remove the Leaden pins, and with your hand close the skin to the forehead; in a
little time after this you will perceive the hair to fall off, but assure your
self the next hair which appears will be white.

This I know true likewise by my own experience; take a Crab and roast it, and,
being excessive hot, bind it to that part of the Horse which you would have
white; this will infallibly scald away the old hair, and the new hair that
comes will be white.

Secondly, how to make a black Star.
This black Star, you are to understand, is to be made on a white Horse, which
will be very remarkable, and thus you must do it: Take the rust of Iron, Galls
and Vitriol, and pound them in a Mortar with Sallet-oil, and herewith anoint
the place, and it will convert white hair into coal black color.

I have been told that this will do as well, though I never tried it: Take four
scruples of the wood of Oleander beaten to powder, and one scruple of Ink; then
with an indifferent quantity of Sheeps-suet work them together, and herewith
anoint the designed part, and this will effect your purpose.

Thirdly and Lastly, how to make an artificial red Star in the forehead of an
Horse.
Take of Aqua Vitae one quartern, of Aqua fortis one Ounce and a half, and of
Silver to the value of one and twenty pence; put them into a Glass and shake
them well together, and therewith anoint the place very well; this in an
instant will convert what ever the color of the hair be, into a perfect red;
but this will continue no longer than till the casting of the hair; so that if
you desire a continuance, you must renew it.

Sit-fast.
The Sit-fast or Stick-fast, is called by the French Mal de la Cron; it is an
hard horny knob, growing in an Horses skin under the Saddle, and is dead like a
hard piece of Leather: It proceeds from some old Saddle-gall or bruise, which
not impostumating the skin falls dead and sticks to the flesh.

That you may effect the Cure, take the green outward leaves of a Cabbage; then
take tried Hog's Grease and stamp them together, making thereof an Ointment;
herewith anoint his back very well, chafing it in, and it would not be amiss to
clap on his Saddle and immediately ride him.

But in my opinion this is the best and speediest Cure; first anoint this dead
skin with Hog's Grease, to supple and mollify it; then pull up this skin, and
with a sharp Penknife cut it away from the sound flesh; if after this the
cavity appear deep, pour every morning and evening into it Butter melted hot,
and this will eaven the flesh; then dry and skin it with the powder of Honey
and Lime mingled together.

Swaying in the Back.
Swaying in the back is occasioned by great burdens, slip or wrench in the
lower part of his back, below his short Ribs and directly between his Fillets.

The signs are, when the Horse is laid he will rise with much difficulty,
besides his going will be uneaven, swaying sometimes backwards, sometimes
sidelong

The Cure is, first to cover the Horses back with a Sheeps-skin, newly fleyed
off, laying the fleshy side on; then lay thereon a good warm cloth, letting the
Sheep-skin lie so long till it begin to corrupt; then apply a fresh one,
continuing so to do twenty days; this I have tried, but have not found it so
successful, but that I was forced to use this Remedy, which never failed me.

First, draw his back on both sides of the ridge from the pitch of the Buttock,
unto an handful within the Saddle, and so again overthwart; let the lines be an
inch distance one from the other, and let not the strokes be otherwise burnt
but only to look yellow: having so done lay on this Plaster.

Take of Pitch half a pound, of Tar half a pint, of Rozin and Bole-armoniack of
each a quarter of a pound beaten into fine powder; boil these together stirring
them till they are thoroughly incorporated, then being lukewarm, daub all the
burning therewith very thick; after this take flox of the Horse's color, and
daub as many on as will stick; remove it not, but let it fall off
spontaneously: if the season will permit turn him to grass.

Spurgalling how remedied.
Spurgalling to be sure happens no other way than by the indiscretion of a
digging Horseman. The signs are plain to be seen and felt: the Cure is not
difficult, only take Urine and Salt, Water and Salt, or warm Vinegar alone, or
bind unto the Spur-gall the tops of Nettle-leaves and any of these will
perfectly cure him.

Swelling of the Cods.
This swelling is always accompanied with an inflammation, and happens to the
Stones of an Horse several ways, viz. either by the bite of an Horse or some
venomous beast, by a blow, or by a strain; nay it has been found to have
happened after sickness or surfeit with cold, being a sign of his recovery; if
so, the usual way of curing it is by taking of Bean-flower, Wheat-meal, Cummin
and Hogs grease of each an equal quantity, and therewith Plaster his Cods or
Stones.

Sometimes again this swelling proceeds from rankness of seed, and the
Symptom thereof is the great sliminess of his Yard; if so, then get any Mare,
and let him first cover her, then keep him without Provender, and bleed him
above the great Vein which is between his lips; having so done, take three or
four hard Eggs, and some of his own dung and pound them together, making
thereof a Plaster, with which cover his Cods; but be sure that every day you
wash them with cold water, till the swelling come down.

But if by accident, as by stroke, strain, etc. his Cods and Stones do swell,
then follow this Rule, which the French prescribe:

Take the roots of wild Cowcumber and Salt, and boil them, and with the water
bathe the Cods, after this anoint them with an unguent made of Oil,
Goats-grease and the white of an Egg, or an ointment made of Chalk,
Potters-earth, Ox-dung, Cummin-water and Vinegar mingled together; after this,
let him blood in the Flank-veins.

Selender.
There is very little discrepancy between the Selender and Malander, only that
the Selender breeds on the bending of the bough in the Leg behind, whereas
the Malander afflicts the bending of the Leg before; the Symptoms of the one
bear an analogy with the signs of the other, and, to speak the truth, there is
no difference in the Cure; however, for variety sake, take this one Receipt
more.

Take fresh Butter, Bay Salt and Frankincense both pulverized very finely, and
boil these together; then take a stick and tie a rag about it, and dip it into
this Ointment scalding hot, and apply it to the Selender three mornings
together; after this, heal it up, and renew the hair by anointing it with
Mallows and fresh Butter.

Surfeited and Grease-molten.
In the first place, my advice is, to take blood from the Horse; then give him
this Purgation.

Take of Trisora magna, and Filonio Persico of each half an ounce, Cassia one
ounce, Syrop of Violets two ounces; dissolve these in Mel Rosarum four ounces:
then put these well mixed together into an Horn, and give it him in a morning
fasting; then ride him gently two or three miles, bringing him into the Stable,
let him stand upon the Trench, somewhat better than an hour; after this give
him a sweet Mash; having swallowed that, then give him dry Oats, clean and
well sifted, and lastly give him some sweet Hay.

Be sure to give him no cold water in eight or nine days, after that time you
may, but with this caution, when ever you let him drink cold water, that you
immediately exercise him with moderation, so far as not to make him sweat.

String-halt.
The String-halt is a Malady that is most incident to Horses of the greatest
metal, and by some it is called the Mary Hinchcho..

It is an ill-favored distemper, and frequently happens by an Horses taking
sudden cold after a great heat, and most commonly happens to the hinder Legs;
this cold comes by washing him too soon, whereby the blood and sinews being
stupefied, the Horse is deprived of the sense and feeling of that member it
seizes.

The signs are apparent to the eye, and very uncomely it appears; for he
snatcheth up his leg much higher than the other, twitching it up in such manner
as if he trod on needles, or that the ground was so hot it scalded his foot.

The Cure is, to take up the middle Vein above the Thigh, and underneath the
same, under which Vein there lies a string, which with a sharp Knife cut away;
then anoint him with Butter and Salt, or anoint him with this Ointment
following.

Take of the Oil of Worms and Oil of Petroleum, of the Oil of Nerval, of
Piece-grease made of the shreds of Shooe-makers Leather, and of Oil of Spike of
each one ounce, of London-Treacle two ounces, and of Hog's Grease one pound;
melt all these together, then take it off the fire and stir it till it be cold;
with this anoint the string-halt once every day; then wisp him up with a soft
thumb-band of Hay from the Pastern to the top of the hoof; do thus eight days
together, and when you anoint him, hold an hot Fire-pan to the grievance, that
the ointment may sink in the better; after this keep him warm, and do not ride
him in a month after so as to make him sweat: this will make him both do well
and go well.

Stripe or blow upon the Eye of an Horse.
A mischance may so happen, that the Eye of an Horse by a rod or whip may
sustain very much detriment; and I have known the like evil proceeding from
Horses playing with each other or fighting.

There are abundance of Receipts for the Cure of this accidental Malady in an
Horse's Eye; wherefore, to avoid prolixity, I shall only nominate some of the
best Remedies.

First let him blood on the Eye-vein; then take strong Nettles with a little
Beer, and bruising them, strain them, and squirt a little of the liquor into
his eye twice or thrice together; then take the fine powder of Sandevoir and
blow some thereof into his Eyes, then cloth well his Eye that no cold or air
may come at it; if there be a necessity that you must ride him, then put before
his Eye a warm woollen cloth, and it will do him not much harm.

Now if the Horses Eyebrows be very sore, then take Soap-water and cold water
mixed together and wash the Eyebrows therewith; but if you perceive but little
amendment by that means, then bleed him in the Temple-veins, if he rub his
Eyes, then bleed him in the Veins under his Eyes, and wash his Eyes with cold
Soap-water*

The best way, I think, is to anoint the sore Eye three or four days together
with Capon-grease, which will mollify; then take live Honey, and with a
feather wipe the inside of the Eye, or join the juice of Plantain with your
live Honey.

Lastly, if his Eye look red by the stripe or blow, then take red Lead and
Sallet-oil, and having mingled them well together, apply it Plaister-wise unto
it.

Swelling of the Neck after Phlebotomy.
There is a four fold cause of the swelling of an Horse's Neck after breathing
a Vein.

1. When the Vein is struck through, so that some of the blood getting between
the flesh and the Vein, it there putrefieth and corrupts, and by that means
is ingendered an Impostumation.

2. It happens sometimes by the carelessness of a slovenly Farrier, who without
looking on his Fleim, having not let blood in a pretty while, never observed
that it was rusty, and so striking the Vein therewith, the Vein rankleth; and
this I can assure you is very dangerous.

3. This may come by cold suddenly striking into the Orifice.

4. And lastly, by permitting the Horse, too soon after blood-letting, to hang
down his head to feed or graze; this will cause an attraction or resorting of
humors to that place, which in a very short time will turn to an Impostume.

You need no other Cure for it but this: take Oil of Camomile and warm it, then
therewith anoint the swelling; then lay upon it some Hay wet in water, so
binding it, that it may not easily fall off; put fresh wet Hay or Litter every
day for six or seven days, in which time it will be either discust or brought
to suppuration; if brought to an head and thoroughly ripened, then with your
Lancet lay it open and let out the corruption; having cleansed it very well,
take flax and dip it in Turpentine and Hog's Grease melted together, tenting it
therewith, and by dressing it thus every day, it will be whole and perfectly
cured.

Screw.
This Screw is no more but a puzling name for the Splint, and indeed is no more
in its nature and qualification, only with this difference as to their
location, the Splint being ever on the inside of the Leg, and the screw on the
outside, which is less dangerous than the other.

Now by reason that several Horses have been found and known by several to have
had at one and the same time, and upon the same leg Leg, both these Splints
diametrically opposite one to the other, some have entertained an opinion so
absurd and ridiculous, that they have thought they have gone through the
Horse's Legs, and from hence have been vainly entitled the thorough-splint, and
thence concluding it incurable.

Now to confute the ignorance of such, and for the better information of the
Reader's judgment, be pleased to take notice, that the Shin bone is hollow and
filled with Marrow, so that there can nothing grow through it, but it must of
necessity destroy the Marrow, and so by consequence the bone can no longer
hold, but must presently break in sunder, considering that so weak a spongy
substance as a Splint shall possess the whole strength of the Leg; I hope what
is here expressed will convince every knowing person of this gross and
ridiculous vulgar Error.

Now since the Screw is made appear to be the same with the Splint, certainly
the Cure must also be the same; wherefore I refer you to the foregoing Section
of the Splint and its Remedies.

Shackle-gall.
The Shackle-gall, or Gall in the Pastern, on the Heel or upon the Cronet is
often seen in those Countries which are Champain, as Dorset-shire, Wilt-shire,
etc. and where Horses are much used to the Teather; or this Malady may happen
by the Shackle-lock.

In this case you must take Verdigriese and Honey of each an equal quantity,
and boil them together till a moity be consumed, at which time, or thereabout,
this composition will look red; then take it off the fire and set it a cooling,
after that take hereof and anoint the sore every day twice, strowing thereon
some flox that are chopped, to keep on the Salve; continue thus doing till it be
whole: this Medicine is most sovereign for the Shackle-gall, but principally
good for the Scratches.

Suppositories of all sorts, with their uses.
There are certain malignant humors in the body of an Horse, which the
strength of Nature cannot expel, and therefore must be discharged three several
ways by Art, either by Potion, Clyster or Suppository; of the two first I have
already succinctly discoursed, and therefore I shall only treat of the last
which is a Suppository, and this Suppository is no more than an Handmaid or
Preparative to a Clyster; for although the nature of a Clyster is to open, yet
can it not perform its office many times, by reason of the hardness of the
Excrements, by reason of a dry, hot and costive constitution; and therefore, to
soften the Guts, there ought to be as a forerunner, the application of a
Suppository, before either Potion or Clyster be administered.

Thus as we have related the Nature and use of Suppositories, so in the next
place it will be requisite to give you some Receipts in the due forming and
composing any Suppository.

The first and most gentle of all Suppositories is this: Take a great Candle,
of four to the pound, and cut it into twain; then take the lower or bigger part
and anoint it with fresh Butter, and so thrust it into his Fundament; as soon
as you have so conveyed it, hold his Tail to his Tuel three quarters of an
hour, by which time the Candle will be melted; after this let loose his Tail,
and ride him presently, I mean trot him up and down till he begin to evacuate;
thus by exercising him after the administration of the Suppository, you will
cause it to work the more kindly.

But if so be your Horses constitution be so weakened and debilitated that you
durst not give him any purging Medicament, then take of Salt-Nitre three
ounces, of Honey half a pound, of Wheat Flour, Anniseeds finely powdered, of
each two ounces; boil these together to a consistency, and make it into
Suppositories, and convey one of them at a time into the body of the Horse, as
you were before directed, giving him the same manner of exercise.

If you would purge Phlegm, this is a most singular and approved way: Take a
piece of Castle-soap, and with your knife shape it into the usual form of a
Suppository; and apply it according to the former directions.

Now since I have spoken of the Purgation of Phlegm, give me lieve to proceed
in my giving instructions, by such like means, how to correct the malignity or
redundancy of the other three humors or Constitutions.

And first as for Choler, use this Suppository: take of Saven an indifferent
quantity, of Stavesaker and Salt of each two ounces; Stamp these well together,
and boil them in so much Honey as may make them of that thickness fit for the
composition of Suppositories, and at your pleasure apply them as before.

For Melancholy, you may only take an angry red Onion; and having pilled and
jagged it cross-wise with your knife, thrust it into his Fundament, using him
in the same manner as before prescribed.

Lastly, if your Horse's body be overheated by superfluity of blood, then take
a pint of ordinary Honey, and boil it so thick as it is fit to be made into
Suppositories; this will so refrigerate and cool his body* that it will reduce
it into an orderly temper.

Observe that in your administration of all Suppositories, Clysters, or
Potions, you choose the morning fasting for that work, that he drink no cold
water, but warm Mashes; and lastly, that your Horse be raked before
administration of such like Purgation.

The Tongue of an Horse hurt, how cured.
It is impossible to describe how many ways the Tongue of an Horse may become
hurt and detrimented; the usual causes are an Halter, or being fiery or head
strong by holding a stiff Rein on a Bit.

The common cure is to take the juice of Celandine and though the Tongue be cut
half way through, yet if you wash it therewith ten or eleven days it will
perfectly heal it, for this Celandine conglutinates after a wonderful manner,
and will cement the lips of a wound especially in the Tongue very speedily.

Or you may use this remedy which I was taught by a very ancient French
Farrier, and one that was highly esteemed for his skill in the Reign of King
Charles the first of ever blessed memory; it is thus: take an ounce of Arman,
and roast it till it be red hot, then take it and pulverize it very finely;
having so done, take six spoonfuls of life Honey, of White Wind one quart, take
the powder and mix them together, then set it over the fire, and all the while
it is boiling be sure to stir it well, then take it off and cool it, and wash
the Tongue therewith twice a day.

Theriacum or Unguentum Theriacum, how to make it, with a character of its
Virtues and uses.
This is an Ointment so sovereign that I know not what is better for any ach in
the joints, griefs in the Hip, Stifling place, Legs, Shoulders, Pastern, or any
other part of the Leg whereby the Horse is compelled to go lame; only you must
except the back Sinew strain; the way of making this Vnguentum Theriacum is
thus.

Take of Nerve Oil, of Oil of Pamphilion and of black Soap, of each four
Ounces, of tried Hogs grease one pound, melt these, then add thereunto a
groats worth of ordinary Treacle, then take it from the fire, and stir it till
it be cold, and then its color will be dunnish, and so keep it for your use.

This you must chafe into the part grieved, or make it sink in with a hot flat
bar of Iron, as you do other Ointments.

Tetter or Ring worm.
This Tetter is called by the French the Flying worm, because the Sorrance is
so much given to spread it self; the signs are apparent.

The Cure is, take the roots of Enula Campana and red Dock, of each an equal
quantity, slice them thin, and having gotten somewhat above a pottle of Urine,
put them therein, with Bay Salt the quantity of two handfuls, let it boil till
the Moity be consumed, then take it from the fire, and being very hot wash the
Sorrance therewith, thus doing six mornings together will kill the Tetter.

Thorns in the foot, how to draw out.
Take house Snails by some called Dodmonds, and boil them in Butter, and apply
them to the foot, and they will extract or draw out any Thorn or Nail
whatsoever; of the same efficacy and power are the roots of Reeds bruised, and
in like manner applied.

To tame an unruly Horse that will not stand still to be drencht or dressed of
any grief.
Take a little sharp flint stone, and put it into one of his ears, then grasp
the Ear hard with your hand; if he will not be quiet with one, then put the
like stone into the other Ear, and that will make him stand as still as a Lamb.

Truncheons, what they are, and how to kill.
Some are of the opinion that Truncheons and the Bots are one sort of Vermin,
but they err in their judgment that so believe them, for their color is
different, and so is their abode; the Bots dwelling in the great Gut adjoining
to the fundament, and the other in the Maw only.

The Truncheons are a thick short worm, having black and hard heads, and there
is no way to remove them but by Physic, to which end, take a quart of sweet
Wort, or strong new Ale, a quarter of a pound of Fern roots, of Saven half a
pound, of Stone-crop, stamp them together, and put to them of Brimstone and of
Soot of each two spoonfuls, both well powdered, then let these be steeped in Ale
two hours, then strain it, and give him of this two hornfuls, then bridle him,
and tie him up to the Rack two hours, the next day give him these purging
Pills, take of Lard one pound, laying it in water two hours, then take nothing
but the pure fat thereof and beat it in a Stone Martar, and put thereto of
Anniseeds, Liquorish and Fenugreek, all made into powder, of each half an
ounce, Aloes powdered two drachms, and of Agarick one ounce, incorporate these
together, and of the Mass make six Pills of equal bigness, the Horse having
fasted over night give him three in the morning, the Pills being first anointed
with Honey, then keep him warm, and at night let him have a sweet Mash; three
days after give him the other three Pills, and keep him warm as before.

These Pills will so purge the bad humors which bred and nourished these
worms, that the Horse will be perfectly freed from them of what kind soever
they be, whether Bots, Truncheons, or Maw worms; you shall find them voided in
his Excrements, the most part of them still living.

Tails of Horses how to cut, or the way of making Curtails.
Foreign Nations by reason of their not exposing their Horses to so much
labor and hardship as the English are accustomed to do, seldom cut their
Horses Tails as we use to do. Neither are we wanting of reason for so doing,
for we entertain an opinion, and not without good grounds, that an Horses chine
is much stronger by cutting his Tail; now since our Horses backs are so much
employed in carrying great burdens, it is very requisite that they be dockt
with all convenience.

The manner is thus: first you shall grope with your finger and your thumb till
you find the third joint from the setting on the Horses Tail, having found it,
raise up all the hair, and turn it backward, then take a small strong Cord and
tie it about that joint, and when you and another have pulled it with all your
strength three or four times, make fast the ends of the Cord, then take a piece
of wood whose end is smooth and even, of equal height with the strunt of the
Horses Tail (and having trammelled all his four legs so that he cannot stir)
set it between the Horses hinder legs, and lay his Tail thereupon, then taking
a strong sharp knife made for that purpose, set the edge thereof as near as you
can between the fourth and fifth joint, then with a great Smiths hammer strike
upon the back of the knife and so cut the Tail asunder; if blood issue hereupon
you must tie the Cord again; if not, the Cord was well tied; then take a round
Iron of the compass of the fleshy part of the Horses Tail, and being red hot
clap it so to the Tail, that the bone may go through the cavity of the head of
the Iron: in the searing you will see the ends of the Veins start out, however
go on in searing the Tail till you think the flesh is mortified enough, and
when you think the blood cannot break through the burning then loose the Cord;
after this anoint it with Hogs grease and Turpentiue till the sore be healed.

Vives vide Avives.
Ver-volant or Ring worm.
Ver-volant or Flying Worm is a French appellation given to that Sorrance which
we call a Tetter or Ring worm.

It is caused by much heat in the blood, from whence is bred a sharp bilious
humor, and thence comes this Ver-volant or Ring worm: it most usually
afflicts the Rump, extending it self into the Tail, and frequently turns into
a Canker, not but that sometimes it seizes on other parts of the body, so
tormenting him with an intolerable Itch that by rubbing the part violently
against whatsoever he can come near, he will fetch off not only the hair but
skin and flesh too.

The signs are the falling away of his hair, his continual scrubbing, and if
gotten into the Tail, by a Scab, which if picked will run with thin kind of
water, and if let alone will canker every joint: for the prevention hereof,

Take of Precipitate two drachms, and put it into a small Vial with water,
somewhat more than will cover the powder, keeping it close stopped, and
herewith anoint the Sorrance every day, and you shall not doubt a cure.

Here note that after every time washing the sore you stop your Vial very
close, shaking it well, and so set it by till the next dressing. If you find
the cure goes but slowly on, then wash it twice a day.

But if this Tetter, Ring worm, or Ver-volant have seized any fleshy part, then
take the juice of Southern-wood, Maudlin, and Rue, of each an equal quantity
stamped and strained, and wash well and bathe the place therewith every day
twice till it be perfectly cured.

Venom drank how to cure.
An Horse may swallow poison diverse ways, as by drinking Horse-leeches, by
licking poisonous Spittle off the grass, by eating Hens-Dung, licking up a
Feather and the like, you shall know his distemper by these three signs, either
panting, swelling or scouring.

For the Cure take Sow thistle an herb so called, and having dried it, beat it
into powder, and take three spoonfuls thereof into a pint of Ale, and give it
the Horse to drink.

Veins taken up why and for what causes.
It is the opinion of most skilful Farriers that some Maladies will never be
cured but by the taking up of Veins; for if not, those Veins will so feed the
Sorrance, that unless the passage of those malignant humors be stopped the
cure will never be effected.

Now as the taking up of Veins hinders the progress of a Sorrance, so it
prevents the coming of some, which if seizing the part would never be cured
without it. For Example, the taking up the Thigh Veins will send packing
Spavens, Splints, Curbs, Kibed Heels, swelled Legs, Scratches, Malenders, and
the like: besides it eases all pains, aches, strains, and stiffness in the
limbs.

Take up the Shackle Veins, and it preventeth the Quitter bone, Ring bone,
Swelling in the lower joints, Foundrings, and the like.

Wherefore these premises considered, they are much to blame who exclaim
against the taking up the Veins, betraying rather their own ignorance and want
of experience than any just fault in the exercise thereof.

Wolfs teeth.
The Woolfs teeth are two extraordinary teeth, being small, and growing in the
upper jaws, next unto the great grinding teeth, which are so painful and
troublesome to an Horse that he cannot endure to chaw his meat, but is forced
either to let it fall out of his mouth, or else to retain it in his mouth half
chewed.

The Cure is thus: first cause the Horses head to be tied up so high to some
beam or rafter, and his mouth opened with a cord so wide, that you may with
much ease see every part thereof, then take an instrument made like a
Carpenters Gouge, and with your left hand set the edge of the tool at the foot
of the Wolfs teeth on the out side of the jaw, turning the hollow side of the
Tool downwards, holding your hand steadily, so that the tool may neither slip
nor swerve from the Teeth aforesaid; then having a Mallet in your right hand,
strike a strong stroke upon the head of the Tool, so that thereby you may
loosen the Teeth, and bend them inward, then straining the midst of your Tool
upon the Horses nether jaw, wrinch the Tooth outward, with the hollow side of
the said Tool, and so thrust it clean out of his head, which done, serve the
other Woolfs tooth on the other side in like manner, and fill up the empty
holes with Salt finely brayed.

But this is a long tedious way, and I cannot approve of it in my judgment to
come near this way I am going to prescribe, which I have frequently
experimented; and that is, when you have tied up your Horses head, or if you
please you may cast him, then open his mouth, and with a very sharp File, file
the Woolfs teeth as smooth as is possible, and then only wash his mouth with a
little Allom water.

Wildfire.
This Wildfire is a very dangerous Malady, and difficultly to be cured: before
I met with an Italian I made several attempts to cure it, but all to no
purpose; but having made trial of his Receipt I found it wonderfully
successful; it is made after this manner.

Take of living Toads five, the blackest and largest can be found, four Moles
living, seven or eight old Shoe soles, and about forty heads of Garlic
unpilled, with their heads and roots remaining, then takt four pound of the
Smoakiest and leanest Martlemas Beef, also take five quarts of Oats, and two
pound of very old Woollen rags, with a good quantity of Swallows Dung, and half
a dozen living Swallows, put all these ingredients into a new Earthen pot, big
enough to contain them; having so done, lute up the pot so close, that no air
may enter.

Now take your pot, and carry it into some void place, and there make a great
fire round about it, and keep the fire about it till it be red hot, continuing
the fire about it after it is red hot for near upon an hour, letting the fire
to go out of it self, letting the pot to stand therein till it be thoroughly
cold; then take out what is contained therein, and put it into a great Trough
so placed where no wind may come, covering the trough with a Cloth; then stamp
it well with a pound of unslaked Lime, but let him that stamps it have a care
of his eyes, and therefore a glass case would tend very much to their
preservation, having reduced it into fine powder, searce it through an hair
cloth, and so preserve the finest of the powder in a Gallipot for your future
use.



This by my own experience I have found a sovereign remedy against all Wild
fires, Running Sorrances, and Ulcers whatsoever, but you must be cautious of
applying it to fleshy places, where Veins and Sinews be, for it will burn them
asunder.

Warts in an Horses Eye.
I have often seen these Warts or fleshy Excretions, growing sometimes upon the
Eye, and sometimes upon the inside of the Eye lids.

This distemper is occasioned by a thick phlegm falling down into the Eye, by
keeping an Horse too long in a dark Stable, which in continuance of time will
bring the Eye of the Horse to a Consumption, making it grow little.

You must take this Sorrance in time, by ta^ing Roch Allom, and burn it on a
Tile stone, (...) then put as much white Copperas thereunto unburnt, and grind
them to powder, then lay a little of that powder just upon the Wart, do this
every day, and in a short time the Wart will be con^^ined.

Wens, or other Excretions in the Flesh, how to remove.
A Wen is an hard Excretion rising out of the flesh, being somewhat firm
externally, but internally toward the bottom there lodges putrfection.

The Causes hereof are several, but the most usual are some hurt, stroke,
bruise, blow, or knock of a stone; there need no other signs than the apparent
swelling.

As to the Cure, if you can, tie a thread about it, and that will eat it off;
but if you cannot come to tie any such thing, then take your Incision knife and
cut it across into four equal quarters to the very bottom, but have a care you
cut neither Vein nor Sinew, then burn off the four quarters with your
Cauterizing Iron, then heal the place with your before prescribed healing Salve.

There are again Warts or Wens which grow about the Saddle skirts, growing
betwixt two ribs, and do always proceed from old bruises.

The usual way of curing them is daily to anoint them with Hogs grease for
eight or nine days, sometimes bathing them with Wine Lees; if they come to no
head in that time then lance them downward, and tent them with Turpentine well
washed, Yolks of Eggs, and Saffron well incorporated together, renewing the
tent every day till the sore be completely healed.

But if the Wart be Spongy, you must take another course; but first let us look
into the nature hereof; a Malady must be first known what it is, before you can
apply a proper remedy.

A Spongy Wart then is a kind of Wen, which sometimes appears very big, at
other times but small, but then they are in number many, growing in Clusters.

They are occasioned by very malignant blood, such as is very bad and rank.
Where note that my advice is never to breed of that Stallion or Mare which is
naturally inclined to them; for as they themselves will never be free from
them, though the utmost of Art is used to remove them, yet still as they are
displanted in one place they will grow in another, so they will convey to their
breed what does afflict them by the indisposition of their own blood.

Now as to the Cure: first purge the Horse well; then take blood from the
Master-vein, which you find is the greatest nourisher of them; if the Wart or
Wen be a pretty distance from the skin, then take two of the longest hairs of
his Tail, and tie about it as fast as possibly you may, so that they may not
slip, in four or five days they will eat the Wen quite off; which done, take
the powder of Verdigriese and strew upon the root of the Wen or Wart, and that
will absolutely destroy the seed of its further growth; then take the green
Salve before specified and heal the Sorrance; but if you cannot come to tie it
in the manner aforesaid, then burn it off and then take away the Fire by
Turpentine and Hog's Grease.

Wounds of all sorts how cured whether new or old.
Before I give you the several remedies proper to every wound, it will be very
requisite to give you an exact account what wounds are in general, and they
are, according to the opinion of the most expert and understanding Farriers,
Solutio Continui, or the Whole parted or divided. Now the Latins make a
difference between continuus and contiguus, for continuity is the flesh of
either Lip, contiguity is when both Lips are closed; again, if there be no
solution or division, it is then rather called a Contusion than a Wound; a
Contusion or bruise is made with a blunt weapon, Wounds with sharp or piercing;
yet if any part of the whole be broken though with an Instrument that is blunt,
it may properly go under the denomination of a Wound.

Of Wounds some be hollow, others deep and hollow; if a Wound happen in a
fleshy part, so that no Sinew, Vein, Artery, Ligament, Tendon or Nerve be
lacerated, then it is called a Simple wound, or if a bone be not fractured it
is the like; but if a bone be broke or a Vein, Sinew, etc. torn, as well as the
whole divided, then it is called a Compound Wound, which is much more dangerous
and difficult to cure than the former.

If then an Horse has received a Wound in his head, or in any other part of
his body which is full of Bones, Sinews, Gristles, etc. then, according to the
opinion of the most judicious, wash the Wound well with white Wine vinegar
warmed, and whilst you are dressing the Wound, keep it warm with clothes dipped
in white Wine; after this, take your Probe and search the depth of the Wound
therewith, letting as little air as you can to enter into the orifice thereof;
having so done, take of Turpentine, Mel Rosarum, Oil of Roses of each four
ounces, with a little unwrought Wax, and having melted these together, stir
them well that they may be the better incorporated; if it be a Cut only, make a
round Plegant of soft Towe, of that thickness and length which may not only
reach the bottom, but fill up the Cavity: where note, make your Plegant
Taper-wise; for the bottom of the Wound is not so wide as the mouth or top
thereof.

If the Wound be long and large, then with a stitching-quill and a needleful of
fine Crimson silk, draw the lips thereof together, whereby the Wound will not
only heal sooner, but will leave a less scar or eyesore.

But if the hurt bear the resemblance of a narrow hole, then make a stiff Tent
of lint, so long as may reach the utmost extent of the Wound; and this Tent you
must dip in the foresaid Ointment before you put it in, then bolster the same
with a little Lint or Towe: having so done, lay over your Plegants and Tents a
Plaster made of Pitch, Rozin, Mastich, Turpentine and Hog's Grease of each as
much as you think fit, spreading it well on Leather and cover the Wound
therewith.

If it so happen that the mouth of the Wound be not so wide that the internal
corruption may have a free passage, you may (if Sinews, Veins, or Nerves do not
obstruct) lay it more open with your Lancet or Incision-knife.

If the hole be deep and in such a place that you dare not cut it, then be sure
you make your Tent full as big as the cavity is wide; let the composition
thereof be of a dry Sponge never wet, though it may be somewhat difficult to
get the Tent down, yet by wrying it to and fro, it will enter to the bottom at
the last; thus dress the Wound twice every day, mundifying the part every time
with white Wine lukewarm: now the reason of using a dry Sponge for a Tent is
this, (it being first anointed with the aforesaid Ointment) it will draw and
suck up what ever filth or corruption there is within, not leaving any thing
that is foul to annoy the part or obstruct the Cure; as you shall perceive it
to heal, so lessen or contract your Tent, and leave not off tenting it as long
as the Orifice will admit of one; otherwise by hasty skinning of your wound,
you will make it turn into a Fistula.

If your Wound be green and but small or very inconsiderable, then take Soap
and unslaked Lime, and work them into body, and having spread it Plaister-wise,
first wash the green Wound with white Wine warmed, then lay on the Plaster:
you may dry it up presently with a Marrow-bone burnt, and take the powder
thereof and straw it on the Wound.

For any Wound whatsoever, old or new, this green Ointment following will prove
a speedy and infallible Cure.

Take of Water-betony, Comfry, Mugwort, red Sage, Jerusalem-sage, Sothernwood,
Rue and of Rosemary of each two handfuls; boil all these in a quart of
May-butter, with the like quantity of Mutton-suet; having boiled a while, take
it off and strain it, and preserve it for your use; it will last a whole
twelvemonth.

Now if the original of the Wound be some old Impostumation, then your best way
will be to take three great Onions, and taking out the Cores, put in the room
of them some Bay Salt, and a little Saffron, and so roast them in hot Embers,
and being hot lay them Plaister-wise to the Wound, laying on fresh every day
till you have healed the Wound.

If you find there be too great a resort and conflux of humors to the Wound
you would heal with all convenient speed; then take two pints of Tartar, and
put therein the quantity of an Egg of Bole-armoniack, an handful of Bay Salt,
an handful of great Bur-dock-leaves or the roots, wash the swelled places round
about every day, and this will divert the humors and facilitate the Cure.

This is another most excellent Defensive, which will repel those humors that
hinders the healing of the Wound: Take a pint of Verjuice, and infuse therein
three penniworth of Camphire cut very small; boil them together near half an
hour, (you may double or treble the quantity) and when it is cold preserve it
for your use; wash the Wound with this daily.

If the upper skin of the wound be putrified, and you would have it removed;
then take a Plaster of Cow Dung boiled in milk, and lay it to the Wound, and
in a day and a night it will not leave any thing vile or superfluous about the
Wound.

If an Horse has received a Wound about the Belly, so that the flesh is very
much rent; then take a pint of white Wine-vinegar, the sharpest that is to be
gotten, and boil in it a quarter of a pound of Bole-armoniack; having boiled a
little while, take it off, and then put therein a small quantity of fresh
Butter and bathe the place grieved once in two days.

If your Horse be staked, or wounded with a Fork; first wash the Wound very
well with Butter melted and some Vinegar mixed therewith; then take a Clout tied
to a stick and dipped in Linseed-oil and run to the bottom of the Wound; anoint
it well, and in a little time this alone will cure it: if perchance the wind
should get into it, so as to make it swell, then anoint the swelling with the
Oil of Populeon.

To conclude, take some general Receipts for the Cure of all sorts of Wounds
whatsoever, according to the practice and experience of ancient and modern
Farriers.

For the Cure of any Wound whatsoever, take four Ounces of Butter, Tar and
black Soap of each two ounces, with a little Turpentine; boil all these
together, excepting the Soap only, which you must put in after the rest are off
the fire; with this Ointment dress any Cut whatever.

Another.
Take Wormwood, Marjoram, Pimpernel, Calamint, Olibanum, and beat them all into
fine powder; then take Wax and Barrows-grease and boil them on a soft fire to
an Ointment, and with this dress the Wound.

Another.
This I shall commend to you from my own experience; Take Turpentine, Honey,
Hog's Grease, Wax and Sheep-suet of each an equal quantity; melt them well
together till they become a Salve; but if the Horse be staked, as I said
before, then cast him, and pour into his Wound Butter scalding hot, letting him
lie so long till you know it is gone down into the bottom of the wound; and do
this once a day.

If you would keep a Wound open, you need do no more than put in the powder of
green Copperas; but if you would make a speedy Cure of it, then take
Wheat Flour and Honey well beaten together to a Salve and that will do it,
observing to dress the Wound once a day therewith.

Wind-galls.
The Wind-gall is a little Bladder full of corrupt jelly, growing on each side
of the Master-sinew of the Leg a little above the Pastern, these Bladders being
not always of one size, nor of equal number; in the Summer time, when the
Weather is hot, and the ways by the heat of the Sun adusted, these Wind-galls
do so afflict Horses that they are not able to go without halting, and perform
their journey with much dolor and pain.

The Causes whence they proceed are excessive labor and pains taking in the
heat of Summer, causing the dissolution of some humors to flow into the
concav'd places about the nether joints, and there they settle and congeal,
being only covered over with a thin skin like a Bladder.

For the Cure take this Balm, which you must make thus: Take half a pound of
the best Piece-grease, and having melted it, take it off, and put it into three
ounces of the Oil of Spike, and one ounce of the Oil of Origanum; incorporate
these together, and preserve it in a Gallipot for your use.

When you have occasion to make use hereof, make it very hot and rub the
Sorrance therewith, chafing it in with Elbow-grease, and to help your pains
taking, hold a bar of hot Iron before the part; do thus but once in two days,
though you may rub with your hand the part twice a day.

Another excellent Receipt for the same.
First heat the Wind-gall with an hot Pressing-iron; then with your Fleim vent
it in several places; then take half a spoonful of Nerve-oil, a spoonful of
Salt, a penny weight of Verdi-griese and the White of an Egg; beat all to a
Salve, and dipping Flax therein apply it to the grief.

In former times Farriers were wont to take a Knife and open it to the length
of a Bean, piercing no further than through the skin, that thereby they might
thrust out the Jelly, which is like the White of an Egg, then take the Yolk of
an Egg and as much Oil de Bay as may equalize a French Nut, and by mixing them
make a Plaster, and apply it to the Sore; the Cure is effected in three or
four days.

Those in our later times take up the Master-vein, on the inside of his Legs,
suffering him to bleed only from below; then having put up the Vein, cover all
his Leg over with a Plaster of Wine-lees and Wheat Flour mingled together,
and roll it with a long Rowler, dressing him thus once a day.

Others take the roots of Cummin, and beat them well with Salt, and lay that to
the Wind-gall. Or take an ounce of white Wax, and the like quantity of Rozin,
two ounces of raw Honey, three ounces of Swines-grease, two ounces of the Oil
of Yolks of Eggs, five ounces of Oil de Bay; mix these together and strain
them, then rub herewith the Wind-gall, chafing it in, and if you make it sink
in with an hot Iron it will be the better, and will speedily cure the
Wind-gall; this I have experienced, and find it to be an excellent Remedy for a
Wind-gall.

I will add but one more, and I have done, which is this: with a fine Lancet
open the Wind-gall, not making the Orifice bigger than what may be convenient
to give passage to the white Jelly therein contained; having thrust it forth so
that none remain within, lap a wet woollen cloth about the Sorrance, and with a
Taylor's Goose rub upon the cloth, till you have made it suck in all the
moisture from the Wind-gall, so that the Wind-gall be completely dry; then take
of Pitch, Rozin and Mastich of each an equal quantity, and being very hot daub
it all over the Wind-gall, clapping good store of flox upon it of the same
color the Horse is of; then either let him run to grass or stay at home, it is
indifferent, so that you let the Plaster stay on till it fall off by its own
accord, and the Cure will be completed.

By way of caution, take this for a safe Rule, which if not observed will prove
dangerous; use neither Arsnick nor Resalgar to a Wind-gall, for if you do, the
Wind-gall may disappear for a time, but it will return again, neither must you
burn much, and pray forbear to make any great Incision, for any of these will
so convert into hardness the soft substance of the Wind-gall, that the Horse
will become incurably lame.

White-water how to make it.
Because, in several places of this Book, the white Water is made mention of,
and prescribed to be drunk in physicking when other Waters are forbidden,
unless a warm Mash, or so, I thought good in this place to give you an account
what it is; to say the truth, it is nothing else but insipid water made hot in
a clean Kettle, and being hot enough, it is my custom to put therein a quantity
of Wheat-bran, or Barley-bran will do as well,

Now the reason why I would have this white Water used in the administration of
Physic is upon a triple account; first to prevent giving cold water to drink,
which may prove dangerous: next, Mashes are not always to be had, or not so
proper for the Malady; and lastly, to keep his bodily heat from being
disturbed, and therefore you must give him this white Water blood-warm.

Weakness in the Back.
I have already treated of some sort of weaknesses happening to an Horses back,
but what I shall now speak of differs from them all; for this weakness is a
kind of biting or fretting of the Reins, occasioned by the conflux of many
malignant humors flowing abundantly to that place, depriving the hinder parts
of the Horse both of feeling and strength, in such grievous manner, that the
Horse cannot keep his feet, but will immediately fall to the ground; when they
overflow very much, they will make resort to the Heart, and will so suffocate
the same, as to procure sudden death, or at least death in four hours time.

The most approved Remedy that I can hear of is, to take good store of blood
from the Neck-vein, after that draw his back with an hot Iron, right out on
both sides of the Ridge of his back from the pitch of the Buttock unto an
handful within the Saddle, and then again overthwart, and let every line be an
inch one from the other, but do not let the strokes be deep, and no more burnt
than that each may look yellow; having so done, cause him to swim in some deep
pond or river, then rowel him upon the Haunches, near unto the Huckle-bones;
after this anoint the Sorrance with Hog's Grease, and three-leaved grass stamped
together; you must continue anointing him herewith till his Back be perfectly
cured.

Water-farcion.
An Horse comes often to be troubled with the Water-farcion by his mere feeding
only, that is to say, in low Marshy watery grounds, and by his grazing in places
where the grass grows but a little above the surface of the water, whereby he
cannot but lick up the water as he feeds, and hence comes the swelling that
is so often seen about an Horse's chaps and belly.

The Cure must be wrought thus: Take an Iron made into the fashion of a Fleim,
and heating it red hot, strike through the skin and no further upon the
swelling, but no where else, and let those pricks be several; from each stroke
or prick you shall see issue a great quantity of yellow gray oily water: having
let it run a while, wash it with Chamber-lye and Salt, as hot as the Horse can
endure it; thus wash the water Farcion but four or five times and it will
certainly cure it.

This washing serves for an ordinary swelling, but if the swelling be very
great, as it often happens, then take strong stale Urine, Salt and
Bolearmoniack the quantity of a large Nutmeg, and having boiled them together
wash the Sorrance therewith.

The Signs to know this Water-farcy from a Pocky-farcy are these, the swelling
will be in great bags as big as a two-penny Loaf, sometimes under his belly, at
other times under his jaws, and about his chaps. Where note the more you work
any Horse that is troubled with any sort of Farcy, the sooner you shall
complete the Cure, and the Horse will thrive the better.

And you need not to fear working your farcied Horse with another; but let them
neither stand nor feed together.

There is besides this Water-farcy a Button-farcy, and the signs to distinguish
it from any other sort are bunches and knots, lying in burbles in the skin,
some as big as Cherry-stones, others as big as Hazel-nuts.

The Cure must be effected after this manner; first take good store of blood
from both sides the Horses Neck; having so done, take some Housleek; beat it
and strain it through a fine linen cloth, and the juice thereof convey into
his ears; then take an ounce of Aristolochia and beat it small or grate it, the
tops of Rue one handful, Hog's Grease the quantity of an Egg; beat these three
last into a Salve, and after the Housleek dividing these into two equal
proportions, put the one part into one ear, and the other part into the other
ear; and having put some wool after it to keep in the Medicine; stitch up the
ears with a needle; then with the point of your Incision-knife make a small
hole in his forehead, and then with your Cornet raise the skin from his
forehead the breadth of your hand round about the hole; then take a red
Dock-root and slice it, and put three pieces thereof into the hole, which will
draw a great deal of putrefaction from it, and that very putrefaction or
corruption that comes from it will scald the hair away where it runs; when the
strength of the root is gone, it will drop out of it self, and when it is dropped
out, anoint the place with fresh Butter, and then clap thereon a Paister of
Burgundy-pitch to keep out the wind; let him, after this, stand upon the bit
seven or eight hours, and then shall you see him foam and champ as if he were
ridden, let what you put into his ears stay there eight and forty hours; taking
this course, the knobs or knots will fall in a very little time, and the hair
will come again on the forehead.

Wens in the Neck.
I have treated somewhat already of Wens, but nothing of Wens in the Neck;
these Wens are bunches or kernels upon the skin, being a superfluous
excrescence, the inside whereof is sometimes grisly, sometimes spongeous, and
sometimes yellow, like rusty Bacon, with some white grains intermixed; their
magnitude is uncertain, sometimes great and sometimes small, and are sometimes
painful and sometimes not at all.

They are caused several ways: sometimes they proceed from cold, or drinking
extraordinary cold water; but principally they are occasioned by pinching or
galling of an Halter or Collar.

The Cure is thus: Take an hot Iron, and therewith burn away all superfluous
flesh; then heal up the sore with the powder of Honey and Lime mixed together;
this is a very speedy Cure.

The Remedy that is generally practiced is this; Take of Mallows, Sage, and red
Nettles of each one handful; boil them in running water, and put thereunto a
little Butter and Honey; when you have so boiled the herbs that they become
soft, take them out and bruise them very well; then add thereunto Oil de Bay
two ounces, and of Hog's Grease two ounces; warm these together over a fire, and
having thoroughly incorporated them together, spread it on a piece of Leather,
about the bigness of the Wen, and lay it thereunto as hot as the Horse can
endure it: every day lay on a fresh Plaster for nine days together; if it come
not to suppuration in that time, lance it from the midst of the Wen downwards;
so deep that the corruption may be discovered and let out; that done; heal it
up thus:

Take of Turpentine four ounces, and having washed it nine times in fair water,
mingle therewith the Yolk of an Egg and some English Saffron beaten to powder,
then take a Tent of Flax, and dipping it into this Ointment, tent the Sorrance
therewith.

Yellows vide Glanders.
Yard Mattering.
The Yard of an Horse will often matter by over spending in the covering Mares,
and by his own heat it will turn into the Running of the Reins*

The signs of this distemper are the swelling of his Yard, dropping with yellow
matter, and when he offers to stale it is with great difficulty and pain.

For the Cure, you must first purge him very well, then take Roch Allom one
ounce, and white one pint, boil them till the Allom be dissolved, then inject
this with a Syringe thrust up into the Yard a considerable way, this must be
done three or four times a day, and it will be a cure.

If his Yard be fur'd and foul so that he pisseth in the Cod, take fresh Butter
and White-wine-Vinegar and melt it, then draw out his Yard, doing off the filth
with your hand, and then wash it clean with the Vinegar and Butter, and squirt
some thereof into the Yard with a Syringe. Probatum.

CHAP. XXVI.
How to make an old Horse seem young.
IF you have an old Horse you have a desire to part withal, and would sell him
for a good price, first put him into good case, then next counterfeit the mark
in his mouth, which you may do thus: take a small Iron about the thickness of a
Goose quill, or not so thick, and heating it red hot burn a little black hole
in the tops of the two outmost teeth, of each side the nether chap before next
the Tushes, and then with an Awl blade prick it, making the shell fine and
thin, then with a sharp scraping Iron make all his Teeth white and clean;
having done this, take a fine Lancet, and above the hollow of the Horses eyes
which are shrunk down, make a little hole only through the skin, and raising it
up put in a quill that is very small, as a Duck or Ravens quill, and then blow
the skin full of wind till all the hollowness be filled up; then taking out the
quill, lay your finger on the hole a little while, and the wind will stay in,
by which means to all outward appearance the Horse will seem but six years old
at the utmost.

How to make Hair slick and smooth, and though hard and rough before, how to
make it even and soft.
If you would speedily make an Horses coat smooth, slick, soft, and shining, be
sure that you first with good store of clothing keep the Horse warm at heart;
for this you must observe, that the least internal cold will so operate on the
external parts of an Horses body, that the hair will stare after a very strange
manner; next cause him to sweat often, for that will raise up the dust and
filth, which causes his coat to be both foul and hard. Observe, when your
Horse is in his greatest sweat, take an old blade of a sword or Sithe, and
turning the edge toward the hair, scrape or curry away all the white foam,
sweat, or whatsoever filth shall be raised up, by so doing in a very little
time you will cause his coat to be both smooth and even.

Or you may effect your desires this way, when at any time you shall have
occasion to open a Vein preserve some of your Horses blood, and therewith rub
him all over, letting the blood to remain on his coat eight and forty hours,
then curry and dress him well, and this will not only make the hair lie even,
but shine like Jett.

How to take off Hair from any part of an Horse.
Take half a pound of unfleckt Lime, and boil it till a fourth part be
consumed, then put thereunto an Ounce of Orpiment, then take hereof and spread
it on Leather, and lay it to that part of the Horse from whence you would have
hair taken, this in six hours will take the hair quite away.

Or you may take Rust and Orpiment, and whilst it is scalding hot wash the part
therewith, and in a very little time the hair will fall away.

There may be necessary occasions for the use of either of these medicines, but
I would not advise you to abuse it as some have done, and have been justly
hanged for their pains, that is, they have by these means taken out a star in
the forehead of an Horse they have stolen, or some observable mark about his
body, and have made hair grow of another color in the place, by which means
the right owner knew not his own Horses when he saw them. See more of this in
the foregoing Sections of making artificial Stars.

How to hinder an Horse from neighing either at home or abroad.
Give me leave to tell you that the art of keeping of an Horse from neighing at
any time is of excellent use, especially when upon service in the Wars you
would not be discovered by the Horses neighing or making a noise; thus it is
done, take a woolen cloth, and tie it fast in many folds about the midst of
your Horses tongue, and believe this, if not from my experience, yet from your
own you may, as long as the tongue is so tied, so long will the Horse be
restrained from neighing or making any extraordinary noise with his voice.

How to make a tired Jade go forward.
It is a very usual thing for an Horse of a naughty nature, and dull spirit to
be soon restiff, or so tired that he will not go one foot farther, though it be
not on a journey; nay sometimes this ill quality proceeds from a certain
sullenness: to cure him of this fault make a running suickle of a small cord,
and put it about his Cods and Stones, so that it may not easily slip, then draw
the rest of the cord between the girths and the Horses body, bringing it up
just between the Horses fore legs, and as you sit in the saddle hold the end of
the cord in your hand, when you perceive him to begin to grow restiff, then by
pulling the cord, cramp him by the Stones, and by that means you will force him
to go forward, and by thus using him fourteen or fifteen days he will lose that
evil quality of standing stock still.

If your Horse upon the road begin to faulter and will not go forward, take two
or three small pebbles, and put them into each ear, and you shall find that he
will speedily mend his pace:

But if you would preserve your Horse from tyring, after the first days
journey, coming to your Inn at night cause him first to be very well rubbed
down, then take a quart of strong Ale, and put therein an Ounce of very fine
powder of Elicampane, and having brewed them together, give it your Horse for
to drink, in the morning provender him very well, and give him withal some
more of the Elicampane.

I have known those who have only tied a bunch of Pennyroyal to the mouth of a
bit or Snaff, and by the comfort that the Horse has received thereby, he has
performed his journey with wonderful alacrity.

Others take very good Virginia Tobacco, and putting it into a glass close
stopped, dry it against the Sun, then pound it very small, and mingle it with an
equal quantity of Cockle shells, then with the Oil of Dill and Oil of Cloves,
make the powder into Paste, then make it into balls about the bigness of
Walnuts, and so keep them close in a Gally pot; when you travel carry some of
these with you, and as you find your Horse begin to tire, give him one thereof
at a time.

But the best receipt I have met withal is, when you find your Horse to tire to
take off his Saddle, and with an herb called Arsmart rub his back all over very
hard, then lay some Arsmart under the Saddle, then ride him gently, and if
there be any Vigor left it will make him go on apace.

How to make an Horse to follow his Master, or though he be mixed amongst a
multitude, yet to find him out amongst them all, and challenge him.
For an Horse to distinguish his Master amongst a number of people when he gets
into the crowd seems a very wonderful thing, and indeed it is no less for an
irrational creature so to do, or contrary to the nature of the beast to follow
his owner is very strange, yet frequent experience gives us to understand that
it has been done; and thus you must do, if you would have the like performed.

Take a pound of Oat meal, and put thereto a quarter of a pound of Honey, and
half a pound of Lunarce, and make a Cake thereof, and put it into your bosom,
as near your Arm pit as you can, then apply your self to some bodily exercise
till you sweat, then rub the Cake upon the sweat, having so done, restrain your
Horse from all sorts of food for twenty four hours; after the expiration of
that time give your Horse the before mentioned Cake to eat, let him digest it
well, and then turn your Horse loose, and you will find that he will follow
you; but if you perceive it is but with some indifferency, then you must renew
the Philtre, that is to say make another Cake, and doing therewith as you did
before, give it him to eat, and then try him again, and then you shall find he
will (like a Dog that has lost his master) hunt you up and down when he has
lost you, and though you should be environed with never so great a multitud he
will know you from the rest; every time he thus finds you out spit in his
mouth, and anoint his tongue with your Spittle; this will so engage him as
never to forsake you.

How to make an Horse exceeding nimble at the Spur.
If you find your Horse of a dull sloathful nature, or that he is wearied and
tired through travail or some other means, then shave him on both sides, the
breadth of the palm of your hand, just upon the spurring places, then with a
Lancet make half a dozen small Orifices on both sides, then raising the skin
from the flesh, put into each hole some burnt Salt; this will make the sore
rankle, and so let it remain three days, then mount him and spur him well in
the sore places, after this wash the sore with stale Urine, Salt, and Nettles
boiled together, this will cause the spurring places to smart so grievously
that he will never abide the spur after.

To make the Sore whole take Honey, and anoint his sides, or rub his sides with
the powder of glass and it will work the same effect.

How to make Hair grow soon, thick and long.
To make hair grow long where it is short, thick where it is thin, or very soon
in any bare place, is an art that must not be slighted, since the want of hair
is a great deformity and eyesore to any Horse: to the intent you may supply
such defects you must take this course: get the Urine of a young Lad or Boy,
and therewith first wash the bare place; after that take Lie made of unfleckt
Lime, Ceruss, and Litharge, and with it wash the aforesaid place often, and it
will quickly procure Hair to grow, not only long but thick.

This is an excellent way, but there are several others not much inferior to
it, for variety sake I shall here insert some of the best.

Take Agrimony pounded and infuse it in Goats milk, and therewith wash that
place whereon you would have the Hair speedily to grow.

Or take the Dung of Goats, Allom, Honey, and Swines blood, incorporate these
well together by stirring them over a fire, and when well imbodyed, take
thereof and anoint thee bare place therewith.

Some take Nettle seed bruised, with Honey and Salt mixed; others the root of a
white Lilly beaten, and boiled in Oil; others the juice of a long Onion, or the
juice of Radishes; others Tar, Oil Olive and Honey boiled together; lastly,
others take the soot of a pot or kettle, and mingling it with Oil and Honey
anoint the bare place; but in my opinion, and according to my long experience
there is nothing more efficacious for this purpose than to take green Wallnut
shells and burn them to powder, and mix the powder with Honey, Oil, and Wine,
and anointing the place therewith, you will find an increase of hair even to
wonder.

How to fatten a lean sickly Jade in a fortnight that he shall yield a good
price in the Market, and indifferently well perform a journey, if not too hard
ridden.
Since this art of quick fatning poor hunger-starved, sickly, and diseased
Horses has been found out, many and several cheats have thereby been put upon
the buyer, purchasing Horses fair to the Eye, which in a little time after have
discovered themselves to be what they are, infirm and only boulster'd up by
art, and not worth the riding.

The Receipt is thus: take of Wheat meal a sufficient quantity, of Cummin seeds
two Ounces, of Anniseeds a quarter of a pound, of Carthamus two drachms, of
Brimstone two Ounces, of Sallet Oil a pint and half, a quart of Honey, and of
White Wind a pottle, first take your hard Simples and pulverize them, then
commix them with your humid Simples, work them together into a paste, and make
thereof balls or loaves as big as a penny white loaf: Mornings and Evenings
when you water your Horse dissolve in his cold water one of these balls or
loaves, crumbling it between your hands, and let him drink thereof; if you find
that he refuse it by being not accustomed to the like taste, let him fast till
he be willing to drink thereof, and so will he be glad to take it at last:
after twice tasting hereof he will refuse any other liquor for it.

By the way let me tell you, though Jockeys and Horse-coursers make use hereof
to cheat and abuse people, yet it is a most sovereign Medicine, not only to
fatten any Horse, but is also a most admirable scourer, not only feeding, but
cleansing the body from all peccant and malignant humors whatsoever.

What things are to be observed by every Horse-courser before he lay out his
money in the purchase of an Horse or Mare.
Mark well the feet of that beast you intend to buy, and see that they be
little, for broad feet ever are the tokens of dullness; let his Pasterns be
short, his legs large, broad and flat, a thick large breast, with well raised
shoulders, and a quick full eye.

With your hand feel between his chaps whether the Horse has any Glanders, or
that he be not troubled with a Curb, Splent or Spaven, and by the waving of
your hand to and fro before his eyes you will soon discover any impediment in
his eyes.

The mark in his mouth will discover his age if he be not above seven years
old, but if that do not visibly appear, feel all down his Tail, if his Strunt
be smooth without any knobs at the end you may adventure on him, having not
seen half his best days; but on the contrary, the knobs do show he has not
many good days to come.

Now if you would discover any secret malady or imperfection lurking internally
and not discoverable by the eye, then let him run at the halters length till he
sweat, and he will discover an old cold by his cough, and by his drawing of his
breath, that he is either pursy or short winded, or if he be lame you will find
where the grief lies by the favoring of one leg or other.

Take special notice when you ride him whether he frequently turn up the white
of his Eye, or lays his Ears to his pole; if he do, my life for yours, he is
a sullen ill conditioned Jade, if he be Wall-eyed he is so much the worse: but
if when you come into the stable you perceive the Horse to stare nimbly about
him sometimes on this side and sometimes on that, and then again quite behind,
it argues he is lively, full of mettle, and has a good stomach, then take him
out and riding him observe to turn him as short as you can, by which means you
will discover whether he be swayed in the back or not, and if the hair in the
spurring place be white, the spur has been often used in that place to correct
his sloth and heaviness.

The most marketable Horse, and the fittest for all sorts of business is one
that freely eats his provender, has broad loins, strong feet, his pace is
easy, his nature gentle, and is swift and light of foot. Now take this for an
infallible rule in travail, that if upon some occasion you stop him in his
course, he fall a pawing with his foot, it argues much impatiency in him for
being detained, and undoubtedly will perform his journey very well.

What is to be observed concerning Mares in general.
First, if you intend your Mare shall go through with her conception, give her
convenient rest after her covering, and do not hazard the loss of the seed
injected by travel.

Be not over covetous of having too many colts from one Mare if you rate her at
a good value, and let her not be covered till she be about five years old, and
let it be before the full of the Moon, and when the sign is female if you
desire a Male Colt, if a female let the sign be male, and after the full.

To facilitate the conception set the Horse with the Mare two or three days by
times, but suffer them not to copulate, only do this to heighten their desire
to each other; after this let him cover her, and immediately after he has
withdrawn himself from her, pour a pail of cold water on the ridge of the Mares
back, this will make her knit the better, but suffer them not afterward to
come together.

The way to know whether your Mare be with Foal is to throw some water into her
ear, if she only shake her head and not her body too, she is then with foal,
otherwise not.

If you would have your Colts be good Trotters, let your Stallion be of the
Neapolitan breed or a Barbary; as for Amblers, there is none better than your
Spanish Jennet or the Irish Hobby.

Rules and principles to be observed both in Colts and Horses very remarkable
and worthy of due consideration.
Of all beasts whatsoever the Legs of a Colt grow least; wherefore if his Legs
be long, you may conclude of the length and height of his stature, and by the
bigness of the Legs his strength and greatness is to be known: House not your
Colts till they are three years old.

When your Colt is fit to back, take notice if he have a long back; if so, then
fit him with a large Saddle, and before you mount him make him thoroughly
acquainted with the Saddle, putting it often on, and taking it as often off;
girt him by degrees, till you can make him endure a strait girting; let him
smell to the Saddle, and dangle the Stirrops, to make him the more familiarly
acquainted therewith.

Forget not to anoint your Bit, when you first put it into your Horses mouth
with Honey and the powder of Liquorish, or Honey and Salt will do as well; but
be sure at no time that you put any Bit or Snaffle into your Horses mouth
without washing it.

Mount not your Horses back before you have the Bridle-reins fast in your hand,
and do not, when you alight at the brow of an hill, drive your Horse before
you, lest you run the hazard of losing the reputation of a prudent Horseman.

If your Horse be fiery and full of metal, do not fret or be angry with him,
but win him by patience and fair means; but if you find him dull and sluggish
quicken him with your Spur, with this proviso, that having spurred him much, you
will, when you find convenience, rub his Spurgalls with water and salt.

Now as as to Horses, several Countries produce Horses of different natures: as
for example, as Mr. Markham observes, the Greek or Turkish Horse is of an
excellent constitution, being swift, bold, well-headed, tall and strong. The
Arabian Horse is as swift as the wind and very beautiful to the eye.

The African or Barbary is full of courage, swift and nimble, and will not with
the Turkey Horse either deserve or endure much beating. The Friezland Horse is
fiery, yet not well conditioned, but as for your Flemish Horse he is the worst
of any. I cannot but approve of the Spanish Jennet being very good, swift and
light of foot, but the Neapolitan for all uses is most excellent and beautiful;
now for great burdens, constant labor and long travel the English Horse
exceeds all that have been named hitherto.

Your Irish Horse is generally well breasted, but I never saw any but what had
thin and very uncomely buttocks, being evil-natured, very sullen, weak and
unfit for much labor; those that are tolerably good are very scarce through
the whole Country.

The most experienced Horsemens observations.
Your Horse being in health, feed him with such dry meats as shall not swell
his body, as Straw, which is excellent good to take up the belly of a running
Horse, Hay, Oats, sometimes a little Wheat, Beans, Barley, bread made of Beans
or Pease, neither are Fitches to be despised, and in the giving them observe
this order; first give him some hay, then water, and lastly his grain or
provender.

When you are upon a journey, look first to your Horse before you look to your
self, seeing that he be well rubbed down, well littered with fresh straw, and be
sure that you feed your Horse betimes, for all night, that it may the better
concoct, and that he may the sooner take his rest. I would not advise you to
give him of Provender a greater quantity than three pints at a time; there is
nothing that feeds better and fattens more speedily than bread made either of
Beans, Pease or Fitches well cleansed.

If you would have your Horse to feed with an extraordinary appetite, take Wine
and Salt and rub his mouth therewith.

In a journey, whether at baiting or at night, coming to your Inn, let not your
Horse either eat or drink whilst he is hot, but first let him be reduced to his
proper temperament.

In the extremity of heat and cold, the labor of your Horse must be always
moderate.

Take not, after travel, the Saddle off your Horses back too suddenly.

Whatever you do, let no Poultry come within your Stable; for should your
Horse lick up a feather, or swallow any of their dung, which casually fell into
the Hay or Provender, it is of a dangerous consequence.

Make it frequently your business to ride your Horse on stony ground, for by so
doing you will reap the benefit of hardening his Hoofs, which will the better
enable him to travel.

Have a care of letting your Horse stand near any Mud-wall, for I have known
Horses, not a few, which have coveted to eat thereof to their very great
prejudice; and let his bed be made not of Barley-straw, for some Horses love to
eat thereof, which is unwholesome; but let it be of Wheat, or rather of Oaten
Straw; for that is soft, and if eaten very wholesome.

It is the opinion of all, that to sprinkle water upon the Hay you give your
Horse is wholesome, and most sovereign to mingle Fenugreek with his Provender,
the first is good for the wind and the latter for the worms.

If your Horse happen to be brought very low and much impoverished by too much
labor or some great surfeit, get Mares-milk and give it him eight days
together, and you will perceive a very sensible recovery.

The best hours for watering are between seven and eight in the morning, and
four and five in the evening.

You are to take notice, that an Horse takes much delight in rubbing and
combing, and therein he seems to be sensible what is good for himself; for it
preserves his health, and keeps the strength of body and legs.

In the Canicular or Dog Days, you must have a special care that you do not
ride your Horse frequently into the water to qualify or allay his natural or
any other contracted heat.

Be mindful of often picking and cleansing the bottoms of your Horses feet, and
stuff them well with Ox or Cow Dung, and now and then anoint his hoofs with
fresh Grease and Turpentine.

When you ride, forget not to look often to your Saddle, and see that it wring
or pinch him not, and that his shoes be fast on, and that there be no Gravel,
Stub or Nail got into his foot.

Lastly, according to Northern observation, use no other walking than your self
upon your Horses back, that is to say, you must ride him gently to his Inn, so
cooling him by degrees; when in the Stable, shake Litter under him, and see
that every part of his body be rubbed, till it be dry, not omitting his head;
then unbridle him, and give him Hay, but slack no girt in two or three hours,
and when he drinks, let it be but little for fear of too hasty cooling his
Stomach.

Some general Observations on a Smithfield-Jockey.
The Smithfield Jockeys, as some sort of Horses, are much the better, either
for the breed or Country from whence they came.

There are several Jockeys in every Country of England, but none so expert as
such as were spawned in York shire, who have generally such a natural love for
their Horses, that their inclinations lead them to ride before they can well
go: this makes them generally more knowing in Horses than others, not only as
to riding, but as to the several humors and constitutions.

It is proverbially said, that Shake a Bridle over a Yorkshire-Tike's grave and
he will rise again; I dare not justify the truth hereof, but this I may, That
many of them will not long be without an Horse if they have but money enough to
purchase a Bridle; as for a Saddle, they can make that themselves, so little
(and yet so commodious) that they can carry it in their breeches without
discovery.

Further, to prove them Horsemen even from their Cradles; look into the Inns,
especially of London, and for one Hostler of any other Country, you shall find
ten either of Yorkshire or Lancashire; and they are naturally very subtle and
crafty.

To give you a particular account of the humors and practices of these Jockeys
and their Hostlers, would be a task which would take up too much time, and
would afford matter enough to swell a volume from it self. I shall therefore
briefly give you an account of so much as I shall think convenient.

How to cheat by the mark in an Horses mouth.
This Trick is used by Horse-coursers to make an artificial mark appear in the
Horses mouth, which can hardly be discerned from what is real and natural, and
thus they do it; when an Horse is grown very old, they first make him very fat,
which they do with much ease and in a short time, either by mingling Carrets
among their Oats, or by Markham's fatning Balls, or several other ways they
have; and having so done, they then take an Awl or Bodkin, and having wrought
the Horses Tooth therewith, they clap in a piece of Sheath; this will look so
like the natural mark that several men of excellent judgment in Horses, nay
Horse-coursers have been deceived thereby, as I. P. and L. S. can testify by
woeful experience, at an Horse-fair in Northamptonshire.

How to make a dull heavy, resty Jade so to caper and prance both abroad and in
the Stable, as if he were all mettle and spirit.
Your Jockeys have an excellent and present Remedy for a dull and heavy Jade,
and that is by beating of him in this manner: they first take him out of the
Stable in a morning, and having gotten ready a good Bulls-pizle or a smart
Whip, they beat and whip the Horse unmercifully; then they turn him into the
Stable, and in the afternoon they come to him again, and there beat him again
in the same manner as they had done abroad; and thus they fail not to do twice
a day morning and evening for six or seven days; after this, when ever they
come into the Stable, they whip him more or less: the Horse being thus
accustomed to continual whipping, will dance and caper when ever he sees his
Master come into the Stable; but the cunning Jockey will never use his whip or
rod when he brings any Customer to look upon him, that he may infuse a belief
that this prancing is the effect of his great mettle, and not of the fear of
punishment.

Besides; that he may thus caper when he is ridd in Smithfield, the Boy that
rides him (as commonly they make use of such Cattle for their purpose) has
frequently a fling at him before he is put to sale; this makes the poor
beastfling and flounce, when the Boy mounts him, as being too sensible of what
punishment he is to undergo.

Thus many men are abused; for though the Horse thus prance the length of
Smithfield, the Buyer will find him in half a score miles riding that he will
not stir one foot further.

A way to make an Horse go very merrily without Rod, Whip or Spur, a little
way, although he be a mere Jade.
Take a quarter of a peck of Oats, and take the root of Elicampane, and having
washed it very clean, cut it small and mingle it with the Oats, and let him eat
hereof the night before your Market; if you add a spoonful of Honey thereunto
it will be much better.

The next morning, as he is ready to go out, take a glass full of Sack, and
pour one half thereof into one Ear and the other part into the other Ear, and
then clap your hands upon his Ears, holding them fast a little time, that he
may not shake out the Wine, then letting him go, straightways mount him, and he
will go for two or three hours as merrily as any Horse whatever. Probatum.

The Vulgar Error of the Eel detected, and proved to be a thing false and
ridiculous.
In former and later times it has been believed by some (how prudent I cannot
tell) that there was no better way to make a resty dull Jade to prance and
caper, than to take a live Eel, and through his mouth convey it down the
Horse's belly; I know not many more ways more speedy to dispatch him; for you
must not think that the Eel can presently and in an instant pass out of his
stomach into his Guts, or if he did, I do but think what woeful work he would
make there, but much worse in his stomach if he continue there; for certainly
his motion would so disturb the vital parts, that it would render him incapable
of living two minutes.

How to fatten an Horse speedily, for sale.
I have known some that have made their Horses look plump and fair to the eye,
in 14 days, by only mingling Carrets with their Oats; but that which never
fails to fatten an Horse speedily for sale is, take of Elicampane, of
Cummin-seeds, of Turmerick, of Anniseeds of each two ounces, of Grounsel an
handful; boil these well together with three heads of Garlic cleansed and
stamped in a gallon of strong Ale; then strain it well, and give the Horse to
drink thereof a quart made warm in a morning fasting; then ride him till he be
well warmed, then set him up and cover him well, and do thus five or six
mornings; after this, for seven or eight days together, take of the fine powder
of Elicampane, and the fine powder of Cummin-seed of each a like quantity; mix
these well together, and put thereof half an ounce into his Provender, g^ving
him thereof three times a day.

A notable trick of an Horse-courser or Jockey.
Though the story may be old, yet it is new to those who never heard it, and I
can assure you it is very true.

A Jockey had an Horse which was comely enough to ^ight, yet he could not put
him off, he used several projects, but none would take; as first, he would
often cheapen his own Horse, and often bid within ten shillings of the price he
was profer'd for, which the Rider was by agreement to refuse, to make others
the more eager to buy him: when that would not do, he got some friends to
cheapen his Horse by turns, and yet this procured never a Chapman; having tried
several other ways, at length he pitched on this: he sets up his Horse till
friday the next Market Day for Smithfield; the day being come, he got up before
Sunrising, and having gotten a couple of his Confederates mounted as he was,
as soon as the Sun appeared, (which was in the midst of Summer) he rode from
the Sun in Charterhouse-lane to the Sun in Aldersgate Street, and from thence
to the Bell-Inn, and there rested till the Sun was gone down, and then rides
him through Smithfield (having somewhat heated him, to make him look somewhat
like a Traveller) a Gentleman seeing the Horse, calls the Rider, and demands
the price of his Horse; truly Sir, said he, I am very loath to sell my Horse,
but were I minded so to do, this is no proper time; for I protest, said the
Jockey, I have rid him this very day from Sun to Sun and never drew bit, my
occasions being very urgent; and if you will not believe it, there are now two
Gentlemen (meaning his own Comerades) at the Bell-Inn in Aldersgate will
justify it, this made the Gentleman so eager (finding the price much lower
than he imagined, and the Horse so well after so long travel and hunger) that
he bought him; but in six days after he could not ride him the length of
Long-lane.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, or Sold by Simon Miller at the Star, at the West End of St.
Paul's.
Quarto.
BIshop White upon the Sabbath. The Pragmatical Jesuit, a Play, by Richard
Carpenter. The Life and Death of the Valiant and Renowned Sir Francis Drake,
his Voyages and Discoveries in the West- Indies and about the World, with his
Noble and Heroic Acts: By Samuel Clarke, late Minister of Bennet-Finck,
London. The Life and Death of William the Conqueror, King of England and Duke
of Normandy; by Samuel Clarke. Bagshaw of Christ and Antichrist. Astrology
Theologiz'd: Showing by the Light of Nature what influences the Stars have upon
Men's bodies, and how the same may be diverted and avoided:
Large Octavo:
The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is established by Law; by E. Bagshaw
of the Inner Temple, Esquire An Enchiridion of Fortification. Nomenclatura brevis
in usum Scholae Westmonasteriensis. The English Horseman and complete Farrier;
directing all Gentlemen and others, how to breed, feed, ride and diet all kind
of Horses, whether for War, Race or other service; with a discovery of the
Causes, Signs and Cures of all Diseases both Internal and External incident to
Horses, Alphabetically digested; with the Humors of a Smithfield Jockey. By
Robert Almond a well know and skilful Farrier of the City of London, practicing
therein above forty five years. The Loyal Prophet, a Sermon preached at the
Summer Assizes at York in Anno 1668. by William Bramhall, Rector of
Gouldsbrough, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains.
Small Octavo.
The Midwifes Book, or the whole Art of Midwifry discovered, directing
Childbearing Women how to behave themselves in their Conception, Bearing,
Breeding and Nursing of Children: In six Books, viz. 1. An Anatomical
Description of the Parts of Men and Women. 2. What is requisite for
Procreation: Signs of a Woman being with Child, and whether it be male or
female, and how the Child is formed in the Womb. 3. The Causes and hinderance
of Conception and Barrenness, and of the pains and difficulties of
Childbearing, with their causes, signs, and cures. 4. Rules to know when a
Woman is near her Labor, and when she is near Conception, and how to order the
Child when Born. 5. How to order Women in Childbirth, and of several Diseases
and Cures for Women in that condition. 6. Of Diseases incident to Women after
Conception: Rules for the choice of a Nurse; her Office, with proper Cures for
all diseases incident to young Children. By Mrs. Jane Sharp, practitioner in
the Art of Midwifry above thirty years. Merry Drollery complete, in two parts;
or a Collection of Jovial Poems, Merry Songs, Witty Drolleries; intermixed with
pleasant Catches, collected by W. N. C. B. R. S. I. G. Lovers of Wit. Natural
and Artificial Conclusions. Daphnis and Chloe a pleasant Romance. Boteler of
War. Ramsey of Poisons. Shepard of the Regulation of the Law. Knowls Rudiments
of the Hebrew Tongue. Herbert's Childbearing Woman; or Devotions, Meditations
and Prayers for Women in that Condition. The Rebellion of the rude Multitude
under Wat Tyler, paralleled with the late inhumane Rebellion against K. Charles
the First. The Rebels Arraignment, Conviction and Execution in three Sermons,
By Jo. Brookbancke. The Death of Charles the First lamented, and the
Restoration of Charles the Second congratulated by William Langley. The King of
Spain's Cabinet Counsel divulged. A Description of Jerusalem, as it flourished
in the time of Christ. Observationes and Experientiae de Febribus, Authore
Gulielmo Drageo Medico. Nonnihil de Febribus, Authore Gulielmo Statholmo
Medico. Divine Poems by A. Nasmyth. The Life of Dr. Tho. Morton late Bp. of
Duresme. Morison on the Covenant. The Miraculous Visions of R. Wortley,
Minister of Edgureth in Bedford-shire. A Discourse of the Piety and Charity of
elder Times and Christians, paralleled to the Members of the Church of England,
by E. Waterhouse Esquire.
Large Twelves.
The Moral Practice of the Jesuits, demonstrated by many remarkable Histories
of their Actions in all parts of the World; Collected either from Books of the
greatest Authority, or most certain and unquestionable Records and Memorials;
by the Doctors of the Sorbon. Oxford Jests Refined and Enlarged. Smith's
Practice of Physic. The Duty of every one that will be saved; being Rules,
Precepts, Promises and Examples, directing all Persons, of what degree soever,
how to govern their Passions, and to live virtuously and soberly in the World.
The Spiritual Chemist, or six Decads of Divine Meditations on several Subjects,
with a short Account of the Authors Life; by William Spurstow, D. D. sometime
Minister of the Gospel at Hackney, near London. Witty Apothegms, delivered at
several times by K. James, K. Charles I. the M. of Worcester, the Lord Bacon
and Sir Tho. More. Man's Masterpiece; or Contemplations and Meditations on
several occasions, by Sir Peter Temple.
Small Twelves.
A new Method of Preserving and Restoring Health by the Virtue of Coral and
Steel. A Help to Prayer. The Understanding Christian's Duty worthily to
commemorate the Death of Christ in the blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
pressed from 1 Cor. 11. 28. The Pious Prentice; or Advice to the Apprentices of
London, concerning their behavior to God, their Masters, and themselves: By A.
Jackson. The King Triumphant, or the Rebels Ruined, by Capt. N. Foster.
FINIS.

