AN ACCOUNT OF THE FIRE At New-prison BY CLERKENWEL, WHEREBY The greatest part
of that House was Burnt down on Friday Night May the 9th. 1679.

Presumed on very violent Suspicions to be set on Fire by a Papist that was
there in Custody, and by that means Escaped.

Taken from the Mouth of the Keeper of the said Prison.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for L. C. 1679.

An Account of the FIRE at New-prison by Clerkenwel; whereby the greatest part
of that House was Burnt down on Friday Night May the 9th. 1679.
WE are sufficiently sensible of the Mischiefs of Jesuitical Villains; sixty
six we hope is not yet, nor ever will be forgot, nor the grand Contrivances or
petty Instruments of that Cursed Conflagration; Nor have we wanted several
instances since of their malice. The same men that first Burnt our Houses,
would quickly Burn our Bodies; and had they power would no doubt repeat all the
Butcheries of the Marian days. We shall not mention Southwark, Wapping, etc.
Though the Promoters of the Mischiefs there are not unknown: However since the
Burning of this Prison which is just now happened, is so remarkable in the
Town, it will not be inconvenient to give the World a perfect Narrative
thereof, to pevent false reports and misrepresentations. On Friday the 9 th. of
May, Mr. Green the Keeper of the said New-prison of Clerkenwell (a very Civil
and Careful person) being abroad upon his Occasions, came home about Eleven of
the Clock at Night; and (according to his usual manner) did by himself take a
Pipe of Tobacco, and then looked very diligently, (as he always used to do,)
about the House; and found every thing safe, and no Candle or Light that he
could perceive, besides what he had with him: It being just after the Sessions
had Discharged most of the Malefactors, there were but few in Custody, but
amongst the rest one Mr. Woodgar a Notorious Papist, some say a Priest, but
that is uncertain: He was Lodged by himself up one pair of Stairs; and it is not
said there were any Suspicious persons in the House, but only common Offenders
which by the manner of the thing would no ways be supposed to to be concerned
in contriving the Fire. Mr. Green went to his Bed much about Twelve of the
Clock at Night, or some small time before, but had not lain above half an hour,
before a Fellow that was a Turn-key to the House, came to the door of his
Chamber, and cried out Lord! Master the Prison is on Fire. This much surprising
and affrighting him, he started out of his Bed and run to the door, but did not
presently open it; but called the man, desiring him to run with all speed to
call the Watch, and get help as well to quench it, as to secure the Prisoners:
The man went away, but what became of him is not known, for he has not since
been seen or heard of thereabouts.

Nor is the said Mr. Woodgar the Papist to be found, though Mr. Green does
affirm that according to the best of his apprehension, he does believe the Fire
was begun in his Chamber; and there is a violent suspicion that it might be by
Confederacy behim and the said Turnkey, and that they may be gone away
together; or otherwise that they must be both Consumed in the Flames, which is
not very probable, because the Turnkey being up and sensible of the Fire, it is
not reasonable to think he would expose himself to danger; nor did he go as he
was ordered to call the Watch.

But Mr. Green having hastily got on his Clothes went down, and found the House
on Fire to that degree as not to be Extinguished till most of it was destroyed.
In that hurry and confusion the rest of the Prisoners were let out to preserve
their Lives from the Fire, and so got away, there being no assistance ready to
secure them; but were all seen except the Papist, who it is supposed was gone
before.

The Prison is generally Burnt down, but the Corporation, or house usually
called New-Bridewel adjoining thereunto was preserved safe and without damage.

This what account we can get or obtain of this matter, and what Judgment is to
be made of the same, is left to the Disquisition of Authority, and Discretion
of the Reader.

Those that are professed Incendiaries of Kingdoms, it is not to be doubted but
will be apt enough to Fire Houses, especially when tempted by the advantage of
gaining Liberty, and avoiding Justice by such horrid practices; and it will be
the duty of all persons that have such kind of people committed to their
Custody, to take more especial care from this example to secure themselves, and
disable their Prisoners of that stamp, from all opportunities of doing such
mischiefs.

FINIS.

