AN ACCOUNT OF THE DOCTRINE AND DISCIPLINE OF Mr. Richard Davis, of Rothwell,
in the County of Northampton, And those of his SEPARATION.

With the Canons of George Fox, appointed to be Read in all the Quakers
Meetings.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1700.

Reader!
THere have been great Contentions, and various Disputes concerning the
Doctrine and Proceedings of Mr. R. Davis, of Rothwell, and those of his
Separation; and as well the Magistrates and Ministers, as the People of
England, are yet in the dark concerning them. Wherefore, having in my hands a
Copy of their Church Covenant, together with the Explanation thereof, as it was
Printed, by their Order, in the Year 1694, and delivered to diverse whom they
style Church Officers, and others in Fellowship with them; I deemed it not
amiss to communicate the said Covenant, with the Explanation, to the end the
Nation in general may be acquainted with their Doctrine and manner of
Discipline among themselves; that, for the future they may not lie under any
false aspersions; nor the People of England under any mistakes with regard to
them.

I would not hereby intimate, that every individual Member of this Separation
lies under the obligation of this Covenant in terminis: For I Am informed, that
very few, besides their Church Officers, are acquainted with it; and that the
new Members are admitted by a shorter Covenant: But the Mystery lies here, That
the People (as occasion serves) are, by the Officers, informed of the meaning
and design of their entering into Covenant with them, from the Contents of this
Covenant and Explanation: So that, it is the same thing (in their sense, and as
the Officers manage the matter) as if they had expressly obliged themselves to
all and every thing contained therein. This is all I think fit to say on that
Head. Let the Covenant plead its own Cause, especially coming into the World
with the advantage of so large a Comment from its own Masters.

You have here likewise an Account of the several particulars of their
Discipline; wherein, I hope, and I verily believe, I have not injured or
misrepresented them in any respect. If I have, and they please to give public
notice of it, I will be obliged to retract all such particulars, and to give
them public notice thereof in another Edition: For, as I design nothing hereby
but the service of the Church of God in general, and of this Excellent
Established Church of England in particular; so I could not hope that God would
permit me to be instrumental in either respect, should I be found in the number
of those who wilfully or negligently Slander or Misrepresent their Brethren.

And if the State of that Separation be, indeed, such as is set down in the
following Account (which I take to be the case of the greatest part of the
Independent-Congregations throughout the Nation) I would humbly propose it to
the Reverend the Clergy, to consider what Methods are most probable to
reconcile this Branch of the Separation to the Communion of our Church; and,
among others, whether the present endeavors of forming the Clergy into
Societies, pursuant to the Advice of His Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, may not prove a probable means, through the Blessing of Almighty
God, to secure so great an happiness to this Church and Nation?

The most effectual way to deal with an Enemy seems to be to turn his Weapons
upon himself. If these Men secure the interest of their Societies by a mutual
Correspondence, what hinders but we may do the like? Were they dispersed as the
Ministers of the Church are; or did they neglect to acquaint each other with
those things which relate to their common Interest, it would be impossible for
them to Subsist. Indeed the several Sects among us are so many formed
Combinations against the Established Church; and, though in many things they
differ from each other, as much as Light does from Darkness, yet they seem
universally agreed to Crush the Church of England. If so, the consequence is
plain; You Gentlemen of the Church of England look about you, and suffer not
your selves to be undone by piecemeal; which you must necessarily be without a
joint Union among your selves. Nothing is more confirmed by Reason and
Experience, than that every public Work is best carried on by a friendly Union
and Correspondence among the Undertakers; and certainly the great Work of the
Salvation of Souls deserves our Consideration in the Methods of the most
prudential Polity. God Almighty has distributed his Talents variously among us;
and the only way to make them all useful, is, first, by frequent and familiar
Conferences with each other, to discover where they lie, and then to employ
them as the public judgment shall determine.

After the Copies of these Papers were sent to the Press, Francis Bugg
delivered into my hands a Copy of the Canons of George Fox, which are judged
proper to be Printed with the Account of the Davisites; they being a farther
Confirmation of the Agreement of the Sectaries, in endeavoring to distress the
Church of England; and for that reason among many others very obvious, I have
here presented you with a just view of the said Canons.

A Church Covenant.
WE the Members of the Church of the Living God, having greatly revolted from
our dear Lord, in the deep sense of both former and latter Miscarriages against
his Love, Blood, also Honor, Crown and Dignity, as King of Souls, Churches and
Nations; firmly believing all these blotted out, by the Blood of the Lamb, and
that we have an undoubted Right to our Father's renewed Manifestations of his
Pardon and Favor. Do now again give up our selves, and all ours, in a most
solemn manner, in this our renewed Act of Covenanting unto the Lord, to be his
for ever, solemnly promising, and engaging in his awful Presence, and his
Angels, in the presence of Professors, and of the World, to walk continually in
him, and with him, and for him; maintaining every manner of way the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, as to Act and Doctrine, against all Opposition and
Opposers whatsoever: And we will in the strength of Christ endeavor, that all
our Holiness shall flow from Faith in Exercise working by Love: And thus we
subject to him as King of Souls.

We also solemly Promise in the strength of Christ, to observe all the Forms,
Fashions, Statutes, Laws and Ordinances of his House, especially the great Law
of Love to our Lord, and to his Members; resolving in the Grace that is in
Christ Jesus to bear a becoming Evangelical Testimony against what is contrary
to Love, or any other particular Form, Statute, Ordinance, or Law of his
whatsoever, either in our selves, or any of our Brethren and Sisters of this
Church, or any other. We farther Covenant with our dear Lord, and with one
another, to discharge all relative Duties in this House of God, or in any other
Relation we stand in whatsoever. And this is our professed Subjection to him as
King of Sion.

Finally, We promise in the strength of Christ, and in the presence of our
Royal Husband, to profess our Allegiance to him as King of Nations, and to The
asserting of the Kingly Power of Christ over Nations, does assert also the
Rights and Authority of Kings, and these Magistrates that Reign under him.
maintain his Rights and Prerogatives, as the King thereof, (to whom the
Kingdoms of the World belong) with our Lives, and all dear to us every manner
of way, as his Word, Spirit, and Divine Providence, shall from time to time
call us thereunto.

And in all those things, we in the Grace that is in our dear Lord, shall
endeavor to walk according to his Word, and the Explication of this our
Covenant, which is annexed thereto.

To the only Wise God be Glory and Dominion for ever, and ever. Amen.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE COVENANT.
WE the Covenanted People, and Church of God, being greatly humbled, that in
our former and latter Covenanting, we were so ignorant and legal; and that it
came to pass, thence, that we have been guilty of so many Breaches thereof,
both we and our Officers; now in the steadfast believing Views, that all those
Breaches are blotted out, and Transgressions pardoned in him, and for his sake,
who is our constant 1 John 2.1.
Advocate, at the Father's Right hand, Jesus Christ the Righteous; and being
constrained by the Sense of the boundless Love of the Father and the Son, and
the past and present Testimonies thereof to our Souls, do professedly and
publicly Deuteronomy. 26.17.
this day avouch again solemnly the Lord Jesus to be our Isa. 33.22.
Judge and King, and Lawgiver, and John 8.36. compared with Romans 6.8.22.
profess our selves his Subjects, according to the Tenor of his blessed Word,
and our former Covenant: And for as much as many of us, if not all of us, were
then more or less ignorant, how extensive our former Covenant was, when we
engaged to obey Exodus 19.8.
all his Voice Heb. 12.25.
that speaks from Heaven Rev. 19.10.
in his House; and because since through Grace, we are more enlightened by his
Spirit from his Word concerning our Generation-work: We think it highly
Necessary, now to declare our Sense of those several particular Ezekiel. ^3.10.
Ordinances, Laws, and Judgments, that we now are engaged to maintain and to
perform by the Bowels of his tender Mercies, his holy Word, and our consent
thereto in our former Covenanting: And First, We do judge that our then solemn
Covenanting as a Church, was a public Declaration and Romans 1.9.10
Confession with our Mouths, that we had by Faith with our Hearts laid hold of
Christ Jesus, as Rev. 22.16. 1 Cor. 15.45.
our Root Heb. 7.22.
Surety and Romans 5.12. etc.
Representative. The Grace of Election as being from Eternity fixed on a
certain number of Ep. 1.4.5.
Persons; and that those determinate number of Persons, for the most part
should be of a Race, Kindreds, Families and Fatherhoods, not excluding the Seed
of Strangers in all Ages, but especially in the latter Age of the World, when
the Partition Wall was to be broken down between Jew and Gentile.

This is abundantly witnessed to by the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 4.37. c. 10.15.
which words though they speak literally of literal Israel, and of the Election
of their Seed to suceed in their then Church; yet Israel and their Seed was
typical, inclusive and expressive of the whole Election, Romans 9.6. and the
Election and Separation of the Seed of Abraham out of the World, was to prove
and exemplify God's Eternal predestinating a certain number for himself, to
the Adoption of Children. This Truth also was attested to by the series of
Divine Providence in all Ages, chiefly causing Electing Grace to run through
Godly Families, and filling up the Old and New Testament Church with their
Seed, yet never excluding the Seed of Strangers. We likewise judge, that in our
Covenant, we profess that by Faith we laid hold of the Eternal Compact, made
with our Lord the Redeemer, as our Root, Surety and Representative, and with us
in him and ours too, that were of the true Israel, Isa. 59.21. which words
though they be spoken by God the Father, to our Lord Jesus, the Surety and
Dispensator of the New Covenant, and Testament; to his Seed, and Seeds Seed in
him; yet he therein is also the Messenger or Angel of the Eternal Compact. And
the New Covenant it self, in its most glorious Administration* is but a fuller
Copy thereof, promulgated and published. We professed then, and now do also, to
lay hold of this Eternal Compact, as promulgated in a more comprehensive way in
the Old and New Testament, as running with Noah, Abraham, the Patriarchs,
David, the Righteous, the Godly, the Church, and their Seed.

Romans 4.16. compared Gal. 3.8. Genesis 17.17. compared 2 Cor. 6.18. with Acts
2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14. Genesis 12. and 7.13.15.15. compared with Heb. 14.8. with Romans
11.17. 2 Kings 8.19. 1 Kings 2.4.8.25. Psalm. 132.12. Psalm. 25.13.112.2. 1 Kings
1.2.33. Psalm. 37.25, 26, 89.28, 29.36. 2 Samuel 7.11.19.29. Deuteronomy.
1.8.11.9.10.15.4.37. Psalm. 22.30.69.36.102.28. Number. 24.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. ver. 19.
Psalm, 105.6. Deuteronomy. 4.10. Prove. 11, 21. Psalm. 25.13.112.2.127.3, 4, 5.128.3.6.
John 5.25. Isa. 22.24.65.23. Psalm. 72.4.103.17. Prove. 14.25, 26.20.7. Genesis
17.13. Deuteronomy. 7.9. Psalm. 122.28. Isa. 6.13.43.5.44.3, 4, 5.54.3.61.9.65.23
59.21.66.22. Joel. 2.28. Heb. 8.10.11. compared with ult. pars 11. Romans 11.16,
17. Acts 2.16, 17. verse. 39. 1 Cor. 17.14. Matthew. 10.12, 13. Luke 10.5, 6. Luke
19.9. Acts 16.31. Matthew. 19.14. Mark 10.14. Luke 18.16.

Being therefore convinced that in our first believing, we laid hold on the
Covenant, in the most comprehensive extent of the Grace thereof for us, and
ours: And filled with joy and wonder at the Manifestations of this
Covenant-blessings and Privileges declared in the Gospel, as we have in our
former Covenanting, so in this our Renewal, do now again publicly and solemnly
give up our selves and ours to the Lord Jesus, our Royal Head and Husband, to
be his for ever, now again publicly declaring that he is our Lord, Psalm. 45.11.
and we will Worship him.

We likewise do judge, that in our former Covenant with the Lord, we being Pet.
18. Col. 1.13.
Chosen and Redeemed by him, Mat. 19.27, 28
translated into his Kingdom by his Spirit, at Effectual Calling, gave up our
selves to follow him in the Works of our day, to be Assertors of his Spiritual,
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Interest in the World, and to be witnesses of this
threefold Interest of his against all Oppositions or Opposers whatsoever. And
now, considering we are not our own, but bought 1 Pet. 18.19.
with a price, and redeemed from a vain and fruitless Conversation to serve
him. Moved with a sense of his unspeakable Love to us ward, being greatly
humbled, and filled with self-Abhorrence, that we and our Fathers have too much
declined, and forsook the Cause of our Blessed King Jesus, as King of Souls
Churches and Nations, do, firmly trusting to the sufficiency of Grace we have
in him, promise and resolve to maintain and abet his Spiritual, Heb. 3.8. Psalm.
2.6. Rev. 19.16.
his Ecclesiastical and Temporal Rule over our Souls, his Churches and Nations
to the utmost: And shall be ready, as the Lord shall call us to testify
against the Opposers and Usurpers of this threefold Prerogative belonging to
his Crown and Dignity, carrying our Lives, Liberties, Estates, and all that is
dear to us, in our hands to Sacrifice at his Feet for this end and purpose. We
also now are convinced, that in our former Covenanting, to perform all Duties
required, we chiefly engaged our selves to that first and great Joh. 6.29.40.
c. 3.16.18.39. verses.
Command of the Gospel, viz. believing on the Person and Righteousness of
Christ, for Heb. 11.4.
Eternal Life, Acceptance with God, Romans 5.1. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9.
Peace of Conscience, Joh. 6.53.56, 57.
Spiritual Light, Life and Strength, and every thing else necessary. Therefore
being greatly Jerem. 3.13.
ashamed of the constant and notorious breach of the Command of living by
Faith, and of our turning aside from the Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11. Ez. 20. Heb. 3
12. verse. 28.
Living God, the Fountain Jerem. 2.13.
of Living Waters to our own Cisterns, that will hold no Water, being under
deep sense of the Guilt, of our John 2.15.
Spiritual Adultery, and Idolatry, with the World, and the things thereof, our
own Gal. 3.1. comp. Gal. 3.
legal Performances, or that called Gospel-Obedience, our inherent Jerem. 2.17.
2 Cor. 12.7. compared with Cor. 9.19.
Qualifications and Spiritual-Enjoyments, which we advanced in the Cor. 2.2.
room and throne of the Mediator his Blood and Righteousness.

We now constrained from a sense of his pardoning Grace, and in the strength
and virtue of the Blood of the Zach. 9.11. Heb. 19.14.
Everlasting Covenant, sprinkled on our Consciences, do resolve to abide by
Faith in Exercise in the Joh. 15.2, etc.
Person, 1 John 4.16.
Love and Ex. 28.35.43. Psalm. 89.15, 16.
Righteousness of Christ, and as we have Col. 26, etc.
received him our Root, Surety and Representative; so walking in him by Faith
Rev. 7.14, 15.
that we may continually walk with him Phil. 2.1.
in the Fellowship of the Spirit, constantly Jam. 1.25.
beholding our selves by Faith in the glass of the perfect Law of Liberty, Ephesians.
4.30.
Members of his Glorious Body, Col. 2.10.
complete in him and presented by him in the Body of his Flesh, through Death,
Ephesians. 5.27.
not having spot or wrinkle, or blemish, but always Col. 1.22.
holy, unblamable and unreprovable in his, and his Father's fight; and hereby
deriving all Influence and Virtue Joh. 1.16.
from his Fullness for all manner of holy Conversation, and Walk that thus ^^hn
^5.^^.
acting continually in his presence, constrained by his 2 Cor. 5.14.
manifested Love, Heb. 4.14, 15.1^. c. 10.^^, 20, etc. 1 John 18.
encouraged by the blotting out of Guilt, and Imperfection from our Persons,
Graces and Duty, and they made perfect in him and his Grace; we may always seek
those things that are Above, where Christ is, having our Ph^l. 2.20.
Conversation in Heaven, whence we look for the appearing of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; and being all the day Romans 8.6.13.
thus spiritually minded, watching over our vain wandering Thoughts, we may
Isa. 62.^.
continually make mention of his Name, Psalm. 71.6.
Righteousness and Isa. 63.7.
loving Kindness, having our Speech always Matthew. 5.13.
seasoned with Salt, administering Grace to the Hearers. And being as the Salt
of the Earth, and of the Families we dwell in, we may be day by day dying to
Sin, and living to Righteousness, Romans 8. Tit. 2.12.
denying Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and living righteously, soberly, and
godly in this present World; and with a Conversation Phil. 1.27.
becoming the Gospel. We also do believe this direct acting of Faith on the
Person of Christ for all things, is Jude 3.
the Faith of the Gospel, the Faith once delivered to the Saints, which we
ought earnestly to contend for, and to resist all Oppositions thereto Heb. 12.4.
even unto Blood, whether in our Souls, in the Churches, or other Sister
Churches, from the World and Carnal Professors. Hence therefore, laying hold on
the strength of Christ, (though we know Unbelief will cleave to the lest of our
Performances,) yet we will not plead for it, nor indulge it as a little Sin,
much less as a Virtue or Grace; but continually watch against it, mourn over
and loath it, and slay it on the Head of the Sacrifice, as the greatest 1 John
5.
Immorality, because it gives the God of Truth the Lie, and Heb. 10.29.
treads the Blood of the Covenant under foot, and more especially the greatest
Unbelief of Mat. 14.31.
questioning the Ability and Fullness of Christ to save us to the utmost.

And though we think it our present Duty not to reject all Preaching, whose
Doctrinal part treads in the steps of the first Reformers; though the
Application be mixed with some self-Darkness and Legality Jude 22.
putting difference between them and others, pulling them out of the fire by
love and familiarity; yet Jude 23.
detesting every Garment of Doctrine, so far as it is spotted with the Flesh of
Man's Wisdom: Yet notwithstanding all those, under what Name or Denomination
soever, whose Tenants corrupt the Doctrine of the Person of Christ, either
denying or lessening his Godhead, his Humane Nature, or mystical Union of both
Natures in one Person, or else separating the Natures, or confounding them. As
likewise all those that add the least mixture to Christ's Righteousness, though
it be their own acts of Faith in point of Acceptance, Acquittance, and the
obtaining of Peace of Conscience, and who T^ (...)


and infinitely free in the purpose of God in Election, in the public and
indefinite Manifestation of it in the Romans 56.10.
Person of Christ, by Redemption, and in Romans 4.5. Ephesians. 2.8. 2 Timothy 1.9.
actual conferring of it, and manifesting of it in effectual Vocation to a
particular Soul, who also make Faith and Repentance foreseen as Conditions of
the Eternal Election, and of the Redemption of Christ Jesus, and Faith and
Repentance, actual in the Soul, the preparative federal Conditions of
possessing the Blessings of Election in Christ our Head; whether it be Christ's
actual influential Union to us, Justification, Adoption, or any other Grace
whatever: But especially the Perverters of the Gospel, those most refined and
subtle reserves of Antichrist, singled out to support its tottering Cause in
this his last War with the Lamb, in these last days, who Gal. 1.7.
pervert the Gospel, turning it up-side down, asserting Faith, Repentance and
Holiness to be given to the Soul before the Person of Christ, and his
Righteousness, denying that blessed Order of the tenders and gifts of the
Gospel, which is first the Romans 8.32.
Son of God freely, and then all things freely with him; refusing him and his
Righteousness to have the Col. 1.18.
pre-eminence in all things; 1 John 5.12.
even in their actual bestowment as they ought to have. And besides all this
wickedly intruding a new Law of their own Invention, requireing imperfect Faith
and Repentance, and Gospel Obedience on Man's part, as the imperfect and sinful
Conditions of the Gospel-Justification; thereby Romans 3.31.
vacating the good old righteous Law of God, setting up Terms of obtaining
Spiritual Blessings, exceeding derogatory to the Holiness of God's Nature, Ways
and Laws, and contrary to the freeness of his Love and Grace, from the Eternal
Purpose thereof in Election, even unto the Execution of Electing Grace here and
in Glory.

We do declare and protest against them and their Doctrine, and likewise all
those that teach us to 1 Cor. 1.31. 2 Timothy 2.1.
glory in any thing but the Lord, or be strong in any other Grace, but that
Grace that is in Christ Jesus. And do resolve in the strength of Christ's Grace
to testify all manners of ways even unto our Blood, against any other Gospel
than the Gospel of our dear Lord, and against all other Doctrines than those
that are Tim. 6.3. Tit. 11.1.
according to Godliness, and if Men most noted for knowledge and Holiness, or
an Gal. 1.9.
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, and maintain those Tenants
beforementioned, we do in the presence and strength of Christ promise and
engage to witness against them by public Preaching, and declaring against such
Principles, by withdrawing from them, and not receiving them to our Houses, nor
bidding them God's speed, according to the Command of the Lord, 2 John 10. and
by cheerfully and triumphantly delivering our Possessions, Liberties and Blood,
as a Testimony against them and their pernicious ways, if called thereto.

We likewise now judge, and are persuaded, that when we Covenanted with one
another to follow the Lord in the Observation of Gospel Ordinances, and the
performance of all relative Duties in this Church, we professed for all his
Ecclesiastical Interest, and Ezekiel. 43.11.
gave up our selves to walk with him and one another, in all the Forms, Laws,
Ordinances and Statutes in his House, all which Forms and Statutes are most
holy, and Ez. 43.13.
tend to promote Holiness in the Psalm. 15.
Holy Citizens of Zion. Particularly that we are thereby obliged, and by his
Word to love our Lord and King with the Gal. 5.6.
highest love, and to testify love to him, by keeping all his Commands in his
Joh. 14.15. Mat. 10.40. c. 18.17, 18.
House, to Honor, Reverence, and bow to his Authority and Power lodged
therein, and that Authority also as clothing his Heb. 13.17.
Officers, Ruling in his Name, to 1 Pet. 5.3.
maintain the Rights and Privileges of any particular Church, his Clergy, his
Body, 1 Cor. 12.27.
against all Innovations and Usurpations from Officers or Members within, from
Sister Churches, or their Officers without, not committing by Delegation the
Power and Judgment of the Church to any 2 Cor. 2.6.
minority of it, because thereby the form and fashion of a Gospel Church is
altered, and is not according to the Pattern in the Mount. We farthermore see
that we ought to maintain toward each other pure Love, and unfeigned in all
the Roots and Springs, and Effects thereof; and 1 Romans 12.9. 1 Pet. 1.22.
to watch against all defects therein, either in Root or Branch. And therefore
we being now grieved for great decays on us in our love toward the Lord Jesus,
and to one another, do in the presence and might of our Blessed Advocate and
Intercessor, promise and resolve to abide in the Love of Christ, Joh. 15.9.
that our Hearts may be stirred up to love him, and in love to obey his Royal
Laws; particularly to reverence and subject to his awful Power and Authority in
Church Assemblies, as if he were himself personally among us, not affronting
his Presence by a slight Carriage, nor his Majesty there on his Throne, by
proud rebellious undervaluing Thoughts, by passionate Reflectings, Revilings,
or contemptuous Speeches, or by any unbecoming Carriage or Gesture whatever;
nor despising his Dominion in his House, as the Jud. 8. 2 Pet. 10.11.
filthy Dreamers of old, not grieving nor quenching his Spirit, nor stubbornly,
nor rebelliously despising and rejecting his Admonitions in his Church, not
thinking his Yoke heavy, nor his Burden weighty, but counting it an unvaluable
Blessing to be under his strictest and highest Watch and Care in his Church.
Matthew. 11.30.
And if his Children (which God forbid) should, err in the Judgment of any of
us, we shall by Praying for them, by Reasoning with them, from Christ's Rules,
in his Bowels, Meekness, and with our own, bringing the Advice of other Sister
Churches, most faithful to Christ, endeavor to reduce them, but shall not
slight them, nor uncover their Nakedness, because they are the Throne of
Christ's Glory, and the place of the Soles Ezekiel. 43.7.
of his Feet, least we should thereby wound his Person, his Honor; affront his
Majesty, Crown and Dignity in his House.

We that are Rulers do in the presence of Christ engage to rule faithfully,
diligently Romans 12.8.
and courageously Josh. 1.6, 7, 9.
in Faith, in the fear of God, Sam. 23.3.
in Meekness, Gal. 6.1, 2. Tim. 2.25. Lev. 25.43.
and Authority, Tit. 2.15.
hating Covetousness, and Partiality, Ex. 18.21.
having took the over sight of the Flock of God which he has purchased with his
own Blood, and not for filthy Lucres sake, nor out of constraint; 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
not ceasing to warn them Night and Day with Tears, Acts 20.29. etc.
watching against the Assaults of Satan, and their own Corruptions against
grievous Wolves, that may not spare them, and against them that may arise among
themselves, speaking perverse things, endeavoring to turn them aside from the
Lord that bought them. Tim. 1. to 8th. Tit. 1. ^. to the End. Ti^. 2.1.7, 8.


We also that are ruled in the Church of Christ do before our Crowned King, and
strengthened with his might, solemnly promise to obey our Rulers set over us in
the Lord, to follow their Faith, and consider the ends of their Conversation,
to submit our selves to them according to the Word of the Lord, for they watch
for our Souls as they that must give an Account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, (...). 13.7, 8.17.18. (...). 5.12.
and also pray for them. (...). 4.3. 1 These. ^.25. 2 These. 3.1.
We do now in the presence and Grace of our dearest Lord, that has redeemed
us, likewise engage as a Church of Christ in all respects to endeavor to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
unfeignedly loving the Persons of one another, without dissimulation, R^m.
12.11. 1 Pet. 22.
even when we bear the greatest Testimony against their sin; and as the effects
of that endeared brotherly Love to watch These. 5.15.
over our Brethren and Sisters that they do not decline in their acts of Faith,
or turn aside from the Faith of the Gospel, considering and getting down into
one another. Hearts continually, that we may mutually provoke one another to
love, and to good Works; not forsaking the assembling our selves together any
manner of way, for this good end and purpose. Heb. 10.24.25
Likewise with the assistance of the Spirit of Grace we shall endeavor to be
very tender of one another good Names, Psalm. 15.3.
Bodies, Health, Lives, Mat. 5.38.39.
and outward Estate: 1 C^r. 1. ad 11 ^ev. 19.17
We shall be ready to assist one another herein to the utmost, being concerned
for the particular welfare of each other therein, as for our own. We no less
judge it our Duty, not to suffer the least Sin, and the least appearance of
evil to rest on one another, 1 John 1.6. (...). 10.17. M^t. 18.17.
as knowing, that Sin resting on a Brother or Sister, will mar their present
Communion with the Lord Jesus. 1 John 1.6.
If the fault be secret we shall with great Secrecy admonish a Brother or
Sister, and out of due regard to their Reputation, forbearing to reveal it to
our most intimate Bosom Friend Mat. 18.15.
unless it be to some Officer, if the Case be dubious, provided we can but gain
by our Loving Admonition; But if not, we shall in the Strength of the Lord take
two or three more Mat. 18.16.
as Witnesses and Associates with us, farther to warn and beseech them, in the
Bowels and tender Mercies of God in Christ, to repent of their evil; yet not
presume to publish their Faults to any, but those we take with us; and if any
among us publish the Miscarriage of any Brother or Sister, unless it be with a
design to take the Parties with them as Witnesses, we shall faithfully admonish
them for breaking the Rules of Christ in so doing. In all the discharge of our
Duties hitherto, we shall carefully watch against any Prejudice to their
Persons, by acting and dwelling in the Bowels of Christ, and considering them
as clothed with his Righteousness, and clean in God's sight; Cant. 4.6.
We also leaning on Christ's Strength to assist us, shall endeavor to
discharge our Duty with great Faithfulness to them, as well as Tenderness,
contentedly bearing Oppositions from themselves and others in hard Thoughts,
Speeches, Frowns and sinister Constructions, out of sincere love to Christ's
Glory, and the good of their Souls. And if we cannot reclaim them by these
methods of Mercy and loving Kindness, for the Prevention of the farther
spreading of their evil without delay acquaint the Church with it. Mat. 18.1^.
We with him on Thrones of Judgment in his Name and Power, in his Presence and
Might; and in his render Bowels shall admonish any Brother or Sister, thus
brought before us, 1 These. 5.14.
or any whose Faults are in their own nature public, 1 Timothy 5.20
publicly backing our Admonition from his Word and Authority, and his
Sovereign Grace committed to us. If we see one Admonition begin to take place,
we shall wait for their thorough Repentance, till we see occasion: And when
ever we see our Administration blessed for their thorough Humiliation, and our
Endeavors used in a Spirit of Gal. 6.1.
Meekness succeed; we shall be most ready to receive them into the Bosom of our
Lord and his Church, testifying in his Name, his, and our declared Forgiveness
to them, Forgiving them with all Readiness and Cheerfulness, as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4 32.
no Man daring to upbraid them in the least, whilst they walk with us in Love,
and the Laws of Christ: But if to the dishonor of the Name of Christ, the
wounding and hard'ning of their own Souls, and our Grief and Shame, they
continue obstinate and impenitent, we having mourned first over them, shall in
the Name, and Power of Christ our King, with enflamed Zeal for his Name, Rule
and House, in Tenderness, Love and Faithfulness to their Souls, cut them off
and deliver them to Satan, for the Destruction of the Proud Flesh, that their
Spirit may be saved in the Day of Christ Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4, 5 1 Timothy
1.20. 2 Timothy 3.5. Tit. 3.10. 2 These. 3.14.
; and this will we do with the Lord's help in Faith, that this Ordinance shall
be blessed for their recovery in God's time 1 Cor. 5.5.
, if they belong to the Election of Grace. Nevertheless, we shall continue to
love their Persons, and pray for their recovery, not counting them as Enemies,
but warning them as those that yet may approve themselves to he Brethren, 2
These. 3.14.
when ever we meet them, by charging their Evils on them: And yet will
notwithstanding withdraw all manner of familiarity or Communion with them, 2
These. 3.5.
even that what may be used with the most profligate Sinners, most
conscientiously abstaining from Eating and Drinking with them: 1 Cor. 5.10.11
All this we shall do in the Exercise of the greatest love to their Persons,
firmly believing these are the greatest Testimonies of love that can be shown
them under such Circumstances; being assured that such Carriages toward them
conscientiously practiced in Faith and Love, will be blessed in time, to shame,
reclaim and re-instate them into Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and
his Children; In the conscientious discharge of this Duty toward them, as a
Church, and as Members thereof in our respective private Stations. We shall not
be afraid of Anger, Revilings, nor Persecutions from them, from Churches,
Professors, or the World, but willingly and cheerfully submit to all manner of
Sufferings Luke 17.3.4. 2 Cor. 2.7.8.10.
upon this Account for Christ's sake; When ever God gives them true Repentance,
we shall, with great readiness, cheerfulness and tenderheartedness, forgive
them in the Person, Name, and Spirit of Christ, receiving of them to Communion
with the Lord and us, with the greatest Demonstrations of Love toward them
imaginable, Ephesians. 4.1.32.
not only forgiving, but forgetting, and never upbraiding them with their
faults Col. 3.13.13.
(and if any do so, calling them to an Account for it) whilst these recovered
Brethren and Sisters walk with us in the Ways and Statutes of the Lord Jesus.

We also being greatly humbled for diverse Breaches made among us upon the bonds
of Love, do in the Presence, and resting on the Grace that is in our Head for
us solemnly promise to our Lord, and one another; watch against all those Evils
that destroy, (viz.) groundless Jealousies, evil Surmisings, that are the first
coolers of brotherly Love: so also against secret Whisperings Tale-bearings and
Backbitings, which are the cursed Seed of Sedition and Discord sown in a
Church, and in like manner against all Wrath, Prejudice and Malice; swellings
or vauntings over one another, and despisings of one another; Tumults,
Seditions, Factions, Clamours, or evil Speaking of, or to one another,
forbearing all manner of Reflections, Reproachings and Revilings for Christ's
sake. 2 Cor. 12.20. Gal. 5.20.21. Ephesians. 4.31.
And no less do we engage against Wronging one another, as to worldly Goods,
Life, or Liberties; against all cowardly and covetous refusings the assisting
one another, by Countenance, Advice and Purse, to the utmost of our Ability, 1
Cor. 6. 1 Timothy 4.16. Romans 12.10.13.16.17. Phil. 2.3, 4. etc. Gal. 5.13. 2 Cor.
Chapter 1.9.
and against any other thing, or behavior, that is in the least contrary to
the Royal Law of Love. We think our selves in Conscience bound and engaged to
love the Persons of those that are under Dealing, and Excommunication among our
selves, so also to love the Persons of the World, and the Professors that we
hope are Godly, though they hate us for Christ's sake: But above all, not to
abate in our Love in the least toward our Brethren and Sisters, differing from
us in some Persuasions; Romans 14.1.
though we Judge we are bound by the great Law of Love to endeavor the
Convictions of each other in all things wherein we differ, not by absurd
Cavillings, and fleshly Objections for Mastery, but by the Word and Spirit of
the Lord in Meekness and Tenderness, without heats and prejudice, purely for
the discovery of the Truth, Gal. 6.1. 2 Timothy 2.23, 24, 25.
that we may be still growing to that stature of Fullness which is in Christ:
Ephesians. 4, 13.
And so came at last to speak the same things, to be perfectly joined together
in the same Mind and Judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.
which will be the Crown and Glory on Churches in the latter Day; Isa. 52.8.
and therefore let us pray in Faith and in the Holy Ghost, using all Endeavors
for that end and purpose, that are according to the Mind of Christ, and the
Rule of his Word. As to Members of Sister Churches, we judge we are in Dury
bound to love them as our own, (they being also of the Body of Christ,) and to
use the same Methods toward them in love, when we see them offend, and if we
see them impenitent, to bring them before the Church, to which they belong. We
also judge the Vows of the Lord are upon us, to walk in Communion with Sister
Churches, giving them no just Offense 1 Cor. 10.32.
unless they take Offense at the matters of our God. We judge it is not in our
power to Un-church them, though they do not come up to such degrees of Purity in
Reformation, yet we think our selves in Duty bound, and solemnly engage our
Lord to warn them of Errors in Doctrine and Practice, especially to testify
against the Opposition to the Faith and Order of the Gospel; to invite them to
go along with us in Generation work, and the Work of Reformation, to warn them
in the Bowels of Christ, of the carelessness and neglect therein, to manage
those kind and brotherly Admonitions, by Messengers, Letters, or by Printing,
(yet not publishing their Faults to the World) as shall be thought most
expedient, by the advice of Faithful Sister Churches; And if this reforms them
not, to declare Non-Communion with them. And furthermore we the afflicted
Children of the Lord in this Church, having in several days of Prayer, laid low
at the Foot of Christ, for diverse Neglects and Remissions, in following him in
all the Ordinances in his House, do now in his Righteousness, and the Light and
Life that is in him, solemnly Vow to his Anointed King and Lord, to follow him
fully in all his Appointments in his House, and to fill his House as soon as we
can with such Officers as are mentioned in his Word. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ep^. 4..11.
Acts 20.17.28. Acts 6.1. 1 Timothy 3.12. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. with 1 Timothy 5.6. v. 17.
We also engage conscientiously and constantly to Acts 1.14.21. Acts 2.42. Heb.
6.2. Mat. 3.56.
attend on the public Ministry of the Church, to join with them in the
Ordinances of Christ, such as Baptism, 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
and the Lord's Supper; 1 Cor. 14.23.24. to v. 34.
Preaching, Prophesying, Acts 1.14. Acts 2.4.2.
Praying, Mat. 26.30. 1 Cor, 14.16. Col. 3.16. Rev. 5.9. Rev. 14.31.
Praising by Vocal Singing, Teaching and Admonishing one another in our
Meetings, by Doctrine, Exhortation, or Revelation, also in Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, according to the Command of our Lord Jesus. Zech. 14.17. Acts
2.42.
We also solemnly engage to come up to solemn Days appointed by the Church, and
likewise to come up unanimously to Church-Meetings, Romans 10.9.10.
to govern with our Lord in his House, and keep it clean, to admit Members upon
a Confession with their Mouths, that they have believed on Christ and his
Righteousness with their Hearts, Ez. 43.10.11.
with also a Profession of their Allegiance to follow Sion's King in the Laws
and Statutes of his House, 2 Cor. 8.5.
and for that end their solemn Covenanting with the Lord, and us. Likewise to
admonish Offenders, and to cast out, if need be, and to give our joint Advice
and Assistance in all cases of Difficulty Therefore we do again come under our
solemn Vows to the Lord,. to frequent all the Assemblies of Sion, unless
hindered by length of Days, weakness of Body, or such extraordinary Occasions,
that may be sufficient Reasons in the balance of the Sanctuary for our absence
at any time. We as a Church, and each Member in our private Capacities, do in
Christ's Presence and Strength engage to watch over our Brethren and Sisters,
that they be not negligent and remiss in attending the Assemblies and Services
of the Church. We also solemnly Promise to the Lord and to one another, that we
will not keep away from the Lord's Table, upon the account of Satan's
Temptations, or our own Unbelief, or upon the account of Offense given to us by
any Brother and Sister; Brethren and Sisters, and that we will not in Christ's
Strength disobey him our King, despise his Ordinances, sin against our holy
Fellowship, and punish our selves for the Offense of others.

We likewise engage to the Lord and one another, to keep the Church visible, as
a City set on a Hill, in all its Laws, Statutes and Administrations, and to
appear public there in the face of all Opposition whatsoever.

We do also resolve as a Royal Priesthood in our Profession Ordinances, Walk
and Conversation, with the loss of our Names, Lives and Liberties, our
Reputations and Estates, and every thing that is dear unto us; to bear our
Testimony against all false Churches and Worship whatsoever. To wit, against
the Mother of Harlots and all her Daughters; and we likewise protest against
Idolatry, Superstition, Imposition and Persecution, where ever and whatsoever.
And in love to him, and Honor of his Crown, who first loved us, we resolve and
engage by the assistance of the Grace that is in him, to have nothing to do to
go near their false Worship, unless it be to testify against 'em, that we will
withdraw from 'em, and that we will not join with those that join with 'em, who
are confederates against Christ. And this Testimony we engage in Christ's
Presence to bear every way, and in every place whatever, even in Courts of
Judicature, and at the Place of Execution if called thereto. Furthermore, we
being convinced and humbled, that we and our Fathers have either selfishly
neglected or cowardly betrayed the Interest of our Blessed Lord, as King of
Nations; and do humbly waiting for his Coming in his strength, resolve that we
shall from time to time, as he enlightens us, leads us and calls us, be ready
to part with our All, in asserting and maintaining all his Royal Prerogatives
and Rights, as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, against all Enemies and
Opposition whatever to his Crown and Dignity, to whom the Kingdoms of the Earth
belong, and that we shall faithfully testify against any that shall thus betray
his Cause and Interest. And also when we in our late Covenant engaged to
perform all relative Duties, not only in the House of God, but also elsewhere;
we judge that by the Word of the Lord, and our own Vows, we are obliged to fill
each his place, and discharge our relative Duties in our respective Stations
and Capacities. We therefore greatly grieved for diverse Neglects and Breaches
therein, do engage in the Presence, Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus, to have
continual recourse to the Blood of Sprinkling, to wash away the Stains thereof,
and do in his Presence and Strength promise to watch against all such Breaches
of his Rules in our selves and others.

We do also Covenant with the Lord, and with one another, to seek the good and
welfare of the Nation we live in, Heb. 2.10. to be subject to those higher
Powers the Lord Jesus sets over us, Romans 13.12. Nor only for Wrath, but for
Conscience sake, paying Tribute to 'em as God's Ministers, v. 6. yet as free
Servants of God; but not using our Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, 1 Pet.
2.16. and hereby putting to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men, v. 15. We
that are Husbands do promise to love our Wives, as Christ does the Church, Ephesians.
5.25. And as our own Bodies, v. 28. leaving all and cleaving to our Wives, v.
38. not being bitter against 'em, Col. 3.19. dwelling with 'em according to
Knowledge; giving Honor to 'em as the weaker Vessels; forbearing to sin before
'em, and covering their Infirmities, as being Heirs together of the Grace of
Life, that our Prayers may not be hindered. We also that are Wives Covenant with
the Lord and with one another, to love and submit our selves to our own
Husbands as unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5.22. being subject to 'em, as the Church is
unto Christ, v. 24. having our Conversation chaste with Fear and Reverence to
our Husbands, 1 Pet. 3.2. Avoiding the Pride of Apparel, and conformable
Fashions, v. 3. being meek and quiet in our Spirits and Deportments in our
Houses, v. 5. our Obedience being founded on love without fear and slavery, v.
6. being Sober, lovers of our Husbands and Children; Discreet, Chaste, keepers
at Home, obedient to our Husbands, 1 Tit. 2.4, 5. We that are Parents engage to
the Lord and to his Church to discharge all Duties to our Children, as the Lord
enlightens us and strengthens us, teaching 'em in the way wherein they should
go, bringing 'em up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, not provoking
'em to wrath by unjust and cruel Carriage, Ephesians. 6.4. We that are Children
promise to the Lord and his Church in the strength of his Grace to Obey our
Parents in all things in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 3.20. We that are Masters
and Mistresses also Covenant with the Lord and his Church, in the strength of
Christ, to carry it justly and mercifully toward our Servants, forbearing
Threatenings, and unchristian Violence, Ephesians. 6.9. We that are Servants Covenant
with the Lord and his People, to Obey them that are our Masters according to
the Flesh, with Fear and Reverence; not with Eye-service as Men^leasers, but in
singleness of Heart as unto Christ, as having a respect to his Eye on us more
than Man's, Ephesians. 6.5, 6. c. 7.8. Col. 3.22. endeavoring to please 'em in all
things, not contradicting* or answering again, nor robbing 'em of their Time
nor Goods, but showing all good Fidelity, Tit. 2.9, 10. and thus we will carry
it, not only to godly and gentle Masters or Mistresses, but also to those that
are Carnal and Froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. Lastly, we promise to the Lord and his
Church, to carry it with Justice and Mercy, to the Names, Estates, Bodies and
Souls of our Carnal Neighbors, forbearing to Reproach 'em, and wound their
Reputation, to do 'em the least Damage in their Estates, or injury to their
Bodies, or laying stumbling blocks in the way of their Souls: And thus as much
as in us lies we follow Peace with all Men, but with Holiness, which consists
in avoiding Joining with 'em in the least Evil, or give up to 'em the least
Truth of Christ, or for to please 'em in denying the least thing that relates
to the Faith and Order of the Everlasting Gospel.

Now to sum up all, we finally Promise and Covenant with the Lord and his
Church, in the Presence and Grace of Christ, to obey his whole Will revealed in
his Word, explained to us by his Spirit, nor do we by this Covenant limit our
selves to what is herein contained, but engage to wait on the Lord for further
discoveries of his Mind and Will, believing he will reveal it to us, and if
there be any Wood, Hay, or Stubble, in this Form of Covenant, we are content it
should be burnt up by the Holy Spirit. We also solemnly promise and engage in
the Presence and Strength of Christ, whatever farther discoveries of Light may
be first manifested to the meanest of us, we will examine it by the Word of
God, and in fervent Prayer, and shall be far from rejecting or fighting against
it, unless it be revealed to us by the Spirit, after due search, that it is of
Antichrist.

We do now solemnly declare, that we do not hereby, not will not impose on the
Consciences of our Brethren and Sisters, that are amongst us, in Indifferences
of lesser moment, that walk conscientiously up to their Light, exhorting all to
be faithful thereto, and of a peaceable Spirit, ready to follow on to know the
Lord.

We engage likewise, and solemnly promise all of us, that if any of us should
hesitate about any Doctrine or Practice,
contrary to the Faith and Practice of the Church; to consult with the Church
and its Officers, at least for our own Satisfaction, if not for the Churches
Conviction, (provided it be right) or before any of us do cordially and
thoroughly espouse it.

The whole Will of God revealed in his Word, we solemniy promise and engage in
the Love, Strength and Presence of the Lord, and his holy Angels and Believers,
to consent to and approve of, to comply with, to study to be found in the
practice of, and make the Rules of our holy Walk to be humbled for the least
breach thereof, and to have continual recourse to the Blood of Sprinkling, as
cleansing from the stains thereof to abide in the Person and Righteousness of
Christ by Faith, who in our room and stead, as one surety has perfectly
performed these our Engagements and Presents, our Obedience, as wrapped up in his
Righteousness, through the hands of our High Priest, in the Exercise of our
Royal Priesthood to our God and Father, for the Honor of his Name, the
commendation of his Holy Religion, as the Testimonies of our Love,
Thankfulness, and Gratitude toward him.

Now to him that has washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and has made us
Kings and Priests, to God and his Father, to him be Glory and Dominion for ever.

Amen. There are some Errata's in this Covenant and Explanation which the
Publisher did not think fit to alter, they being the same in the Copy.



THE DISCIPLINE.
ANno 1692, Richard Davis, who styles himself Pastor of the Church at Rothwell,
in the County of Northampton, admitted Members according to the Substance of
the Form underwritten, which he called, A Church Covenant, viz.

Pastor. Do you in the presence of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
this Congregation here present, Give your selves up unto us, as we have given
our selves to one another, To justify this they urge 2 Cor. 8.5.
to walk with us and only us, in all Gospel Ordinances, and the discharge of
all Relative Duties, as God shall help you?

Answ. Yes.

Pastor. So do we, in the aforesaid awful Presence, Covenant to walk with you
in the same, and, if we shall be let into any further Light, to make it known
to you.

In the time of Thomas Browning, the Predecessor of Richard Davis, the custom,
at Rothwell, had been to have their Pastor Ordained by the Elders of other
Churches; but when Davis was made choice of for their Pastor, the Church at
Rothwell pleaded that they were Independent, and consequently ought to have the
privilege of Ordaining their own Pastor, and accordingly Ordained R. Davis.

This occasioned some Differences in the Congregation, and, by degrees, others
arose; whereupon, about the Year 1694, the other Covenant was Framed and
Printed, with the Explanation by way of Renewal of their former Covenant, to
which the greater part assented and remained Members: Those who did not, when
they had pleaded for a dismission and were refused it, joined with other
Congregations according to their discretion, and were cut off by those at
Rothwell.

Their Church Officers Church Officers.
are of three sorts, viz. 1. Pastor. 2. Elders. 3. Deacons.

1. The Pastor Pastors.
is chosen by the consent of the major part of the Congregation, and is
Ordained by Imposition of the Hands of the Elders of the Congregation. His
Office is to Preside, to Teach, to Consecrate the Elements in the Sacrament,
and to Baptize.

2. Elders, Elders.
who are chose likewise by the Congregation, and set apart by Imposition of
Hands, and are of two sorts, viz. 1. Preaching Elders, whose Office is to
Preach and Rule. 2. Ruling Elders, whose Office is to Rule only: Not but that
they may Preach occasionally, if they please.

3. Deacons, Deacons.
who also are chosen by the Congregation, and set apart to that Office by
Imposition of Hands. Their Office is to take care of the Three Tables, viz. 1.
The Lord's Table. 2. The Pastors Maintenance. 3. The Poor. They Collect the
Alms of the Congregation every Sacrament-Day, which is ordinarily once every
three Weeks or Month. They carry the Bread and Wine to the Communicants. They
have the Custody of the Money in Bank, and are accountable for it: This is a
small Sum reserved to answer any particular extraordinary occasion. Out of
these Officers the Elders are generally chosen, not always.

They hold, that the Power of each particular Officer is equal with the rest,
only the Pastor presides for Order sake; and if the Pastor and Officers cannot
agree, the Majority of the Congregation in a Church Meeting determines the
matter.

The Ordination of the Pastor is by Imposition of the Hands of the Elders: The
Ordination of Elders and Deacons by Imposition of the Hands of the Pastor and
Elders. Herein they tie themselves to no form of Words; they stand during the
Ceremony, and Pray before and after, either the Pastor or Elders, or both.

This is always done at their Church Meetings, where none have any Business
besides the Members, and where none else usually are present.

The Pastor is maintained by those in Covenant with him. Maintenance of the
Officers.
There is a Book for Subscriptions; and if any Member, able to contribute,
refuse, he is required to give his Reasons in public; and if they are not
approved of, and he continue to refuse, he is dealt withal as a Sinner. This
Subscription Money is by the Deacons collected quarterly and paid to the Pastor.

Note, That this Subscription Money is not the whole of the Pastors
Maintenance; because the Women, whose Husbands are of other Congregations, do
privately contribute, and that liberally; and it is observed, That the separate
Congregations have generally more Women than Men. Those likewise of meaner
condition among them, who have dependence on any of the Church of England for a
Livelihood, are oftentimes excused from Subscribing, though not from contributing
in proportion to their Abilities.

The Members only are obliged to Subscribe; but the whole Assembly is exhorted
to contribute when the Deacons on the Sacrament-Days collect the Alms of the
Congregation. These Collections are made every Sacrament-Day; and out of these
the several Officers, if they want, are supplied.

Meetings.
Their Meetings are of four kinds, viz.

1. On every Lord's Day, for Prayer and Preaching, and receiving the Sacrament,
as often as it is Adminstred; likewise for receiving the public
acknowledgments of those, whose
Crimes have been public. The acknowledgments here made, are generally by such
persons as have complied too far with the Church of England.

2. Solemn Days appointed by the Congregation; the usual occasions whereof, are
to seek the Mind of God, in relation to any differences in their Church; on the
Death or Resignation of the Pastor; when any Officer or other useful Person
has forsaken them; when there are any Calamities befallen them, or any Mercies
bestowed on their Church, or the Nation: They say the Holydays observed by the
Church of England are all Popish. Christmas, Easter and Whitsuntide they
regard not. State Fasts and Thanksgivings they do allow of.

3. Church Meetings, which consist only of the Members, i.e. those who are in
Covenant. These are for regulating Matters in their Church; and are held some
Day in the Week before they Break Bread. They begin with Prayer, advise
together, admit Members, admonish Offenders, excommunicate the Obstinate,
receive the Penitent, etc.

The ordinary Penance required, is an acknowledgment of the Crime at these
Meetings, with promise of future amendment.

4. Messengers Monthly Meetings, which consist of the Delegates or Messengers
from all the Sister Churches, i. e. those Established after their Model, within
a certain Precinct; for which every Church appoints two or more according to
its discretion. These are commonly the Pastor and one or two Elders of each
Congregation. The manner of appointing them as follows, viz. The Pastor gives
public notice in a Church Meeting, That on such a Day the Messengers Meeting
is to be, and desires them to send their Messengers, and ordinarily proposes
himself and one more, and, if they consent, desires them to lift up their Hands
(the usual sign whereby they signify their consent or approbation.) At these
Meetings they Communicate to each other the concerns of their particular
Churches; give account of all Members cut off, and of all other proceedings
that are material. If any difficulties have arisen in the particular
Congregations, the respective Messengers report to their own Congregations what
was the opinion or determination of the Representatives of the several Churches.

Besides these Meetings abovementioned,
at Rothwell they have private Cabals of trusty Men to prepare matters to be
proposed at their Church-Meetings, thereby to prevent any nice canvasing
matters of Controversy before the Members, for fear of raising or somenting
Disputes among them.

Their method in the admission of Members, Admission of Members.
is, viz. At their Church-Meetings the Pastor gives notice to the Assembly,
that there are certain persons who design to offer themselves to the Church,
and asks their consent that they may be called in and Examined; which obtained,
every Person is called in by himself and Examined; touching his Conversion,
Faith, Experiences, etc. and then ordered to withdraw: The Examination
finished, the Pastor enquires of the Members whether they are willing to
receive such and such particular Persons, and, if the Majority signify their
consent by lifting up their Hands, they are called in, and by the Pastor
acquainted that the Church is satisfied of their Experiences, etc. and will
admit them by and by. When every particular Person has been thus dealt withal;
the Pastor receives them according to the substance of the shorter Covenant,
and in a Book which they keep (different from that which contains the
Subscriptions for the Pastors maintenance) each Person writes his own Name.
This Practice they say is warranted, Isaiah the 44th Chap. the 5th Verse.

After the strictest enquiry it appears that the Printed Covenant with the
Explanation, has been delivered to very few, and those Select Persons; so that
it seems to have been chiefly designed for the Elders, with whom the Members
are to consult. It does not appear that it has been refused to any Member who
has desired to buy it; though the generality have either not heard of it, or not
seen it. Those who have it are obliged not to Communicate it to any Stranger,
or the World (as they term all others) who are not of their way.

When the Congregation is assembled, the Preacher (whether Pastor or Elder)
begins with Prayer, Behavior in the Congregation.
the People generally standing, (they look upon those as lazy who sit and will
not suffer any Man to be covered): When Prayer is ended, they cover their
Heads, and sit or stand, as they please, during the Sermon. This is the whole
of their Behavior and Service, unless they Sing an Hymn, which they ordinarily
do.

Baptism.
They Baptize both Children and Adult, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, without the Sign of the Cross, Praying before and after. None Pray on
this occasion but the Pastor, and none but he may Baptize, and that only the
Members, or Children of the Members of his own Congregation. No Sureties are
admitted. The Parents are charged in behalf of their Children; the Adult takes
the charge upon himself. If one of the Parents be a Member, it is sufficient to
entitle the Child to their Baptism. Where the Parents are of different
Persuasions they Baptize the Children privately. They ordinarily Baptize at a
Church Meeting, and in any private House if desired. Children, though Baptized by
them, are not esteemed Members, unless, when they arrive at Years of
Discretion, they enter into Covenant as the other Members have done.

Breaking of Bread.
Every Member is required to receive the Sacrament as often as it is
administered. The Table stands in the midst of the Congregation, near the
Pulpit. The Pastor sits in his Chair near the Table, and the Receivers on Forms
round about it; the People, as Spectators, at some small distance behind them.

The Pastor Prays (all standing) and craves a Blessing on the Bread; then sets
it apart in almost the same Words which the Church of England uses; then breaks
it into small pieces and puts them on diverse Plates, saying, whilst he is
breaking, Thus was our Lord's Body torn, mangled, broken, etc. The Bread thus
broken is carried in the Plates, by the Deacons, to the several Receivers. The
Pastor sits in his Chair Eating with the rest.

As soon as the Bread is Eaten, the Pastor Prays; then pours out the Wine,
saying, Behold the Blood of Christ poured out for thee, and for me, and for all
of us, etc. Drink ye all of this, drink large draughts of the Love of Christ,
etc. as he thinks most proper to express himself. Then he drinks and gives to
the Deacons. When all have drank, the Pastor Prays, an Hymn is Sung, and the
Assembly is dismissed.

They forbid all private Prayer at this Ordinance, saying, The Pastors Prayers
are sufficient. They esteem 'it a Memorial only: Examine none before they come,
saying, There is no need of any more Preparation at that time than any other.
In the absence or sickness of the Pastor there must be no Sacrament.

If any Member plead Conscience for leaving them, and desire a discharge, and
offer his Reasons in public; Dismission of Members.
they will not give him a discharge, unless it be with a Testimonial
recommending him to some Congregation they approve of. If he refuse to join
with such a Congregation as they approve of, and withdraw himself from them,
they cut him off as an Apostate. No pretense of Conscience will prevail with
them to allow any to join with the Church of England, or the Presbyterians, or
Quakers, or the strict Baptists. They plead they cannot discharge them, because
those Churches they desire to join with, do not walk accordingly to the Rule of
God's Word; saying, should we suffer you, we should comply with you in Sin.
Therefore the Officers charge them with their Covenant, and Command them to
obey the Authority of Christ invested in them, upon pain of the displeasure of
the King of Heaven.

When any Member revolts, Excommunication.
the method they profess to observe, is, To send for him to give his Reasons to
the Church; if he comes they admonish him to return; if he does not come, they
empower one or two Messengers to go to him, and admonish him in the Name of the
Church; this they do a second time: If this prevails not (after some time
allowed according to their discretion) they send Messengers to acquaint him
that on such a Day they intend to cut him off; and when they have cut him off,
they send to acquaint him with it. This is always done at a Church Meeting.

If the Pastor be Living, it is his Sole Privilege to pronounce the Sentence of
Excommunication. The Method is, to Pray, and Exhort the People on this
occasion, and then to pronounce the Sentence in these or the like Words, viz. I
do, in the Presence of God, with the judgment and consent of this Church, To
justify this they urge 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
deliver A. B. unto Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, to be buffeted by
him, that his Soul may be saved in the Day of the Lord. They then blot his Name
out of the Book of Subscriptions (which they call the Book of Life) and
henceforth avoid him, according at it is set down in the Explanation of the
Covenant.

If any sick Sick.
Person desires it, the Pastor and some Elders repair to him and Anoint him,
Praying over him. They dip their Fingers in a Porringer or Sawcer of Oil,
wherewith they rub the Temples of the Sick Person.

They traduce the Public Prayers of the Church of England as Idolatrous and
Antichristian, the Ministers as scandalous in their Lives, negligent in their
Duty, forsaking their own Articles, formal in their Administrations, legal in
their Preaching, without the Power of Godliness, etc.

They call all Churches and Worship false which are not Established by a
Covenant like theirs, i. e. all Churches that are not Independent.

They engage not to go near these Churches; and if any of the Members
occasionally go, and are uncovered there, they interpret such uncovering an
assent to the Prayers, and deal with such Persons as Sinners, cutting them off,
if they do not testify their Repentance.

They say, That God has before ordained whatsoever comes to pass, even the
worst of Sins, and that Sinners cannot avoid committing them; That it is to no
purpose to pray for, or endeavor after Repentance; because the Sins of the
Elect, past, present, and to come, are already forgiven; and therefore they
ought to pray only for the Manifestation of their Pardon.

They look upon themselves obliged to Trade with their own Members, or those of
their Way, if possible: When some have done otherwise, the Pastor has
publicly declared, in their Church Meetings, that it was their Sin, and the
Elders have joined with him. It Is a general Rule among them; Trade with any
rather than the Church of England. In order to perpetuate this Schism, Davis
breeds up Young Men in his House.

According to the best account I can get, There are about Thirteen gathered
Congregations of this Separation under settled Pastors; the Members whereof are
computed to be between two and three Thousand.

Besides these, they have diverse Congregations for Prayer and Preaching, which
have no settled Pastors, nor any Administration of the Sacraments.

When any of the Hearers desires to be admitted a Member of any particular
Congregation, notice is given to that Congregation, who, at their Church
Meeting, appoint the Pastor, with some Elders and Deacons, to go and hold a
Church Meeting near the place where such Hearer dwells, and to examine and
admit him, as before specified.

When they have gained a competent Number of Members in any part, they fix a
Pastor among them, and embody them.

This was the state of the Separation, at Rothwell, about the Year 1696, which,
as I understand, has received no considerable alteration since that time.

THE CANONS OF GEORGE FOX.
Friends Fellowshipp must be in the Spirit and all Friends must know one
another in the Spirit and Power of God
First IN all the Meetings of the County two or three being gathered from them
to go to the General Meetings for to give notice one to another if there be
any that walks not in the truth, and have been convinced and gone from truth
and so dishonors God, that some may be ordered from the meeting to go to
exhort such, and bring into the next General meeting what they say.

2ly If any that profess the truth that follows pleasures drunkenness
gameings or is not faithful in their callings and dealings, nor honest nor
just but runs into debt and so brings a Scandal upon the truth; Friends may
give notice to the General meeting (if there be any such) and some may be
ordered to go and exhort them and bring in their answer the next General
meeting

3ly And if any goes disorderly together in Marriage contrary to the Practice
of the holy men of God and assemblies of the righteous in all ages, who
declared it in the assemblies of the Righteous when they took one another (all
things being clear, and they both being free from any other, And when they do
go together and take one another let there not be less then a dozen Friends
and Relations present (according to your former order) having first acquainted
the men's meeting, and they have cleernesse and unity with them, And that it may
be Recorded in a Book according to the word and Commandment of the Lord, and
such if any walk contrary to the truth herein let some be ordered to speak to
them and give notice thereof to the next General meeting

4ly And all that be widows (which have Children) and do intend to Marry let
Query be made what she has done for her Children: If there be noe will made
then let such part of her late husbands Estate be set out for her Children as
is equal and according to truth, and what they can do afterward let them do
also, And where there is a will made let those Legacies and Portions be
improved and secured before Marriage for the Children of the deceased with what
more they can do for them and then when these things are done let them be
recorded in a Book at the next General Meeting

5ly And also all Widows in all your several meetings, let them be taken
notice of and Informed and encouraged in their outward business, that there be
not any hinderance to them in their inward growth, and so carefully looked after
that they may be nourished and cherished, and so preserved in the truth that
love may be increased And if they have many Children to put out Apprentices or
Servants, that may be a burden to them to bring up: then let Friends take care
to ease them by putting them forth as may be meet. Let all these things be
looked into by every meeting And notice thereof given to the next General
meeting: And then some ordered to see that all things are done according to
truth and Righteousness

6ly And all such as Marry by the Priest of Baal who are in the Rough hands of
Esau and fists of wickedness, and bloody hands, and who have had their hands
in the blood of our Brethren, and who are the cause of all this Banishment of
our Brethren And has spoiled so many of their goods casting into prisons and
keeps many hundreds at this day, And such as goes to them for wives or
husbands must come to judgment and condemnation of that Spirit that led them to
Baal and of Baals Priests also, or else Friends that keeps their habitations
must write against them and Baal both, For from Genesis to the Revelations you
never read any of the Priests that married people But it is Gods ordinance and
whom God joins together let noe man put asunder: And they took one another in
the Assemblies of the Righteous when all things were clear Therefore let all
these things be inquired into, and brought into the General meeting And from
thence some ordered to go to them and to return what they Say at your next
meeting, And all these, before they or any of them are left as heathen, or
written against, let them be three or four times gone to that they may have
Gospel order; So that if it be possible they may come to that which did
convince them to condemn their unrighteous doings that so ye may not leave a
hoof in Egypt

7ly And also such as wears their hatts when Friends prays and are gotten
into the old rotten principle of the Ranters, who setts up the wearing thereof
in opposition to the power of God, and therein holds it which is condemned by
it, and the power of God is gone over it and them, who are ranted from the
truth, And have stopped many who were coming into it, that the very world can
say you are in confusion and divided, and gone from your first principle, who
said you were of one heart and one mind and one soul and Therefore that spirit
must be cut off by the Sword of the Spirit of the Lord that they may come to
that which at first did convince them; And notice must be given to the General
meeting of all these things, And from thence some must be ordered to go to
exhort them that be in such things, to come to the First principle that did at.
First convince them, that they may come over such things And Friends must stand
up in the noble seed of God to judge the world and all the fallen Angels.

8ly And in all your meetings let notice be given to the General meeting of
all the poor and when ye have hard that there is many more poor belongs to
one meeting then to another, and that meeting thereby burdened and oppressed
let the rest of the meetings asist and help them, so that ye may ease one
another and help to bear one another burdens and so fulfill the Law of
Christ, and so see that nothing be lacking according to the Apostles words
(Mark) nothing lacking then all is well; For the Jews outward though they were
as the Stars of heaven and as the Sand of the Sea yet there were not to be a
beggar amongst them according to the Law of God. And amongst the Christians in
the First age there was a men's meeting Set up at Jerusalem to see that nothing
was lacking which was the Gospel order according to the Law of Jesus; And this
continued as long they lived in the life, and power and spirit of God: But when
the Apostasy came in and the true Church fled into the wilderness who was to
continue there 1260 Days, and the witnesses prophesied in sackcloth 1260 Days:
And the Beast was worshpped just so long 1260 Days, and then all things went
out of order, and every thing was wanting in the time they worshipped the
Dragon, and the Beast, And the Devil made the world like a wilderness. But now
the Judgment of the great whore is come and of the Beast, and with them the
false prophet and the Dragon who shall be cast alive into the lake of fire, And
the true Church come up out of the wilderness, and the man child (which was
caught up into heaven) come down again to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron,
And the marriage of the Lamb is come, and the Lamb and the Saints shall have
the victory, and the everlasting Gospel is and shall be preached again, as was
amongst the Apostles, and the Gospel order must be set up as was amongst them,
and a men's meeting as was at the First conversion to see that nothing be
lacking in the Church then all is well, So there is not to be a beggar (now)
amongst the Christians according to the Law of Christ is added in the Co^^, and
blotted out.
Jesus as there was not to be any amongst the Jews according to the Law of God

9ly And also all men that hunts after women from woman to woman: And also
women whose affections runs some times after one man and soon after to another
and so hold one another in affection and so draws out the affections one of
another, and after a while leaves one another, And goes to other and does the
same thing this doing makes more like Sodom then Saints, and is not of Gods
moving nor joining where they are not to be parted, For Marriage is Gods
ordinance and Gods command one to another, and in that they feel the power of
God

10ly And that notice be taken of all evil Speakers backbiters slanderers and
foolish talkers, and idle jesters, for all these things corrupts good manners,
and is not according to the Saints, and holy ones whose words are seasoned with
Salt ministering Grace to the hearers

11ly And all such who are tale carriers and railers whose work is to sow
dissension are to be reproved, and admonished, for such do not bring people
into the unity of the Spirit, but by such doings loose their own Conditions

12ly And all such as goes up and down to cheat by borrowing and getting
money of Friends in bye places, and have cheated several, all such are to be
stopped and judged, as there is a woman tale in her person and fleckled in her
face, and also one John Harding who are for judgment and to be condemned

13ly And if there happen any difference between Friend and Friend of any
matters if it cannot be ended before the General meeting, Let half a dozen
Friends from the General meeting be ordered to put a speedy end thereunto,
That justice may speedily done, that noe difference may rest nor remain
amongst any, And let your General meetings be once every Quarter of a year
and to be appointed at such places as may be most convenient for the most of
Friends to meet in; So that the house may be cleansed of all that is contrary
to purity virtue, light life and Spirit and power of God so that Friends may
not be one another sorrow and trouble but one another joy and Crown in the
Lord

14ly and all Friends see that your Children be trained up in the fear of the
Lord in Soberness and holiness, and Righteousness, and temperance and
meekness and lowlynesse and modesty in their apparel and carriage, and so to
exhort your Children and families: And teach your Children when they are young,
then will they remember it when they are old, according to Solomon, so that
your Children may be a blessing to you and not a curse

15ly And that Friends do buy Convenient burying places as Abraham did who
bought a place to bury his dead, and would not bury amongst the Egyptians and
Cananites and Jacob was brought out of Egypt and Joseph and they were buried
in their Grandfather and great Grandfathers burying place; And so Friends to
buy decent burying places for your meetings, and to keep out of the Spirit of
the Sodomites and Egyptians, and Cananites which corrupts the earth and let
them be Decently and well fenced that you may Condemn the world in all things

16ly And also that Friends buy convenient Books for the Registring of births
marriages and burialls as the holy men of God did of old as you may read
through the Scriptures that every one may be reddy to give a Testimony and
Certificate thereof, if need require or any be called thereunto.

17ly And also that all the Sufferings of Friends of all kind of Sufferings in
all the County be gathered up and put together and sent to the General meeting
and so sent to London to Ellis Hoakes That noe thing of the memorial of the
blood and cruel Sufferings of your Brethren be lost which shall stand a
testimony against the murdering Spirit of this world, and be to the praise of
the everlasting power of the Lord in the ages to come who supported and vpheld
them in such hardships and cruelties who is God over all blessed for ever Amen

18ly And let inquiry be made concerning all such as pay Tithes which make void
the Testimony and Sufferings of all our Brethren, who have Suffered many of
them to death, by which many Widows and Fatherless have been made, and
which is contrary to the Doctrine of Apostles, and the Doctrine of the Martyrs,
and contrary to the Doctrine of the Righteous in this present age, all such are
to be inquired into and to be exhorted.

19ly And let Query be made concerning all Prisoners that are poor that they
may be relieved, and so encouraged in their Sufferings, and also that care be
taken for their wives and families, that they do not suffer for want of Supply
of outward things, And let enquiry be made how many prisoners there are in all
the prisons in all your several Counties

Let Diligent enquiry be made into all these things at every monthly meeting,
and at every Quarterly meeting to take care accordingly

Dear Friends be faithful in the Service of God and mind the Lords business
and be Diligent and bring the power of the Lord over all those that have gain
said it; And all you that be faithful go to visit them all that have been
convinced, from house to house, that if it be possible you may not leave a
hoof in Egypt, and so every one go seek the lost sheep, and bring him home
on your backs to the fold, and there will be more joy of that one sheep then of
the ninety nine in the fold

Coppies of this to be sent all abroad amongst Friends in their men's meetings
G. F.
All my Friends every where who are gathered in the name of Jesus Christ keep
your meetings according as you did in the beginning, between the 10th and 11th
hour when the Priest is in the heart of his worship, and so you all to be in
your meetings feeding on the bread of life, when the Priest and his company are
in his and their dishes and pleasures; and you then to break up your meetings,
as you feel the power to order you about the third or fourth hour, when the
Priest is in the heart of his worship and so you may go away when he is in his
heart, and sit over his dishes and go away in his heart, This was the
practice of Friends in the the beginning Therefore continue in it, and do not
loose it; keep your meetings on the First days and your weekly meetings in
the name of Jesus that never changes

And Friends all take heed of sleeping in meetings and Sottishness and
dullness, for it is an ill savory thing to see one sit nodding in meetings
and so loose the sense of the Lord, and shamefacednesse both, and it grieves
the upright and watchful that waits upon the Lord to see such things And for
the Priests people, and others that comes into your meetings and to see you
that come together to worship God, And to meet together to wait upon him to
have fellowship in his Spirit, for you to sit nodding is a shame and an
unseemly thing Therefore be careful and watchful, and let it be amended, and
mind the light and power of Christ Jesus in you and that will condemn all such
things, and lead you out of and above such things, and make you watchful one
over another for your good

Let this be read in all your meetings G. F.


Mem. This is Spelt and Pointed according to the Copy.



FINIS.

