portrait (head and shoulders) in oval frame of man in ecclesiastical robe;
bottom center of oval frame contains a small coat of arms; outside the oval
frame, below left and right, a bible and a Book of Common Prayer, respectively
Bible

Co^ Prayer Book

This but the shade of him adorned in White
Whose real substance does maintain each rite
of Gods true Church: her Comlie Decency
in spite of Turk or Pope's supremacy


An Orthodox PLEA For the Sanctuary of God, Common Service, White Robe of the
House,


Being writ for the good of all, but more especially intended for the Common
sort; being composed in a Style fittest for their Capacities.

By G. A. Sometime of Oxford, of St. JOHN'S.

Psalm 150.1. Praise ye God in his Sanctuary. Matthew 21.13. My House shall be
called the House of Prayer. Psalm 119.8. I will keep thy Ceremonies: Oh forsake
me not. London, Printed for the Author, and sold by R. Reynolds at the Sun and
Bible in the Postern. 1669.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, HENERY By Divine Providence, Lord Bishop
of Chichester, Grace and Peace be multiplied upon You everlastingly.
Reverend in Christ,
Were I not assured that that Humility which dwells in your self could
condescend to stoop, and view the smallest good with propitious eyes, I durst
not thus have tendered this small Piece unto your gracious Aspect; but being
confident of your great love to things though never so low and weak, I am
encouraged in this my mean address to appear (before your Lordship) and now
what Iv'e writ and offered here, it is your Lordships due, and 'twere a sin
almost as high as Sacrilege, to keep it back, I am obliged for ever to pay
unto your self much more than ordinary thanks; It was you that sent me forth,
and bid me teach: It was your hands by imposition warranted my Call; It was
your Holy Prayers that called a blessing down on what you did, and what I
undertook; of which then I found, and still do find blessed effects. Now not
to own so great a good as this, it were too evident I had forgot how to be
good; but sure my right hand must forget it is Cunning, when I neglect to pay a
due so duly just: I must confess my Offering is but small for what I then, and
since received, to recompense it were imposible; but yet to make my poor
endeavors in some sense to be owned, I must avow and will, this poor Work of
mine appears with freeness from my heart, that well could wish it more, and
better too he will endeavor, may this now be accepted

From him whose high ambition is to serve your Lordship, and the Church. G. A.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous and true Religious Reader,
THe occasion of writing this following Treatise, was from the consideration of
that lamentable blindeness, that obstinate perverseness has bred into many
against the House of God, his Sacred Service, and orderly Worship; and most
especially the people of this our Nation have been led into this wickedness,
and that which is the greatest grief, too many of them love to continue so
still; the ponderous continuance of error has dwelt upon them, and
Issachar-like bend under their burden with content; Custom we say it is a
second nature, and this is too plainly seen amongst many that stand in
opposition to Gods Worship; they have been so long left to themselves, that
they have quite forgot themselves; for when there was no King to govern Israel,
then every one did what seemed good in his own eyes. Oh how easily were the
rude multitude persuaded by a few years continuance of disorderly Rebellion,
that blasphemous confusion, was the orderly government both of State and
Church; so well pleased were some from the use of it that they could wish, and
did desire no better settlement, by which corruption hundreds, nay thousands
were putrified and become abominable, both to the eyes of God, and all good
men, this was and is the dreadful effects of forsaking Truth to embrace Error,
they are given up to a reprobate sense, according to the Apostle, to believe
lies that they may be damned; for upon Gods departing from any, the Devil
enters them, Jus Vacui: Thus did the Devil Lord it here for some time, and
carry the estimation and glory before God; but now to the glory of our true
everlasting God, the happiness of our King and Church, be it spoken, this dark
and hellish Scene is blown over, and Light and Truth appears most gloriously:
In the Rubric.
God give us hearts to be thankful, not only with our lips, but in our lives;
Whereas Murder, Blasphemy, and Rebellion, had almost swallowed these poor
Kingdoms up like an unruly inundation that breaks in by force, and will do
mischief though opposed: So now Mercy and Justice, Truth and Righteousness do
like pleasant Rivers run through the midst of them, whereas before the great
Leviathan of Hell took his pastime here, and suffered nothing to float above
him that was within his reach, but made a prey thereof; so now with joy we may
behold the Ark of God escapt those storms and dangerous threatenings, and
landed safely on the Mountain Ararat: It is time, high time that now we should
appear above the Deck, and with the Prophet sing The People that were in
darkness have seen a glorious light; for know that our deliverance from the
late lamentable darkness, was as the Children of Isreal's out of Egypt, it came
unlookt for. Since then that God has thus redeemed us, let us praise his Holy
Name, and not affront his glorious love and light by willful ignorance, set on
purpose to abuse his sacred goodness.

It is no great shame to be ignorant of some natural things; Parisiensis
observes to ask a man if he can draw a Picture, pensil a Landscip to the full;
he will answer you without shame and blushing Nescio, He has no skill. But ask
a man if he knows how to live holy, and worship God aright, that puts him to
the blush, he is ashamed to answer Nescio; It is therefore the ignorance of
Gods true Worship and Service that makes many not to live upright to God as
they should, though their pretenses be never so seemingly zealous; for it is
the want of being well grounded and principled in true Religion, which makes so
many run, travel, and labor after so many new fangled Doctrines and prejudicial
Errors as they do.

It is the House that is built upon the Sand that swims away with every Flood,
whilst the House that is built upon the Rock stands it out, the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail to turn it over; indeed it is almost impossible for men to live
holy before God, which knows not his way of Worship, nor which way to go about
to serve him.

Strange fire it is abominable, it is the Sacrifice that is kindled by the
ancient Coals under the Altar, which was first inflamed from heaven that makes
the Offering pleasant unto God: But now, good Reader, not to stay thee too long
from what I have intended for thee, I will add but this, peruse this Piece with
charity as well toward the Work, as him that writ it, and know it is honestly
intended more to do good than to get applause; thus heartily conceive of him,
and it, and thou will oblige him that is thy friend to serve thee still, whilst
thou with zeal shall truly fear thy God, honor the King, and love the Church.

G. A.

THE Sanctuary of God.
GOD from the very beginning has always had a Place set apart for his Divine
Worship and Service to be performed in, where with Reverence and Obedience the
Creatures acknowledgements were still offered up to the Creators acceptance.
Genesis 3.8.
Adam our first Parent in Paradise had where to present himself before the
Lord, Genesis 4.3.
and Adams Sonns out of Paradise had where to bring their Sacrifices and
Oblations unto God; the Holy Patriarchs had their Groves and Mountains for
their Solemn Worship, Genesis 22.1.
and when they had no settled Habitation, but were as Pilgrims here on Earth,
yet such was Gods care to have a Church, a place to be worshipped in amongst
them, that he commands them to make a moveable Tabernacle, Exodus 25.
that nevertheless for all their discontinuance of settlement, they might carry
their consecrated Mansion with them where ever they went: and this has been
the desire of God in all Ages, that he might have a peculiar Place set apart
for his Holiness to be worshipped in, and that whatever Fabrics we built or
erected, either Palaces for the honor of Dignity, or Schools for the
maintenance of Learning, Houses for Commerce, Trade, or common uses, that we
should be so zealously careful as to leave room enough for the Temple of the
Lord to be built on the best and highest Ground; so that by a descent,
advantage as well as right of pre-eminence, it might overtop the stateliest
Palace, as well as the more common and inferior Buildings.

It Is true, we here must own that in the infancy of the World, the House and
place of Gods Worship, was but of a small stature, a very fit Receptacle for
her Comers, which were but small; but as Religion grew and increast, so
increast the House of God from Altars to Groves, from Altars and Groves to
Mountains; from Mountains to Tabernacles; from Tabernacles, to Synagogues and
Temples. Thus the dignity and excellency of Gods House increast, until it
arrived to what luster the Law could give it; And as in the Law so in the
Gospel, for in the primitive appearance of Christianity, the Church and Place
of Gods Worship was but low and mean: It first appeared in Woods and Mountains,
but as the Christiain Religion grew and increast into esteem, so increast the
House of God from Woods and Mountains, Matthew. 3.1.
Matthew. 5.1.
to Rooms and Chambers within doors; from Rooms and Chambers, 1 Cor. 16.19.
to Chapels, Rev. 1.20.
Churches, and Cathedrals.

Solomon's Temple was not from the beginning, no more were ours, but arrived by
an orderly growth to what perfection they now appear at: Damnable then is their
opinion who would not allow of Christ's House to be one inch bigger, nor one
glimpse lightsomer than she was in the primitive and persecuting times of
Christianity. Now let but reason be the Judge how foul and cruel this Hellish
tenure is to be satisfied in nothing better than the ruin of Christ's Temples,
that with those wretches in the Prophet, Haggai. 1, 4.
can be content to let the Houses of of the Lord lie waste, while their own
Houses are seiled and complete: Of a certain the maintainers of this wicked
opinion could willingly see with content of mind another barbarous and
persecuting Herod alive, a people as refractory as the obstinate Jews, and all
to lessen the Lords House to crucify Christ over again, to swim and bathe
themselves in Orthodox blood; why this must be, and nothing else could be looked
for otherwise, should the House of the Lord be brought down to its primitive
dejectedness, Christ must be murdered in his Ministers and Professors, for
there is no truer Omen of the people of Gods calamity, than when the House of
the Lord is held in contempt, and by Heresy and Schism eclipsed. Oh how does
Jeremiah mourn for the breach that he saw made in the House of God! The Prophet
David could not sleep neither night nor day, Psalm. 132.1.
but was in a continual discomposement of spirit, until he had found out a
place for the Lord to be worshipped in. Lord remember David in all his
afflictions. He would not climb up to his bed, until he had found out a place
for the Lord to be worshiped in: What says the Prophet, shall I dwell in
Cedars, and the Ark of the Lord without doors under Curtains?

It Is observed in this very thing, that even Pagans and Infidels are careful to
build Temples and glorious Oratories for the worship of their false Deities,
and shall Paganism outstrip Christianity? Shall they worship their Idols in
Temples devoted and set apart for that use only, and shall not Christianity
have a consecrated House set apart for the true God to be worshipped in? Heaven
forbid Oh such impiety, it is the very road to Atheism, for that souldamning
sin, it is commonly entered upon much like the pleasing sin of theft, it begins
with a pin, and ends with a bigger thing: thus ill-principled men, not being
fastened by grace into Gods true Religion, first begin to rob God of one small
Glory, then of another that is bigger, until they have robbed him of all that
they can or dare. First, they begin to cavil and grumble at the number, as well
as the bigness of our Churches, then at Revenues; Oh sie, cry they, its too
much by half: Next at the Ornaments, the windows they are too gaudy, this Altar
that is too superstitious, the Commandments too Mosaical, the Bells they make
too much noise, and then at the last they strike at the whole; why not another
House, as well as this? Thus from one objection to another, they never leave
objecting, until they have objected God quite out of doors, and his House into
a disesteem. But this is not all, they stop not here; for being given over to a
reprobate sense, as the Apostle well notes, the Devil is still animating them
on to further mischief, and denial of goodness, for from a disesteem of Gods
House, they come to a disesteem of the pure and sacred Word of God, which is
able to make the whole World wise unto Salvation; they then pretend they have
no need of Scripture, it is but a dead Letter, cries some wretches, they have a
quickening spirit within them that informs them all things, there is too too
many of these that from a denial of Gods House comes to a denial of his Word,
and from that they arrive at last without Gods restraining grace to that woeful
pitch of reprobation and eternal damnation, even to the denying of the Lord
that bought them; and this was too plainly seen in our late blasphemous and
rebellous times, when almost every apostatizing Sect dare take the Wall of Gods
pure Worship, turning Religion into the Channel; Nay some there were that imp't
themselves into that pitch of impiety and and strange audacious boldness, James
Naylor the Quaker entering the City of Bristol on an Ass.
that Phaeton-like presumed to take upon them the reins of government as the
Son of God, assumed his name, entered the City with shouts and acclamations of
Hosanna. Now what more horrid blasphemy could be acted than this in the face of
God, Angels and men?

It is dangerous my friends to fall out of Gods protection into Satan's ruin,
to forsake the Living Water, and to dig unto your selves Cisterns that will
hold no Water.

It is observed that naturally Religion and serving of God, Dr. Brownrig Bishop
of Exeter.
consults with the Shunamite, If there be a God and Religion, then there must
be a Worship; and if a Worship, then a Tabernacle or Temple; and if so, then it
must be answerable to his glory in a comely manner. Let us but consider the
amiable beauty and resplendent glory of that Temple which Solomon built for
God, the great care, cost, pains and industry in the building of it, that all
things in some measure might be answerable for the entertainment of so great a
God that was to dwell in it. The Gold was fetched from Ophir, 1 Kings 5. Chapter
the Cedar Trees from Lebanon, the Brass from Corinth, Josephus.
the Curious Workmen from Tyrus, and all to erect up a Fabric for Gods
Worship; and now to all this zealous industry of Solomon, 1 Kings 6.12, 13.
see what an encouragement God adds to it concerning this House which thou have
built, If thou walk in my Ordinances -- I will dwell among the Children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel. And accordingly as God did
promise, so he performed; for when the House was finished and made perfect, God
descends in a Cloud and takes possession of it; 1 Kings 8.10.
and this God did for two purposes; First to keep the Founders off for laying
any Title, Claim, or After-interest to that which he had re-entred upon, and
made his own by lawful possession. Secondly, to imprint a reverent
acknowledgment of the house from all men, that that place must needs be holy
where God dwells and inhabits.

But here I know some will be ready to step in and say, Why? It Is known that
all this glory and cost which was bestowed, on Solomon's Temple, it was
performed in the time of the Law, which we have nothing to do withal. Now how
easily may this be answered? Is not God the God of the Law as well as the
Gospel, and of the Gospel as well as the Law? Is he not Alpha and Omega, the
Beginning and Ending? Is he not to be worshipped now as well as then? Has he
not a Temple for ever? And though our Saviors coming abolisht the Jewish
Ceremonies, the Sacrifices of the Law by offering up himself once for all; and
though Moses gave place and resignation of precedence to Christ, all this and
what ever he did, it aimed not at the abolishing of the Temple, or converting
it to any base and inferior use: No our blessed Savior is so far from pulling
down this glorious Temple built to his Fathers service, or to allow of any
employment that it should be put to beyond what it was fitst intended for, that
he undertakes to correct the Jews unhallowing of the same, and to let them
roundly know that it was not fit such a holy place dedicated to his Fathers
use, should be made a place of Mart and Trade, It Is worth our observation, and
it does much conduce to the Churches benefit, if considered, the ardent
vehemence of our Saviors zeal; at this time only, and at all other times,
calm, the Jews spit upon him, buffetted him, and scorned him, crowned his head
with thorns, nailed him to the Cross, yet all this and more stirs him not, he
passes it away in silence: But oh the abuse of his Fathers House, that moves
him to a heavenly anger, I and the sequal plainly confirms it; for he never
stands much to pause and argue with them for their unreverent carriages and
performances in the House of his Father, but gets him a Whip of Cords and to
work with them soundly; Matthew. 21.
He overturns the Table of the Money Changers, and leaves them scrambling for
their Coin, and makes the Dove-Sellers take up their heels and fly for it, and
in the general tells them all, It is written, Mat. 21.13.
My House shall be called a House of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thieves. Blessed be this holy president that our Savior has taught and left us,
by it we see we ought not, nor must not suffer the house of the Lord to be used
irreverently, or to be abused, or turned to contrary ends from what it was
intended. And we find to back this president the good Apostle St. Paul
following the example of his Master Jesus, he severely corrects the Corinthians
for their unseemly behavior to the House of God. Now these Corinthians it is
supposed had had the House of God so long in their own houses, by reason of
persecution, that they began to esteem it no better than their ordinary
dwelling where they eat and drank, feasted and revelled: but mark how sharply
St. Paul takes them up for it. 1 Cor. 11.22.
What have ye not houses to eat and drink in; but despise ye the House of God?
Here St. Paul argues the difference between a common house and the House of
God, Being the Material Church.
I and thus God himself of old commands a reverence to his House, for when God
gave the Commandment to the Children of Israel that they should keep his
Sabbath, see what he linkes to it, you shall keep my Sabbath, Levit. 26.2.
and reverence my Sanctuary; as if the Sabbath could not be kept in a right
holy observance, without a reverent respect to the House of God.

But here I know some others will be apt to say, They could like it may be the
place that is appointed for Worship, were it not for this, the Founders and
Builders of them were Idolaters, they worshipped false gods, as Images, and the
like, and therefore say they, we hold them not fit for the true God to be
worshipped, because they were first set apart and devoted to false gods.

To this I answer, That we are not to forsake the House of God, now in being,
because Idolaters first founded and built the House before it was the House of
God, for know that it was not the first founders or builders of the Houses or
Churches, made them the Houses of God, but the holy and reverend Dedication and
Consecration of them since, and were not this allowable, undoubtedly our
Forefathers would not have received the Temples of Idols, Pet. Ma^t. Com. Pla.
and converted them into holy Houses where Christ should be worshipped, and
those Revenues that were dedicated to their Gods and Goddesses, to Plays and
Vestal Virgins, to the repairing of Churches, and maintenance of Ministers,
whereas these things did not only at first serve Antichrist but even the
Devil himself; you might as well deny almost every thing that you necessarily
and commonly use, as this. For know if you will use nothing that has been
dedicated to Paganism or Idolatry, you must drink no wine; for the Heathens
consecrated it to Bachus; nor eat no bread, for they consecrated it to Ceres;
Water to Neptune, Learning to Mercury, but this observance were ridiculous; for
as learned Mr. Hooker speaks in his Ecclesiastical Polity, Idolaters may judge
even what is decent about external affairs of God, as of greater things that
are true, yet nevertheles^ what ever Idolaters have thought or done
idolatrously let it be abhorred, yet of tha^ which is good even in evi^ things
God is the Author; For should we forsake those part^ that are good in
Idolaters, we might forsake many things and those substantial too without which
there would be no salvation; we might then cease to believe in God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, with other necessary points, all which Papistical
Idolaters believe, and maintain. But in this we ought to be very careful that
we do not press and burden the people of God with any such bondage, as to let
them use nothing that Idolaters has used, being lawful before God. I ask the
Question whether the people of God did disown the Ark because the Philistines
played and sported with it? It was not their carrying of it from Gath to Ekron,
and from thence to Askelon, no they received it with joy, when once God
returned it to them again? Were the people of God to disesteem the House of the
Lord, because Manasses was an Idolatrous King, and built up Altars in the House
of the Lord unto false gods, 2 Chronicles. 33.
and worshipped them when he had done? No upon the Lords chastising of him, and
his returning to the true Religion, pulling down those Altars that were built
up to false gods, and erecting an Altar to the true God, the same House
continued serviceable still; thus the consecrated Censers that Corah and his
Accomplices used, Numb. 16.37.38.
were not to be thrown away, though they employed them to a most profane use,
no more are our Churches to be refrained, because they have been Idolatrously
abused (as I have noted before) for if we must pull down our Churches for
former polutions, then have we work enough to do, not only in respect of the
Papists abuse at first, but in respect also of the late abominable corruptions,
that the last wicked times stained them withal; for it is not unknown to many,
that some of our Churches which were consecrated to Gods service were then
converted to base and abominable uses, very few to any good; for those that
they did not make Stables, and Ware houses, they made them the Conventicles of
Blasphemy, Nonsense, and Rebellion; for in them they have with more than
ordinary confidence prayed as they called it, to the God of mercy, that he
would assist them in the work of revenge, and destruction against King, Priest,
and People; in them they animated the Father against the Son, and the Son
against the Father; See at large Reverend Dr. King, Bishop of Cicister, in a
Sermon (...) preached before his Majesty the 30 Jan.
in them they maintained it was no sin to murder Gods anointed, to banish and
illegally suspend his Ministers; sure then the Houses of God were sufficiently
abused; Here the Church had cause enough to cry out, Was ever sorrow like mine?
Yet all this, and more injuries offered to her, though they were great griefs
in their time, yet not cause enough to make the People of the Lord to disesteem
or forget her, but with Isreal's Captives they still did sing, If I forget thee,
Oh House of God, let my right hand forget its cunning. It is not any thing
indeed that can be used against Gods House that can make the Orthodox-christian
dis-esteem it; No, he mourns with her in adversity, and rejoices with her in
prosperity, never forgetting her however she is dealt with: There are too many,
I would I could not speak it, that now appears in the vindication of the House
of God, because they see she is highly favored of the Lord; that should she
ever be eclips't again, which I heartily pray may never be, would soon draw
from her, and prove the very worst of enemies. There is too too many of these
false hearted Sycophants, that can cry all hail to day and crucify to morrow,
that serve her more for profit than they do for love. Oh that the Reverend
Bishops and my very good Superiors, with submission be it spoken, would think
on some way to purge our Church from base temporizing Pulpitters, such that
whindle, cry, bemoan and fawn upon her in public, that too frequently stab her
to the heart in private; that wait and pray for another wicked change; that
they might be uppermost again, but from such false hearted Proteus's that turns
to every side, that can be a prick-ear'd Phanatick to day, and a seeming
Orthodox-Christian to morrow, that can off with a Jump, and on with a Cassock,
that can swallow a large Scottish Covenant, without streining at it, from all
such in the words of the Letany, Good Lord deliver us. But oh the true
Orthodox-Servant of God, which stands unwavering to his original principle,
that does not say with him that went to Mass, To tullian.
Eamus ad communem errorem, Lets yield to common error. It Is not the torrent
of common practice can draw the religious Christian from his true grounded
resolution: 'twas not the proffer of a Living of a hundred a year, or Chaplain
to Nol^ could do it; they were like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, they will die
first; they are no starters, nor flinchers, but like David's Worthies stick to
her in all her troubles; Sons of the Church, and not o^ the Kirk; they are
builders and not destroyers of the House of God; that repair her breaches, and
not rend them wider; that reverence the House as the Habitation of God, and not
scornfully set by it as a place of no worth or value: of a certain I may speak
it, and that within compass, that there are none but a sort of mad and perverse
Rake-hels that sin against the light of Reason and Conscience, that will not
allow God the same benefit they have themselves to dwell in a house; but let
such inveterate and erroneous judgments aim as destructively as ever they can
against the Dwelling of the Lord, God has, and shall for ever have a House for
his Honor to dwell in.

For while there is a visible Church upheld by God, so long will there be a
material house for his people to worship in, kept up by the same power; for
it is not the devil nor man's envy, can harm either visible or material, but Gods
judgment for the sin and abuse of both is the cause of their destruction, and
demolishing.
A House built upon a Rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and
of a certain that House must needs be strong then where Omnipotency is the Head
of the Building, and a continual Providence to support it; Read but the ancient
prophecy of Gods house the stability, honor, and dignity of it.

Though these Scriptures are by most taken by Gods visible Church, and not for
the material Church made of wood, iron, and stones, yet if we consider that the
visible Church of Gods people cannot well worship God without a place set apart
to worship him in, we may in some sort establish a perpetuity to these our
material buildings which we call Churches, and think them, at least some of
them, to be built on a Rock, against which men's malice shall not prevail.
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountains of the Lords
House shall be established in the top of the Mountain, and shall be exalted
above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, and many people shall go,
and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of
the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths, Isa. 2.2, 3.

See here the Eminency of Gods House, the Height and Glory of it! This is Gods
Hill on which he dwells; For the Hill of the Lord is like the great Mountain of
Bashan, there is no removing of it: Oh how malicious then are those who would
level the Mountain of God if they could, and bring in competition with the
lowest Valley? Certainly these are wretches stamped after the Devils own heart,
not qualified like David, after Gods own heart; who as it were dotes and falls
inamored with the House of God

Psalm. 26.8.
Oh how I have loved the habitation of thy House, and the place where thine
Honor dwells. Psalm. 5.7.
And again, I Will come into thy House in the multitude of thy Mercy, and in thy
fear will I worship toward thy Holy Temple. Thus Holy and Religious men makes
Gods House a place of Fear and Reverence, they do not dis-esteem it, or rush
into it hand over head, making no difference between the House of the Lord and
the Market; of a truth they are acquainted with better things, they follow
Solomon's direction, Eccl. 4.17.
Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the House of God; they are wary
in all their carriages whilst they are there, demeaning themselves according to
the sanctity of the Place, they will not in any action wilfully tread awry, they
know it is Gods House, and accordingly must behave themselves in it: but now
the contrary, is too much the sin of our times and unreverence to the House of
God; we concieve meanly of the House it self, and accordingly we demean our
selves both in it and toward it: Few in our age say with Jacob after his
dream, Genesis 28.7.
How fearful is this Place, this is none but the House of God! But indeed it
cannot well be expected that those that have no respect toward Gods Commands,
that they should have any toward his House; for it is a plain infallible mark
or sign, that those that have no esteem to God and true Religion, they can have
no esteem toward his Dwelling: there are many, and a very great many of them
too, that can be content to give God some slight and cheap observance, but if
there be required from them something more than ordinary to be given for the
Honor and Dignity of God, either to build Churches, or to repair those that are
built; to contribute to the maintenance of their Minister, if he have not a
sufficient competency of his own, in these or such like cases, most men are apt
to draw back, accounting that God and Religion best that is best cheap, thus
when Selflove sways us, Dr. Brownrig late Bishop of Exeter.
we are all for our selves; but true love seeks not his own so much as the
glory of God. It Is worth our, observation to consider Peter's care in offering
to build the Tabernacle upon Mount Tabor, Master, it is good for us to be here;
Luke. 9.33.
Let Us build three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias,
mark how careful he is to build Tabernacles for these three, but takes no care
for himself, he offers to provide for them against wind and weather, and takes
no notice of his own shelter; and from this we may observe, that true love to
God and his Church transports a Christian out of himself, making him to forget
his own comfort in respect of God, to take care for building Gods Tabernacle
before his own. Tertullian observes not any that followed Christ that ever
questioned how they should live, None said, Non habeo, quo vivam, Pietas non
respicit vitam, multo minus victum. Its enough for them to be in famulatu
Christi: attendance upon God should be always or at least our first business,
we should always give God the precedence of being served; first his House being
first built or repaired, Exodus 23.16.
and made serviceable before our own; His absolute dues first tendered before we
reckon any thing to be our own, Levit. 23.14.
Levit. 25.23.
we must have a care of playing false play with God, Mallaki. 1.13.
tendering any thing unto him that is unperfect, or detaining any thing from him
that is his due. Abel makes choice of the best of his Flock, but Kain takes no
such care, that which comes next to hand will serve Gods turn well enough, he
thinks; but our God abominates all such usage: he must have the best or none,
Numb. 18.12.
The best of the Oil, the best of Wine, and the best of the Wheat, shall thou
offer unto the Lord: God accounts it fraud and cousenage to have the coursest
Grain, the least Heap, the lightest Sheaf. The Jews have a Witty saying amongst
them, That Kain was a covetous man, and his sacrifice smelt of it; and truly
the same saying may be verified in many in these our days that what they offer
to God and his House, it smells of covetousness, they will as soon part with
their lives as with any thing with a free heart toward God, the service of his
Church, and the maintenance of his Ministry. Hence it is that the
Ecclesiastical Laws are so great an eyesore and trouble to many, because with
Joshuah they commands the People to worship God, to repair his House, to
maintain his Ministers, to live orderly and soberly in all godliness of life;
and for this reason do most hate the Laws and Institutions of God, because they
stand in opposition to all Profaneness, wilful Liberty, Sacrilege, and
Rebellion.

THE Common Service.
PUlbick Prayer before God it is an utterance of good and wholesome words in an
orderly form so exactly couch't, and forethought on, as may be fit in an
humble manner to be offered up unto the God of Order; therefore when we prepare
for the House of God we must also prepare in a fitted readiness, what we shall
have to say unto God, when we come before him; If for pardon of sin and begging
of supplies, if for giving of thanks for blessings and mercies received,
deliverances obtained, why all this and whatever we shall, or may have need of
to put up to God, must be seriously and devoutly forethought of, to which
intent there has been, and is at this very day fitted for our occasional
wants, holy and profitable Supplies, the Divine-Service of the Church planted
for a stable Worship, and Service to God for ever; So that none might rush into
his sacred presence, and there pour out before the God of Order and Holiness, a
long and tedious oration, the most None-sence, These were the common effusions
of Olivers Saints,
Blasphemy, and Rebellion, with hum's and haw's, coughs and impertinent
fetches. Now God of old, to prevent this strange and irregular boldness,
prescribed a Set-form of Worship that men might not take up that boldness to
speak any thing before him rashly, especially the Guiders and Pastors of his
People, And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron and his Sons.
Thus shall they bless the people,

1 The Lord bless thee and keep thee. Numb. 6.24 25, 26.


2 The Lord make his face shine upon thee, God himself did frame to his Priests
the very speech wherewith they were charged to bless his people.
and be merciful unto thee.

3. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.

Not leaving the blessing to their own extemporary effusions, it is plain enough
known, and that beyond the reach of contradiction; that the ancient People of
God, the Jews had a particular Liturgy, a Form of Divine-Service extracted out
of the Holy Scripture as a constant Service for their approach to God upon all
occasions, their Benedictions being penned by the Masters of their Synagogues;
See Dr. Hamonds Practic. Catech.
Now this their Form of Worship as it was ordained for an exact Service to God,
so was it also intended to prevent the true Religion from all corruption in
Doctrine, that God might be served in all places with one and the same Order
and Form of Divine Worship; And as the Jews had their Forms of Divine Service,
so had, and have the Christians also: Luke 11.1.
John the Baptist taught his Disciples to pray by Form, and our blessed Savior
himself left us a Form of Prayer, to signify his allowance of that way of
Worship, and to prevent all temeritious effusions, as also to take off all
quarrels that might arise by the spirits of contradictions: Our Savior does as
it were stand up, and speak to his Disciples, to whom he was to leave the
government of his Church after his Ascension, my friends, to take away all
disputes that may be amongst you, what kind of worship my Church shall be
served withal, when ye pray say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11.2.
And as the Christians had their Set-forms of Prayer, so had they also their
Psalms and Hymns, 1 Cor. 14.26.
and all to make up a complete Liturgy; Matthew. 26.3.
For when they had sung a Psalm they went up into the Mountain; and as the Jews
had their Songs of Moses and Daniel, Luke 1.46.
so have the Christians the Songs of the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.68.
Zacharias and Old-Simeon. Luke 2.29.
And these are those which the Apostles does so often say, 1 Cor. 14, 15.
I will pray and sing with the Spirit. And again, Ephesians. 5.19.
in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, making melody to the Lord with my
whole heart. Now we know that Hymns and Psalms, and such kind of Prayer and
Praises are not to be canvised on the sudden, but to be premeditated and framed
aforehand. I, but will some say, all that St. Paul performed in this kind, he
did it by the Spirit, he prayed and sung by the Spirit. All this we own, God
forbid else; for know he that ventures upon any Form of Prayer, or Hymn, Psalm,
or Benediction, without a devout and holy Spirit prepared for the work, does
rather prattle than pray; howl than sing Psalms. All Gods Prayers must be
prayed with the Spirit, or else they fall under the scandal with those that the
Apostle so long ago corrects, That they use a Form of Godliness, but deny the
power thereof.

They therefore do very ill and uncharitable to the sacred Prayers of Gods
Church, to stigmatize it with that infamy, crying of it down, that it is barely
carried on by Form without any power, as if all Service and Devotion dwelt
only upon external performances; but they that speak it without book, they
know not what they say; for indeed how dare any take up that boldness to
themselves to judge the heart of man, when none knows it but God. If our
Worship be only formal and hypocritical, as many say it is, I ask the Question
how they know it? Our words in our Service are Gods words, our gestures and
carriages with our habits, are decent and comely, when we perform our Worship:
Now what is within us, none but God knows; for let the worst of our enemies
stand and behold our Order, they must if they will speak truth, When our
service is performed with musical voices and devout hearts according to the old
Latin verse; Non von sed votum non chordula musica sed cor. Non clamor, sed
amor cantat in aure Dei.
say that surely this is the place where God dwells; I must confess we cannot
free our Church altogether from sinful Pastors, as well as refractory people;
for there has always been Mixtura Ecclesiae from the beginning, and will so
continue: Kain and Abel are the Churches Representatives, who shows a mixed
temper and composition of the Church from the beginning; substantial and
false-hearted attenders on the Altar of God; Aug Ep. 145.
Ad huc arca continet corvum and columbam. Clean and unclean birds; the Dove,
and the Raven are both in the Ark and House of God. And this has been of old,
and will continue until the great Shepherd shall come and separate the good
from the bad, till then they feed together in the same pasture: But however
though there be, and must be a mixture of good and bad Ministers and People,
yet the pure Worship and Service it self is unspotted. Prayer and Praises have
no errors, Humanum est errare, but Gods Service has none; And moreover in
reference to the foregoing relation, it has been, and is always the
industrious care of the Fathers of the Church, that none should be admitted to
holy Orders to attend upon Gods Altar, without they did seem and appear to be
as well grounded in Grace as Learning, that their offerings that they should
offer up to God in his holy Sanctuary, might be spiritual and not carnal; for
there is nothing more hateful to God than a Formal Devotion without the Spirit,
therefore when we pray in the Liturgy we pray earnestly for the assistance of
the spirit of God. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance,
and his holy spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this
present. See in the Absolution.
And when the Minister blesses the people in the Lords name; The Lord be with
you, See after the Creed.
He Is answered by the whole Congregation by way of retaliation, and with thy
spirit. And again in the Litany we pray, See the Letany.
That it may please God to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our sins,
negligences, and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of his holy Spirit
to amend our lives according to his holy Word. And so in many other of our
several Collects and Prayers, we beseech God that he would send down his Spirit
upon us to guide and direct us. How wicked then are those men that abuse this
holy Worship, calling it a Form without a Spirit? and have given out in their
preaching and writings that we deny the spirit to have any exercise in our
Worship, when God he knows it is our earnest begging, and entreating of him
continually, when we appear before him in Prayer, that he would ever assist us
with his holy Spirit: They therefore that do not take the Worship and Service
of our Church to be Spiritual and Divine, are led and conducted by no other
spirit but the spirit of Error and Contradiction. For know the Service of our
Church performed cordially and sincerely, it is a pure holy and acceptable
Service, it is as pleasing Incense in the Nostrils of God, when it is fired by
the ardency of Faith and true Devotion; when the Churches Worship is jointly
and universally performed throughout her several Congregations, observing and
obeying one and the same order, though but a Church militant, yet she fairly by
imitation represents the Church triumphant, which praises God in a joint
Communion, they all sing with one and the same Form; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
of Sabbath, whereas a disorderly Devotion in the Church, must surely as much
affront God as amaze the people, when the whole time at Service shall be spent
in throwing out corrupt and indigested words as they happen to come uppermost,
some right, some wrong, the Hearers spending their time in nothing else, but in
listening and considering what their extemporary Preacher, or rather Pratler,
with his long fetches and turns will drive at; at last being often out, but
seldom in, it is therefore no wonder at all that many times the people
complain that their Guides are dark and dubious in their directions, being so
often lost and at a stand themselves in the very prescribing of their Rules:
whereas our Service and Divine Worship it is even a guide to the simplest and
lowest of men; for certainly he must be of a very shallow capacity that cannot
join with the Minister in our Prayers and Services; And undoubtedly those
Prayers does most good that are performed knowingly: Ignorance in the Worship
of God is the mother and breeder up of Error. Matthew. 22.29.
You err, says Christ to the Sadduces, not knowing the Word. He that prays
ignorantly, reaps little profit by it, whilst he that prays understandingly,
reaps wisdom unto Salvation. Oh what a goodly and comfortable a sight it is to
see both Pastor and People praying in a joint agreement and communion; for of a
certain those Prayers and Praises are likely to do most good that are performed
understandingly, as well as publicly: for as Doct. Hamond observes in his
Practical Catechism, that the Union of many hearts being met together are
likeliest to prevail, and the presence of some godly may bring down mercies
upon others whose Prayers has no promise to be heard, especially performed by
a consecrated person, whose office is to draw nigh unto God, to offer up Prayer
and Thanksgiving, as an Ambassador between God and Man. Oh it is a glorious
sight to behold these sacred performances to be done with zeal and devotion;
Certainly, as Jacob says, it is the Gate of Heaven. Holy-Prayer is that which
pleases God, and advantageth Man; And if Prayer, then seemly and orderly
Prayer, and what more orderly and seemly than the Holy Service that is now,
blessed be the Lord, amongst us; the worst of our enemies cannot say it is a
mystical or intricate Worship delivered in an unknown Tongue, or imbroidered
with canting terms, such as many of our adversaries Prayers are more befitting
a Prologue of a Comedy, to create laughter than stir up zeal; the worst they
say of our Prayers, they are plain and homely, but these are unchristian-like
Reproaches; as if any thing that acquaints the soul with God, or conducts it to
Heaven, can be too plain and obvious; but if plain, as they say, let them know
it is the plain Word of God, that Word which is able to make us wise unto
Salvation; For know that our Prayers, Psalms, and Benedictions, are the most of
them extracted out of the Word of God, and are methodically placed in an
orderly advantage for the glory of Gods Praise, and the blessed benefit of his
people that draw nigh unto him. Sure then those orderly and premeditated
Prayers and Praises taken out of the Word of God, may I hope as well for their
antiquity as their worth, plead the pre-eminence before the effusion of long
and tedious extemporary Prayers, made by the vain and bold imaginations of some
Squander-headed fellow.

But here I suppose some may be apt to step in and say, Were your Service made
up only with Prayer and Praises, we might it may be sooner agree and assent to
them, but they are mixed with Prayers, and Hymns, and Psalms, and Chapters made
up altogether, it appears not at all so advantageous and profitable as if made
up with Prayers and Praises only.

To this I answer; our Savior Christ left the government of the Church upon
his ascending up on high, unto the Apostles, and their lawful Successors,
commissionating and binding them as Paul did Timothy at Creet, Tit. 1.5.
to settle and establish all things in an orderly advantage, as well for the
praise of his glory as the good of his people; now whereas it is commonly
objected that the mixture and variety that is in our Service makes it not
approved of, nor followed by many, I thus vindicate this point in opposition to
their erroneous mistake; for know that the Service of our Church would not be
so profitable, nor so like to a true Worship that must be offered up to God,
were it not for the change and succession that is in it. Thus I make it appear
to all reasonable men, viz. When we approach to the public Service of the
Lord, we come or at least ought so to do, to make our confession of what sins
we have committed against him, it is but fit, considering the foulness of our
offenses, to prostrate our selves upon our knees before the throne of his
grace, and there acknowledge with tears the pollution of our souls, saying, we
have erred and strayed from thy ways, etc. upon which articular acknowledgment
the Minister for comfort and consolation does pronounce Gods proneness to
forgive and have mercy upon Submission, which being performed, and the soul
eased by Prayer, then to rise with a reverend posture from the Knees with
Praises, O come let us sing unto the Lord, etc. upon the ending of those
Praises then to place your self decently as in the House of God, waiting and
receiving with an open Soul those holy instructions from Gods Word that shall
be read unto you, and first the Psalms of David, Gloria Patri being ended, then
a Lesson out of the old Testament most commonly relating to the ancient
promises and kindnesses of God to his Church, in consideration it is but meet to
give him praise, singing or saying that sacred Hymn, Te Deum Laudamus. We
Praise thee O God, etc. then after a Lesson out of the New Testament declaring
the performance of his promised mercy to his Church, to sing another Hymn,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. then stoutly to stand with a direct
body, as well as an even soul, like a true heroic Soldier of God, and make a
confession of thy Faith, speaking with an audible voice, I believe in God, etc.
then to bow your self in Prayer before God, for diverse necessities of humane
Nature, The Lords Prayer and other invocations with the Letany.
not only for your self but for others, the King, and the whole Kingdom, yea
even for the converting of your enemies; then after a special prayer for Grace
and Sanctification, the ten Commandments, with the Epistles and Gospels being
distinctly deliverd unto us, the one containing our duty both to God and man,
the other having aspeciall relation to the work of our redemption; See a Piece
Printed at Cambridge 1642 called the Protestant Account.
all and what ever remains of the service of the Church else being in order and
due manner placed for the Glory of Gods Worship, and the convenient advantage
of his Peoples Souls, must needs be approved of from God, and all good and
Religious men.

But I know some others will be apt to say for all this, That though the words
may be good and the Order plausible, yet the length and tediousness of them
keeps them longer out of the Church than they would be: Oh say some, they stop
us an unreasonable while from hearing of the Sermon, and were it not for this
fault, we would hear them oftener.

Why these are strange expressions, and too often used in this sinful Nation,
that Prayer and Praises unto God should be counted tedious and irksome, this is
quite contrary to the Apostles saying, Pray continually. Now whereas it is
objected that the Prayers of the Church keeps people from the Sermon too long,
it is a folly beyond wonder to consider it that ever people should be so
ignorant of the excellency of Divine Prayer and Praises, which are the golden
Keys that open and shut the gates of Heaven; that wrestle with God, and command
his mercy down, as it were, that this Sacred Worship should be jostled out of
the Church, or at least so little set by, that Preaching a thing that has been
more commoner in our age, to savor of wit and humor than any true devotion,
should be preferred before it. I must confess I have been always, God forbid I
should deny the Ordinance of sound Preaching but the abuse of it I abhor from
my heart, when Sermons leds people to Heaven, Oh then they are good, but when
they direct for Hell, when murder and Rebellion is the Theme of the Pulpit,
and confused Extravagancy the whole matter that is raised from it, then to hate
such Preaching is commendable: why this was the preaching of the late times,
and too many I am afraid use it still, this was the vomits of the Pulpit when
that wretch Peter's assumed the Chair of Canterbury.
and am still a Lover of true Preaching, but not at all of that which many
call, and would have pass for preaching, to name a text and then to talk any
thing that comes uppermost from it; either to run so far from the text as never
to come near it after once named, or to crow'd so close to it as to screw it
beyond its height, making the true word of God to speak that which it never
intended, certainly such preaching as this must much abuse the word of God, the
Hearers, and their own souls that vent it, when as a neat, quaint and zealous
exposition upon the words is commendable with allowance, to Paraphrase with
sincerity and truth, neither wresting the word from its intended scope, or
drift, nor assuming to be so bold as to think by your Comments you have
outstript and gone beyond the word of God, as well for worth of matter, as
excellency of style, this were an abominable arrogance, and yet this is a crime
too frequently entertained abroad, to esteem Calamy and Baxters prating before
Gods word, alas they conceive that these men have outdone Christ and his
Apostles for preaching to the purpose, the common consequence confirms this,
for many had rather go five miles to hear one of these fellows talk frightful
whimsies from their own brains, than to go one quarter of a mile to hear our
Savior Christ's Sermon which he preached on the Mount; Matthew 5.1
Acts 2.37.
Peter's converting Sermon to the Jews, with other of Christ's and his Apostles
works. The holy Testament which being read unto us with a pure heart, and we
receiving of it with the same, undoubtedly it is the only preaching of all
preaching that does most good, for what can be safer to be preached than Gods
pure Word which is able to make us wise unto Salvation? and though expositions
have crept into esteem amongst some, yet I think that Christ and his Apostles
Sermons left for our instructions, are to be approved on before all other works
of those that love God. And next to the holy Bible, the Service of the Church
pleads for pre-eminence before any thing that shall appear for Service before
God; for know that Prayer and Praises are the essential Worship of God, it is
the Coin of Heaven, it answers all things, it pleases God and pleases Man,
we have no other way to come unto God but by Prayer (through our Lord Jesus
Christ) Prayer brings us into his presence, and shows us the light of his
countenance; if God be angry with us, Prayer pacifies him and makes all well
again; if we are in sorrow, Prayer comforts us: see this in Hannah, a woman of
a sorrowful Spirit, Prayer maks her look Cheerful; If we are in prosperity, it
still refreshes us more and more, like Moses in his Communion with God on the
Mount, our faces shine by it, our hearts are more clearly revived.

I but say some, this Common Prayer is so mean a thing, that even a Child may
read it that can but read almost any thing, it is so inferior that we cannot
esteem it with that worth as our Pastors would have us.

This sounds something like that sin of Corah and his complies, to think meanly
of the Service of the Church, that any man is able to perform the Ministerial
offices as the Priest particularly consecrated for the work, but the punishment
of Korah, Numb. 16.
Dathan, and Abiram, to those that have read it; should be a terror and a
sufficient warning to stave them off from such a cursed opinion. I ask the
Question, do you think that a Butcher or a Slaughter-Man brought up to that
Profession, could not strike down an Ox with more slight and agility than a
Priest, or Levite? Why yes, no doubt but he could, common reason answers this;
but this was not suffered in the Temple to be done, none but those that have an
express warrant must officiate in Gods House; it is true you may read the
Prayers of the Church to the people, but by reason you are not consecrated to
that particular employment, it cannot be suffered by any Christian allowance:
Strange fire it is an abomination unto God: The Jews Liturgy it was as plain
and easy to be read, as our Service, do you think that the Laity could not
have read the ten Commandments, the Song of Moses and Daniel, the Prophesies,
the Psalms of David? why yes, no Question but those men might have read these
words, but not to any effect, but Aaron and his lawful Successors appointed and
set apart for the work by God; for when the people are to be blessed; it is Aaron
and his Sons that must give them the blessing in Gods name, it is Gods
Commandment, Joel the 2. and the 17. Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord
weep before the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, Oh
Lord. Malachi. 2.7.
By the Priests lips must the people learn knowledge: He that hears them,
hears me, says Christ? And he that despises them, despises me. See here
then the true dignity of a Minister, his Calling and Vocation is both sacred
and eminent. Now as Mr. Sandcroft observes there are a sort of men but of
yesterday, Mr. Sandcroft in a Sermon at the consecration of Bishops.
that would pretend to be wiser than their Forefathers, the whole world, yea
even Christ himself, which undertakes to thwart the ancient Decrees and
Purposes of God, as to the ordering of his Service and way of Worship, a sort
of men that know God and Religion no otherwise but by mere notion, that are
Christians from the shoulder and upwards, that whatever their brain conceives,
their tongue talks it for infallible Revelations; but in the Words of the
Litany, From all such good Lord deliver us.

They that deny the decent Order and Worship of Gods Church, deny all that is
regular and good, such think any thing will pass with God and serve his turn,
his Ministers Dunces, and his Service Nonsense, neither to be called nor
appointed, but to happen upon the office and performance by chance, and so by
guess accordingly officiate, and perform; but our God is a God of Order, and
must be worshipped in Order, not in confusion; his Priests must be consecrated,
and his Service premeditated, or else it serves not his turn, let us square but
one proposal by common reason in reference to this discourse: had we any
business with an earthly King of some weight and concernment, wherein if we
should miscarry in the delivery of our message, we should not only lose our
suit, but incur the Kings displeasure; how careful would we be to get words fit
for our business, how would we forethink of them, be still premeditating,
writing, correcting, and getting them all exact, that nothing might be
mislik't. Do you think our business with the King of Heaven ought not to be as
carefully stated, forethought, and considered on, knowing that all vain babbling
is abominable to him, and that we can never think to be too exact in those
words that must come before God in the behalf of our selves and others, lest
like Zebedy we be repulsed by our asking we know not what? It Is ill jesting
with edged tools, it is a strange presumptuous venture to step into Gods
presence with unthought of words and expressions, Eccle. 5.1.
Be not rash with thy mouth, says Solomon, nor let thy heart be hasty to utter
a thing before God, for God is in Heaven, and thou art on Earth.

The White Robe.
CAvills about matters indifferent in themselves, are too much the quarrel of
the times, and that which makes the animosities the stranger, is this, that
order and comely decency in Gods Service makes the pure Worship of God
despicable, and that is objected too as one of the maine causes of it, The
Surplice.
which in it self is the emblem of virtuous innocence, that that should keep
so many off from serving God in public, as it is pretended, is more then
ordinary wonder; Now this is a great grief to many that know the way to worship
God aright, to see so weak a prejudice live and do mischief, and that upon no
sure ground that it can keep footing on: but let Antagonists vent their furious
madness against that harmless Robe, and we that wear it, let them proclaim we
are Idolaters because we serve the Lord in it, in this we do appeal to God to
judge between their cry and us; thus much we will condescend to satisfy the
world, we never do account our selves the holier when this white garment is
upon us, nor the unholier when it is off; we own this Ceremony, as the body
does a fine garment, for ornament sake, or as a late learned Writer speaks, The
Ceremonies of the Church are as the body to the soul, the body being enlivened
by the soul is very amiable, so Ceremonies with devotion is very comely. We use
this Ceremony in the Church for ornament sake, and its significant resemblance
being a habit fitted for consecrated Persons to draw near unto God withal, for
what more fit than white, that suites with the affection of joy wherein God
delights to have his Saints praise him. Revel 7.6. Malachi 3.1.
White it is the beauty that the Angels appear before him in, how then can
any, nay dare any deny the Church militant here on Earth, that she may not
signify something by action and rite which the triumphant does really perform
in Heaven? This wearing of the Surplice, or White-Robe at D^vine-Service, is an
innocent, harmless and good imitating Ceremony, a thing more for order sake,
than for any absolute necessity of Worship, is received into the Church, and
made use of.

We usually have at the Solemn Actions of Royalty and Justice, ornaments to
beautify and set them forth, and shall we only in actions of Religion account
ornaments a stain and blemish? did we make wearing the Surplice at
Divine-Service a scruple in point of conscience, that if we left it off, and
not use it it would incur our damnation, it might then prove a
stumbling block to many but since it is received into the Church, worn and
made use of as a thing indifferent, yet by reason of the command of more
necessity for comeliness sake, in Gods House to be used, than not; I hope then
without any offense it being thus received into the Church, it may still
continue.

I know some will object, We have no Scripture for the receiving of it into our
Church: it is true, we have no Scripture to warrant it in particular express
words, nor none to disallow it; it is of no great consequence whether we have or
no, for we use it not as an express command from Gods own mouth, but as an
indifferent Ceremony instituted by the Fathers of the Church for comeliness
sake, and not so strictly enjoined as it is imagined; and indeed I suppose it
is not necessary that we should have in Scripture express mention of these
particular things we use in the Church, for this general is enough to know by
Faith that things indifferent cannot harm them that are of a pure heart; But
though we have not any Scripture that commends it to us, or any Scripture that
disallows it to us, yet we may find in Ecclesiastical Histories reasonable
satisfaction that the Ministers of God since the Law, as well as when the Law
was in force, have diversities of garments to distinguish them from the Laity,
as for their decency in their approach to God, Saint John the Apostle at
Ephesus wore a garment called Petalum, Petalius Seu. Lamina. St Chrysistom.
Tertullian.
Cyprian the Martin Pontius the Deacon testifies, that when he was within a
while to suffer death, gave his Barum to the Executioner, his garment of
Dalmatia unto the Deacons, and stood in his linen garment. St Chrysistom,
Eusebius, Tertullian, and other ancient Writers makes mention of the white
garments that the Ministers wore in the Church of old, which does plainly
confirm that the Surplice has been of ancient use in the House of God, I and
that too before the tyranny of Popedom; though many say we fetch it from
thence. But say the Surplice, or White Robe had been first invented by the
Pope, I cannot be persuaded if it had been so, that the impiety of Popedom is
such, Peter Mart^y in a letter to an English Bishop
that whatever she touches she defiles, and polutes, whereby good men may not
be allowed to put into holy uses any thing that her fingers have touched. Now
this were a burden too intolerable for the Church of God to bear; certainly
without harm, this garment may be used in the Church, provided it be worn and
made use of with that respect we allow to it, and no other ways, for order and
decency sake; and not with any superstitious and idolatrous intent.

It is easy to diserne how willingly men of itching ears and perverse minds,
are drawn and kept back from Gods pure worship, by the smallest of dislikes;
men stamped after the old Proverb, that stumble at a straw, and leap over a
block, that are so blinded by the Spirit of contradiction and aversness to that
which is good, they think no way straight, but their crooked ways, a sort of
refractory people spawned by the seed of blasphemy and rebellion, that had
rather see Hewson in the Pulpit with a blew apron, than Reverend Laud in the
Desk with a Surplice, an opinion as preposterous as the authors, men guided and
steered as ships in a dark night before the use of the Compass was found out,
by the rule of rambling, and dangerous uncertainty, for how many of poor
ignorant souls, that know little or nothing of true Religion; that speak evil
of matters out of their reach and capacity, more from a common received
prejudice from others opinion, than any true experience of their own, crying
down most of those things that they do by the hearsay of others; for I am
persuaded that there is not one in ten of these people that are so inveterate
against the Ceremonies of the Church, especially this innocent Ceremony of the
Surplice, that have ever weighed their dislike against them, or it, in the
scale of a moderate and discreet Reason, but at random abhor that which for
ought they know, if they did but seriously examine the matters by charitable
constructions, they might like esteem, and approve of those things which now
they hate and abhor; for this is too evident amongst many that they pin all
their Religion, like or dislike, upon the monstrous productions of the
giddy-headed multitudes, taking their faith on trust from those that have
either invented it themselves, or borrowed it of they do not know whom; not
considering or consulting with truth, whether it may be safe to adhere to or
no, which indeed is the evident cause of those miserable Shipwracks that
Heresy and Schism involves men into daily.

Indeed did this Ceremony of wearing the Surplice, by being received into the
Church, thrust or jostle out any of the Worship, or lessen the pure Service of
God; or that it tended to any idolatrous use, that the people were to worship
it, and to believe that without it no good could be done, then it were matter
of sufficient objection and denial, but being only ordained, brought in, and
received into Gods House for matter of order and decency, I think it should not
appear so odious as it does to many: 'Twas the advice of Diogenes the Tub
Philosopher that when we heard a man speak evil of another, before we gave
credit to the words he spoke, we should consider whether he that spoke them had
a prejudice or no, against the party he accused; intimating, that his word
ought not to be credited that speaks out of prejudice; therefore when we
consider the enemies of the Church, the little kindness they have to the Order
thereof, of which God is the Founder; we know, and are confidently certain,
that their inveterate venomous speeches against the Decency, as well as the
Absolute Worship, is not out of any zealous consideration, but from a hellish
and willful uncharitable gainsaying, being too common like the argument of some
silly women, that will be obstinate against truth and reason, because they will
be obstinate; 'twere happy for many that they did not make it their business as
they do, to cavil about the Ceremonies of the Church, for while their whole
time is taken up in speaking against the Garments of Christ, it is to be feared
they lose the Divinity of Christ: for commonly envy and prejudice it fills the
soul so full that it leaves little room for ought else; besides take any of the
haters of Gods Worship and Order, they that spoke most against it, those
forsooth will pretend that they are the most purely religious, not considering
that the Apostle James says, That he that bridleth not his tongue, his
Religion is in vain.

I could wish that all animosities taken up upon such grounds as these may die,
for it is a shame to Christianity and true protestant Religion, that we that
pretend to serve the Lord, of meekness, should delight in nothing better than
quarrels and disturbances, and that too commonly about matters against which
can be given no substantial reason; for shame leave off all childish and wilful
perverseness, and be instructed, come into Gods House, and embrace the truth,
and with a charitable construction view these Ceremonies understandingly, and
you will find them rather helps, than hindrances; rather Ornaments to
beautify the Church, than polutions to stein or blemish her; I am afraid there
are some that when time was, spoke so much against the Church and her orderly
decencies, when gain and rebellion prompt them on to what they did, that they
are now ashamed to read their lesson backward, although in conscience they know
they are wrong, and ought so to do! Oh what a wickedness it is to live wilfully
in a known opposition to the truth, to deny those things which they know are
very truth indeed. Come, come, for shame give no more occasion to Satan's
predominancy, the Devil rejoices at the disorderly confusion that he sees
amongst you, Satan laughs, and Babylon keeps holy day, both hoping and desiring
the downfall of Protestant Religion, and undoubtedly that which they desire
will come upon you, and us without a speedy unity, according to that saying of
Christ, A house and City that is divided against it self cannot stand, this is
infallible, and we must expect no other without an uniform assent to the ^^uth
published in our Li^urgy.

FINIS.

