AN ACCOUNT OF THE Duty on Tin Exported from Anno 1610. to the Year School.
THE Pewterers Grievance (under which they have long labored) is, That Foreign
Nations buy our Tin as cheap as our own Subjects; with which they make their
adulterated Pewter, and so do undersel us in their own and all other Foreign
Markets. Which (is humbly conceived) cannot be prevented any other way than by
laying such an additional Duty on Tin Exported, that it may come so much the
dearer to them, as may balance their gains by Allay.

The Duty on Tin Exported: As appears by the Custom-House Books from Anno 1610
has been as follows (viz.)
s. d. 1610. King James the first Book of Rates per hundred weight of Tin 7 4
And Pewter 5 2 1635. King Charles the First, the same 7 4 And Pewter 5 2 1642.
to 1657. Ordinance of Parliament, Tin 7 4 And Pewter 5 0 The Commonwealth
Parliament from 1642 to 1657, Tin paid 7 4 And Pewter 5 0

In the Year 1657 the Pewterers then complained, as now, that Foreign Nations
so Allayed the Tin bought of us, that they undersold the English in all Foreign
Markets.

s. d. And thereupon in that Year an additional Duty was laid on every hundred
weight of Tin Exported 12 8 So that Tin then paid 20 And Pewter but 5 1660. But
Anno 1660 upon the Restoration; Tin was reduced again only to 7 4 And Pewter
remained at 5 0 And so it continued until the last Parliament, when instead of
increasing the Duty on Tin, to encourage the Manufacture, there was taken off
Tin 4 4 And off Pewter but 3 0 So that Tin now pays but 3 0 And Pewter 2 0

Though Tin may well bear 8 or 10 s. per Cent more without any prejudice to the
exportation of it.

Which will relieve the Pewterers of England, and increase the Consumption of
Tin, and also augment the Kings Customs 8 or 10000 Pounds per annum.

An Answer to some Objections against Returning and Raising the Exportation
Duty on TIN.
d. in the Pound, or 5 per Cent. on all Goods according to their Value, and Tin
paid 4 s. for every Hundred Weight Coynage Duty, and at, and before the Duty
was taken off, 7 s. 4 d. the Hundred, Custom. In all 11 s. 4. d, which is about
20 per Cent. according to the Value of Tin, which was then but 2 l. 8 s. or 2
l. 10 s. a Hundred to the Tinner.

Cornwall, and has no relation to the Duty settled in the Book of Rates by the
Act of Tonnage and Poundage, but is paid by our own Subjects as well as
Foreigners, in the Country where the Tin is got.

And as to the 12 d. in the Pound by the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, it was
not according to the true and real Value of the Goods, but according to such
Value as was set upon them by that Act in the Book of Rates, wherein Tin is
valued at 7 l. 6 s. 8 d. the Hundred; though the true Value of it, Anno 1660,
when that Act was made, was not near so much.

Besides, if it be enquired what Custom other Goods Exported pay, some will be
found much: to exceed 12 d. in the Pound, or 5 per. Cent. As for instance, Lead
Exported, paies 10 l. Custom for every Hundred Pounds in Value: And if Lead
(the Exportation whereof cannot be in Prejudice of any English Manufacture) pay
10 per Cent. it is hoped it may not be thought unreasonable, that Tin (the
Exportation whereof at so low a Duty as now, being plainly prejudicial to the
Manufacture of Pewter) may pay 15 per Cent. which (at the Price of Tin now in
London) is about 11 s. 6 d. the Hundred Weight Custom, and is 8 s. 6 d. the
Hundred more than the 3 s. a Hundred it now pays, and which Tin may well bear,
without lessening the Foreign Vent of it.

East India (there being great Quantities of it in that Country, as good as the
English Tin) which will much lessen the Foreign Vent of our Tin.

s. 4 d. the Hundred, but yet it is manifest to the most experienced Men in that
Trade, that the Demand for it there is so great, that it will yield in
East India and other Countries beyond the Cape of Good Hope, from 3 l. 10 s. to
5 l. the Hundred Weight; and therefore impracticable to bring it into Europe as
Merchandise: Though sometimes when no better Kentilage can be got, some small
quantity is brought as Ballast to stiffen the Ship, and can be neither more or
less, by laying and Additional Duty of 8 or 10 s. the Hundred Weight on our Tin
exported: Besides, it is not so good in Quality as ours, for the Dutch give 3 or
4 s. the Hundred Weight more for the English, than the East India Tin at the
same time.

And it is evident such an Additional Duty, will not so advance the Price of
Tin, as to discourage the Foreign vent of it; either by discouraging the Use,
or Consumption of it, in Foreign Countries, or by encouraging them, to bring
Tin from East India: For since the taking off the Duty the last Parliament; the
Tinner has advanced the Price of Tin, near 20 s. the Hundred to the Foreigner,
as well to as our own Subjects: The Tinners Price being then but 48, or 50 s.
the Hundred; and the last C^ristma^ Coynage it was advanced to 3 l. 7 s. the
Hundred; besides the Coynage Duty. So that it is plain that 8, or 10 s. the
Hundred, Additional Duty, will not discourage the Foreign Vent of Tin; since
that will not advance the Price to the Foreigner one half so much as the Tinner
or Merchants has advanced it, since the taking off the Duty.

And the difference only is, that the Duty is to the King and for the good of
the Public, and the 20 s. per Hundred, now advanced in Price, is to the
private Gain and Advantage of the Tinner and Merchant, who make this Objection
against the Return and Increase of the Duty; which is not only much to the
Kings Advantage, but also the only remedy for the Pewterers Grievance.



s. per Cent. they have advanced to themselves in Price, since the 4 s. 4 d.
per Cent. was taken off the Duty.

England, upwards of 1000 Tuns or Tin, one Year with another. And therefore
every Shilling the Hundred added to the Duty, will increase the Kings Custom
above 1000 l. per Annum. So that 8 or 10 s. the Hundred added to the present
Duty, will increase the Kings Customs upwards 8 or 10000 per Annum.


