REDEEMING THE TIME.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Preston in Lancashire, January 4th. 1657. at the Funeral
of the Honorable Lady, THE LADY MARGARET HOVGHTON.

Revised, and, somewhat Enlarged; and, at the importunity of some Friends, now
published.

BY ISAAC AMBROSE. Preacher of the Gospel at Garstange in the same County.

LONDON, Printed for Rowland Reynalds, at the Sun and Bible, in the Poultrey.
1674.

Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the Time.


THE Apostle here gives many Lessons; exhorting 1. to love, Walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us: 2. To fly fornication, v. 1.
But fornication, and all uncleaness, or covetousness, v. 3.
let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints. 3. To avoid
intimate, dear, or familiar converse with graceless men, Be not, v. 7, 8.
ye therefore partakers with them; for ye were sometimes darkeness, but now are
you light, walk as Children of light. 4. To walk warily, exactly,
circumspectly, See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise.
And this last he amplifies from an effect, which testifies a circumspect,
exact, and acurate walking, to wit, Redeeming the time, etc.

I am only to learn you some part of this last Lesson; wherein you have 1. The
instruction it self, See that you walk circumspectly. 2. The amplification of
this instruction; and that is either from the reason binding to it, not as
fools, but as wise; or from the effect testifying of it, Redeeming the time.

1. For the instruction it self, See that ye walk circumspectly, (...),
exactly, precisely; no word fits the Greek better than this; it comes of two
words, (...), which signify to go to the extremity of a thing: we must be
willing to go to the utmost of every Command. To which purpose are those
precepts, to be hot in Religion, Rev. 3.16. to be zealous of good works, Tit.
2.14. to be fervent in spirit, Rev. 3.16.
Romans 12.11. to strive to enter in at the strait Gate. Tit. 2.14.
Luke 13.24. with an holy vioence to lay hold upon the Kingdom of Heaven, Romans
12.11.
Matthew. 11.12. Luke 12.24.
But this is not the point I shall now insist on. Mat. 11.12.


2. For the reason binding to it, not as fools, but as wise. It points to us,
that exactness, or preciseness in holy walking is a fruit of true Wisdom.
Luther brings in the men of the World objecting against him, Number tu solus
sapis? Number solus tu De^ places? What? are you the only Wise man in the World?
do you only please God? The answer was easy from this Text, that exact
walking, or a strict conversation, is the fruit of Wisdom. But neither is this
the point that I shall insist on.

3. For the effect testifying of it, Redeeming the time. If I may open the
words, 1. By time is meant oppertunity; which either it taken for the whole
course of our remaining life, or for such and such particular occasions as God
does offer to this or that particular duty; and both these may be understood
here. 2. By Redeeming the time, is meant either the avoiding of some
hindrances, which would take us off from the opportunity; or the recompencing
of some former unfruitfulness, which has been in the former part of our life:
or a gaining, streching, improving of time by embracing all the occasions of
doing all the good we can do: and we shall discover anon, that all these may be
understood here. In the mean time we lay down this Position as a necessary,
fundamental, Evangelical truth, that time must be Redeemed Look to it all ye
that fear God; herein will your spiritual Wisdom, and exact walking appear,
even in Redeeming the time.

In the prosecution of this point, I shall 1. give you the (...) 2. The. 3. The
(...). And then come to Application.

1. That time must be redeemed, the very Heathens confirm it: 'Twas the saying
of one Pittacus, one of the seven Wisemen, (...), know time; lose not a
minute. Theophrastus had another saying near to this, Sumptus pretiosissimus
tempus: time is of precious cost. Pliny seeing but his Nephew at leisure,
taking some turns in his walk, was so very strict, that he tells him, Non
licet has boras perdere, he should not lose so many precious hours. When Titus
the Son of Vespasian who revenged, Christ's blood on Jerusalem, returned victor
to Rome, remembering one night that had done no good that day, he cried out to
his friends, Hen perdidi diem! O alas, I have lost a day! Little do we think of
losing time, and is not this our shame? If such men without God and Christ,
without Law and Gospel, without all the promises of God and Christ in Law or
Gospel, could say thus much, how may they rise up in judgment against many of
us? But we cite not them, as though we stood in need of their learning; Col.
4.5.
the Apostles themselves give it us in charge, walk in Wisdom toward them
that are without, Heb. 3.13.15.
redeeming the time, and exhort one another while it is called to day, lest any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. And again, while it is
said to day, 1 Pet. 1.17.18.
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. And, pass the time of your
sojourning here with fear, 1 Pet. 4.3.
forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, -- but
with the precious blood of Christ. q. d. Christ redeemed you, and therefore you
had need to redeem the time. For the time past of our life may suffice us to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles. -- so that henceforth we should not
serve sin. Romans 6.6, Gal. 10.9.6.
-- or no longer should we live the rest of our time in the flesh to the lusts
of men, but to the will of God. -- Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in
due season we shall reap if we faint not; as we have therefore opportunity, let
us do good unto all men. It is Hieroms saying upon these words, O how short is
this race of my life? how short is this time now in hand? Breve vitae
Curriculum. etc. Jeron. l 3. Comment.
my studying, preaching, writing, correcting, reading, what it is but a gaining
or a loosing of my time?

2. What is it to redeem the time? John 4.
I answer, it comprehends these particulars.

1. An avoiding any thing which would hinder us from taking the opportunity. If
you ask, what are these hindrances? I answer, 1. Ignorance; many think they
are not in so strait a manner to be accountable for time. It is a general
opinion of the grossly ignorant, that if they can but pass away in time
without doing any harm (as they say) they are well enough; as if no account of
time might be given at all: they are ignorant of this principle, that they are
to improve, and to redeem the time. 2. Slothfulness; this makes men heedless,
or careless of their time: As it is with the sluggard, Yet a little more sleep,
Cor. 6.10.
a little more slumber, a little more folding of the arms is sleep. So it is
with the idle person, Let this hour, and this day be spent in doing nothing. O
the many golden hours, and days, and years that many thousands spend, and yet
cannot give the least account wherein either they have glorified God, or served
their generations. 3. Love of fleshly liberty: Alas, what care they for
redeeming time who are set on their lusts and liberties to sin? All the care
they have, it is merely to eat, and drink, and play: sensual pleasures are the
whole study of these men, and if they can but enjoy them, let time slip away as
it will, they never regard it.

2. A recompensing of some former unfruitfulness: (...) has this
interpretation, it is a redeeming (as it were) of that jewel of time that has
been formerly lost. As a travailer that has long stayed at an Inn, when he
finds the night coming upon him, he mends his pace, and goes as many miles in
an hour or two, as he did before in many. This me thinks comes nearest to the
word Redimo, to redeem, or to buy back again. It is taken (say some) from the
custom and practice of wise Merchants or Trades men, who uie to buy their
commodities while fit time of buying serves, and while the market holds; and
having happily had great losses, or formerly spent their time idly or
unthriftily, they do by their after diligence seek to redeem, and (as it were)
to buy back again the time that is past.

3. An embracing of all occasions for acting graces, and doing good; and this
agrees with the reason following, for the days are evil. q. d. Look to your
selves, for these are hard and dismal times; now is much corruption, and great
persecution, and the opportunity of good is exceedingly straightened; and
therefore it is very needful to catch at time, and to lay hold on an
opportunity, both to exercise graces, and to be doing as much good as you may,
while the time permits. I must work the works of him that sent me, John 9.4.
while it is day, says Christ, the night comes when no man can work: And,
John 12.35.
yet a little while and the light is with you, walk while ye have the light,
lest darkness come upon you: Gal. 6.10.
And as we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially to them
who are of the household of faith. Mark these sayings, while it s called to day;
and while the light is with you; and while you have opportunity. Thus you see
what it is.

3. But why must time be redeemed? what necessity for that? I answer --

1. In respect of time past. Alas, many a golden season have we lost, how many
hours, and days, and months, and years have we spent idly, and done little
good? Is it not time then to lay hold of every opportunity to redeem time past?
When God brought us forth into this world, his commands were upon us to work in
his vineyard, and to that purpose he designed to every one his time; thus many
days, or months, or years shall you every one live, and while you live be
employing these and these talents; it is my command upon all the sons of men,
in the sweat of thy face (i. e. of thy brow, or of thy brain) shall thou eat
bread, till thou return unto the ground; Genesis 3.19.
and why then do ye stand all the day idle? why are ye not in the work; and
especially in the work of the Lord? Now if this be so, that there is such a
command, and that we have broke this command at such a time, and such a time,
is it not our duty, and is there not cause to redeem the time? A fellow that
has loytered a great part of the day in his business, and yet must needs
finish his work, will he not toil and sweat at it toward night? will he not
double his pains, and put all his strength to it? So we, having not only been
slack in our business about Gods service, and slow in the way toward Heaven,
but even for many years having perhaps run in a quite contrary course, and
done the Devils work, how should we now toward the night of our natural life,
and in the conclusion of the short span thereof, spare no pains, double our
diligence, press hard to the price of the high calling with an holy kind of
violence, lay hold upon the Kingdom of Heaven, with all zeal, courage, and
resolution labor to redeem past, because it is past? This our reason.

2. In respect of time present: It is but a moment on which depends eternal
bliss or woe, if we have lost time past, and if we do lose time present, we may
be undone for ever. In this respect may we say of time, as Boaz said to his
kinsman concerning Ruth, If you will redeem it, redeem it: never think of
redeeming it tomorrow, Ruth. 4.4. 2 Cor. 6.2.
or the other day; or hereafter; for no time is properly yours but the present
time. Behold now is the accepted time; behold now is the day of salvation: now
while I am speaking and you hearing; now ere the night be done or the next day
comes on. Oh why should we trifle away the time which is properly ours, and
promise to our selves great things in a time which is none of ours? Luk 19.42.
When Christ mourned over Jerusalem he bemoans it thus, If thou had known,
even thou at leas in this thy day, the things belonging to thy peace: So may I
mourn over you, if thou had known, even thou at lest in this thy day: when is
that? while Ministers call and you hear, this is your day; and therefore he
that never heard effectually, let him hear now; it is now high time to awake
out of that cursed security wherein you lie; the Lord is now come near, Christ
Jesus is calling, mercy is entreating, and wisdom is even hoarse with crying
after you, if you lose this time, this hour of grace, who knows whether ever
you shall enjoy such another season? Oh take time by the forehead! post est
occasio calva; it will be too late soon. Now the Lord calls, and now it
concerns us to bestirr our selves upon these grounds.

1. Because now are evil days; the very reason in the Text: these are the last
times, which the Apostle calls perilous times; and why perilous? Tim. 3.1.2.
For men shall belevers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, etc. One would think it rather an History than a Prophecy of our
days. Oh is it not time now, if ever, to reedeem the time.

2. Because now are days of light: notwithstanding the evils of some or most
in comparison, yet many glorious truths do now appear: the Devil, I know, now
brings forth his ware, but withal God is now a communicating many blessed
truths. In respect of us, our fathers before, and since the Reformation were in
great darkness; the candle of God now shines upon this Nation with
extraordinary light: And what then? Why therefore it concerns us to redeem the
time: This is the Apostles argument, Act. 17.30.
The time of this ignorance God winks at but now he commands every man every
where to repent. This is another reason.

3. In respect of time to come: I shall instance only in time of death, and
time of judgment.

1. Death is at hand, and then we cannot redeem the time: So the Preacher,
Eccles. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.
q. d. If there be any thing to be done, if there be any duty God requires, do
it in life, for when death shall come there shall be no more preaching,
praying, hearing. Isa. 38.18.19.
The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth: the living, the living he shall praise
thee, as I do this day.

2. Our doom for eternity of joys or woes draws on apace, and is even at the
door. Then I am sure, account must be given for time, as well as for all other
things. Come, will Christ say, give an account of thy stewardship, of all
things done in the flesh, and of every moment of time: how did thou spend
such a day, such a Sabbath? was not such a day spent sinfully, or very
unprofitably, and was it ever redeemed? Here Is a reason indeed to force on us
this duty. But of this and other reasons I shall speak more in the motives,
when I exhort you to it.

Well then, Use. 1.
is it so, that time must be redeemed? this may reprove several sorts of
persons: as --

1. The idle; that are so far from redeeming time, that they are perpetually
losing time. This was the sin of Sodom, pride, fullness of bread: and abundance
of idleness, was in her. Ezekiel. 16.
Give me leave a little to lay open this sin. Surely this sin is the fountain
of all sins; by doing nothing we shall be sure to learn how to do ill. It is
said of Rome, that during the time of their Wars with Carthage, and other
enemies in Africa, they knew not what vice meant; but no sooner had they got
the conquest, than through idleness they came to ruin. Rust you know will fret
into the hardest Iron, if it be not used; so vice will infect the best heart,
if given to idleness. Standing Water is sooner frozen than the running stream;
and he that fitteth is more subject to sleep than he that walks; so the idle
man is far more subject to temptation than he that is profitably exercised.
Idleness is the Devils special opportunity; and we have an instance in David's
idleness, who at, that time, was set on by the Devil to commit other sins of
Adultery and Murder. But this is a sin that very boys in Schools can declame
against; and if it were not that I see many amongst us spend their time so very
unprofitably, I had not once named it. Oh think of it! If a Master should set a
light upon a Candlestick, and give his servant food, and time, and all things
convenient wherewith to work, yet when he comes to see if his task be finished,
he finds that the meat is wasted, the time is ended, the Candle to the very
socket burned, and little or nothing of the work is furthered, how would such a
servant excuse himself unto his Master? And is it not so with many of you? God
has given you meat, drink, and time; he has given you Candle, Fire. and
matter; but what have you done? Is not the lamp of your life almost consumed,
and yet you have not finished the work that was given you to do? Marth. 20.6.
Oh why stand ye here all the day idle?

2. The voluptuous: these mispend their time as ill as the former. They take
the timbrel and harp and, Job 21.12, 13.
rejoice at the sound of the organ, they spend their days in mirth. They waste
the fat and marrow (as it were) of precious time, even the flower of their age,
in froth and folly. Lord, that men should live upon earth, as Liviathan in the
Sea, only to take their sport and pastime therein! We have seen the sad
Catastrophe of some who have led such lives; and I believe still there is a
generation of men, that except they be continually exercised in variety of
pleasures, they are sore troubled with time; what else is the meaning of all
those passe-times (as they call them) but only a concatenation of such
delights as please the flesh, that time may not be to tedious wearisome unto
them? Little do these men consider that saying of Chrysostom, Presens tempus
non effundendi gaudu, sed tribulationum etc.
The present time is not for melting into mirth, but for lamentation and
mourning; the Devil omits no time to hurt you, for he knows his time is short;
still is he laying his snares to entrap men's souls; he goes about like a
roaring Lion to devour; he roars, and fumes, and flashes out fire against your
Salvation; Chrysostom. in cap. 5. ad Ephesians. Ser. 17.
and do you sit still, and jovially jest it out? Hark in your ears! the
present time is not for mrith, says Chrysostom; no, no, the present time is
for virtuous actions, to do the great business for which you were born, to
mourn, and sorrow, and sue out your pardon, and not to spend it in jollity, and
fleshly delights. If a condemned man had two or three days granted him to sue
out his pardon, were that a time for pleasure and sports? Genesis 2.17.
Surely the sentence of death is upon all flesh; In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die; only a little uncertain time is granted to sue
out our pardon in the name of Christ: why then do you slip away your time
sinfully, and will not redeem it?

3. The godly themselves: Alas, the best are short in this duty of redeeming
the time. Did not the Lord complain against his own people, Jer. 8.7.
the Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed times; and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people know not
the judgment of the Lord. Certainly God's own people do not so improve, as
they ought, those many gracious seasons of love which the Lord affords them. O
the omissions of Duties, and commissions of evils whereof we all stand guilty!
of how many good hours have we been ill Husbands? I shall not need to reckon up
our times of infancy when we knew nothing, nor of childhood when we knew very
little, nor of youth when we knew not much of that we ought to know; but since
our riper years, yea since the time of our regeneracy, how prodigal have we
been of this precious commodity of time? those that keep exact diaries can
easily tell you, such an hour lost, and such an hour ill spent; this day I did
little good, and the other day I sinned against my God. If in this case I may
speak out my own experiences, I must needs acknowledge that many and many a day
I have lost such and such an opportunity, and now that evil days come thick
upon me, wherein I would gladly redeem my days, oh how flow and backward am I
as yet in this Heavenly Duty! My dear brethern, I shall not only reprove you,
but my self in this: O why art thou so dull, and listless, and heavy, O my
soul? Awake, awake! stir up thy self, and with redoubled diligence fall to the
work of redeeming time, while yet the time, the day, the season, the
opportunity of grace, of Heaven, or of Salvation lasts.

2. Must time be redeemed? Use 2.
why then let me exhort you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ to be in
the exercise of this Duty. Oh redeem your time! avoid all those hindrances
that would take you off: recompense your former unfruitfulness by after
diligence; embrace all occasions of acting grace, and doing good. I might
dilate on all these particulars; but I shall contract all in these very words,
Redeem the time, oh redeem your time.

The motives besides the former reasons may be these.

1. Time is ever on the wing, and stays for no man. The Scripture is very full
of this; we meet with many similitudes hinting at the sudden, invisible motion
of time. My days are swifter then a post, they fly away; Job. 9.25, 26.
they are passed away as the swift Ships, as the Eagle that hastes to the
prey. See how Job here multiplies comparisons, that if we will not learn by the
first, we might learn by a second, or by a third: Go we to the land, and there
we see time on the spur, in the swift riding post; go we to the Sea, and there
we see time upon the wind, in the swift sailing Ship; go we to the air, and
there we see time upon the wing, in the swift flying Eagle. Hence the Ancients
emblem'd time with wings, as if it were not only running, or sailing, but
flying. Oh how sad it is to see men live as if time had leaden heels, and not
swift wings; or as if time would any time stay our leisure, and not be gone. Be
not deceived, you that are weary of time, either now redeem it, or you will one
day cry out, What has pride profited us? or what good has riches with our
vaunting brought us? All these things are passed away like a shadow, Wisd. 5.8,
9.10.11, 12, 13.
and as Post that passes by; or as a Ship; -- or as a Bird; -- or as an Arrow;
-- even so we, etc.

2. As time is swift, so our time is short. The Heavens indeed are said to be
of swift motion, but of long continuance; but our time is otherwise. When the
Corinthians propounded diverse cases of conscience, after some answers the
Apostle gives them in this: But this I say, brethren, the time is short; or
time is cut off: he alludes to Sea-fearing men that have almost done their
Voyage, and begin to strike sail. 1 Cor. 7.29.
Time was in the beginning of the World that men might say, I may, by course of
Nature, live a matter of six, or seven, or eight, or nine hundred years; but
now God has so cast out the time of our age, that so soon as we begin our
Voyage, we are ready to strike sail: we have but a little time; If I should
measure it out, what is it but an Ell, a Span, an Inch, a Point? And is it not
time then to redeem the time?

3. Time is not only swift and short, but nothing, I say a very nothing in
comparison. As some creatures are said to be nothing in comparison of others.
What is the Ant to the Elephant; or the Shrimp to the Whale? what is the whole
body of the Earth to the body of the Heavens? So is our time as nothing to all
time; and all time is as nothing to Eternity. David that found out a short
dimension of his time considered absolutely, Psalm. 39.5.
or in it self, Behold thou have made my days as an hand-breath; yet he could
find out no dimension: little enough for his time compared with God, Mine age
is as nothing before thee. God's being consists in one Eternal now; but man's
time is divided into past, present, and to come; three nothings, which being
added together amount in the total to this Sum, Mine age is as nothing before
thee. Oh that we would consider of this language of the Holy Ghost! were it not
enough, think you, to put us on this Duty of improving and trading our time
while the time is ours, and while this short time lasts?

4. Though time be swift and short, and as nothing in comparison, yet is it a
commodity more precious than the Gold of Ophir. If herein we might hear lost
Souls to utter themselves, Oh what would they say? or what would they give for
a little of that little time they had on earth? If the Lord by Divine and
Extraordinary dispensation would but grant them one months time to come hither
again, and to make a new trial, do you think they would not prize this grant?
would they not esteem that little short Golden season of grace at an high and
mighty rate? Would they not make use of every opportunity to lay hold of
Heaven, and to escape those fires wherein now they are burning, frying, and
flaming? O yes! if you would then tempt them, saying, Come, spend this hour
merrily; would they not answer; alas, we have but one months time to live here
in this World, and then we must either to Hell again, or if we improve our time
well, we must to Heaven; and what? shall we trifle away this time of trial and
of grace in offending God? shall we cast away our Souls again to gratify you,
or to please our own flesh, for so little a time as we have now to live? Oh God
forbid! avoid Satan! avoid all Temptations! welcome now all those messengers of
Heaven that will bring us the glad tidings, the tenders, the offers of Christ
and of Salvation! let not one sand in the hourglass run, but let us be doing
some good; let this hour be spent in prayer, and the next in meditation, and
the next in hearing of God's Word, and the next in the exercise of this and
that grace, and so on; but not one hour in sin. Why surely thus would they
prize and improve the time, that know by woeful experience what it is to lose
the time. And by this we may guess the worth of time; oh it is precious so
precious that if all the Earth were turned into Gold, it could not purchase one
minute of it. Me thinks this motive should work, and now that we have a little
time, it should prevail with us to redeem the time.

5. Our time has been a very sinful time. Ah my brethren, think over your
Ignorance, unbelief, worldliness, covetousness, pride, malice, lusts,
lukewarmness, impatience, discontentedness, vainglory, self love, wandering and
wicked imaginations: in a word, all your pollutions, distempers, estrangedness
from God in the time of your unregeneracy; oh were not those sinful,
abominable, and rebellious times: or be it so that your gracious God has since
those times wrought in you effectually his saving grace, have you not since,
then lost your first love, or at least grown remiss, and cold, and lukewarm in
it? Say then, speak out your hearts and tell me, is it not time now to remember
from whence you are fallen, and to repent, and to do your first works? Blessed
Mr. Bolton has a saying, that if it were possible that any uncomfortable
passion were incident to a glorified Saint in Heaven, he would be sorry, and
transported with extreme anger and indignation against himself that he was not
a mere greedy ingrosser (as it were) and improver of time for doing excellently
upon Earth, and that every hour, especially after his Conversion, was not
Crowned with some rare and more remarkable exploit, with some more special and
noble service for the glorifying of that most bountiful and ever-blessed God,
who has now honored him with such unspeakable glory in the Kingdom of Heaven.
But if no such passion is in glorified Saints, I am sure we have all cause
enough to loath our selves in our own fight for our iniquities, and for our
abominations. O come, let this be a motive to spur us on, and to quicken us in
this duty of Redeeming the time, because our days were evil.

6. The Scriptures speak of a remarkable set time of grace, a time of
visitation, Luke 19.44. a time of Salvation, 2 Cor, 6.2. a time whilst God may
be found, Psalm. 32.6. a time when he holds out the Golden Seepter. Esther. 5.2.
a time wherein the Fountain runs, and the spirit proclameth, Ho, every on
that thirsts come ye to the Waters, Isa. 55.1. Thus Jerusalem had her time;
and all the several Churches in Asia had their time; and now England, Scotland,
and Ireland have their time; and if we mis-improve this time, and walk unworthy
of this grace and Gospel of Christ, this time will have an end, Psalm. 95.11.
this Sun will go down at Noon, and set upon our heads. This day, if you will
hear my voice harden not your hearts, said God to Israel; but they hardened
their hearts, and therefore God swear to them in his wrath that they should
never enter into his rest. If it be so with us as it was with Israel in the
wilderness, we do not know but this very day the Lord may clap an Oath upon
our heads, that we shall never enter into his rest. Oh then that we would learn
of the Ant, that gathers her meat in the Summer time! Oh that while we have
this time of grace, we would redeem the time in praying, reading, hearing,
meditating, and treasuring up the things belonging to our peace! This time is a
set-time that hastens away: and we cannot with Joshua, bid the Sun stand still.
O then let us say, This is our time, and therefore what we will do for our
Souls, we will do it now. Surely better it is to redeem it now, than to wish in
pain and torment for the time again when it is past redemption.

7. The time, is a coming, yea it is near, even at the door, when time shall be
no more. This is the voice of the seventh Angel, Rev. 10.5.6.
And the Angel which I saw standing upon the Sea and upon the Earth, lifted up
his hand to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever, that there
should be time no longer. Who was this? a man? no, an Angel: and what, did he
say it? no, he swear it: how swear it, by himself? no, he swear it by him that
lives for ever: and what? that time should be little? no, it should be no
longer, time should be no more. Needs must this time come, that has all these
circumstances to confirm it. And what if this time should come even in your
time? what if now the seventh Angel should lift up his hand to Heaven, and take
this Oath? If this time be far off as to the general Judgment (which I cannot
think) yet sure I am, and without all peradventure, that it is not far off to
thee and me. It may be before this year, this month, this week, this night be
done, that God may say to his Angel, Go to such a man, and such a woman, I will
give them no more time; bring them hither, and here let them give an account
what they have done with all their time, for I must have a reckoning of all
time past. And then comes in, Imprimis, so much time in Drinking and Revelling;
Item so much time in Idling, Sporting, playing, etc. Oh, will God say, were
these things I gave you time for? no, no, it was for Heaven and Salvation you
had your time; and if that time be mis-improved, away, away time, and now enter
Eternity upon these Souls. Is not here a motive to make us look about us? Oh my
brethren, now, now if ever, redeem the time, for anon time will be gone, and
then succeeds eternity, eternity, eternity.

But what are the means for redeeming time? I answer. --

They are so many, that I may have no time to enumerate the Particulars; shall
we instance in some? you must pray, read, hear the Word, meditate, and watch
over your hearts with extraordinary industry; mortify your members which are
upon the Earth, as pride, covetousness, lusts, etc. grow up in grace, clear up
your evidences against that day when all shall stand naked before that great
and glorious Judge, etc. And these, and all other Duties (of which anon) must
be done while the day lasts. Here Is a great work, and a little time; does it
not concern you to bestir your selves? If a man have much to write, and but a
little Paper to write on, he must write small, and thick, and close as ever he
can: So must you do. I verily believe there is not one Soul amongst us but he
may find out hundreds and thousands of sins to repent him of; he may find out
many and many a Particular Duty that he should be exercised in from morning to
evening, and from evening to morning; so that it is a wonder how he can spare
any time at all for any thing else. Well then, up and be doing; lose not a
minute, but be in the use and exercise of some of these Dutys. These are the
means, and in the use of these means you may (by the Lords help and grace
concurring) redeem your time.

One Objection I would remove. It may be the day of grace is done, the gate of
mercy is already shut; and if so, how is it possible for me to redeem the time?
I answer --

1. By way of Concession. I believe there is a day of grace indeed, and if that
Sun set, it will never, never rise again. If thou had known, even thou at
least in this thy day, the things belonging to thy peace, but now are they hid
from thine eyes. Luke 19.4^.
q. d. Now is the gate of mercy shut, there is no means of grace or Salvation
for ever hereafter to be hoped for. As there is no Market or Fair-day that
lasts always; if the Country will not come in, the Tradesman will at last
put up his wares: So the Lord's standing may be open, and his shop set wide for
such and such a time; but if Souls will not come in, and buy without money and
without price, he will at last put up his wares (all his jewels of grace) and
then be gone.

2. Though it be true that there is a day of grace, and that this day may set;
yet in respect of us the Ministers of Christ, we cannot determine it; and
therefore so long as you live we call still, oh repent! oh redeem your time! I
may add, in respect of your selves, it is not in you to know the times and
seasons which God has put in his own power. Act. 1.7.
And the commandment of Faith standing in force on you so long as you live,
and thereforce you are still to look to your Duty of redeeming the time.

3. It may be this day, this night, this Sermon, this very hour may be thy day
of grace. Hearken! is not Christ's Spirit now a knocking? is not Christ himself
now offering mercy to thy Soul? O ye sons of men that have mis-improved your
time, will ye now at least in this your day he wise to Salvation? why now I
call to your hearts; now I command you to open your everlasting doors, that I,
the King of Glory, may come in; oh let this be the time of love! Come, give me
your hearts, and now redeem the time. Away, away with all objections, scruples,
cavils that may hinder this Duty, and now, even now, hearken to this voice of
Christ, or of the Spirit of Christ, that your Souls may live.

3. Must time be redeemed? Then for some Rules or Directions how we must redeem
it.

Rule 1. Use 3.
A void we every thing that would hinder us from taking the opportunity. What
those things are you have heard before; as ignorance, sloth, and love of
fleshly liberty. Many other particulars might be enumerated, but chiefly and
especially foregoe we these.

Rule. 2. Repent we of all former mis-improvings of our time. There is no other
way of recompensing former unfruitfulness but by repentance and after
diligence. This is the scond table after shipwreck; in this way we may redeem,
or buy back again the time that is past. The very word resipiscentia signifies
to be wise again, after all our former follies. Oh that ever any should be so
unworthy as to decry this godly-Gospel-golden Rule.

Rule 3. Live we every day as if every day were the last day we had to live.
This Rule or direction is so comprehensive, that I must needs break it into
particulars. Suppose then I were to begin this day, and that I looked on this
day as the last day of my life, how should I redeem my time; or spend this day?
I answer. --

1. My first and morning-thoughts should be on God, or on something in order to
his service. Psalm. 130.6.
My Soul waits for the Lord more than they that watch for the Morning. Isa.
23.2.
-- O Lord be gracious to me. I have waited for thee, be thou my arm every
Morning. Psalm. 59.16.
-- I will sing of thy power, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in thy Morning. --
It is good to give thanks unto the Lord. Psalm. 92.1, 2.
and to sing praises unto thy name, O most high, to show forth thy loving
kindness in the Morning. Psalm. 139.17.
-- How precious are thy thoughs unto me O God, when I awake, I am still with
thee. Now these Morning-thoughts may be spent either in a way of Meditation,
Isa. 26.
or of Prayer; and my Duties lie in both.

2. I should meditate. I shall not determine whether Morning or Evening may be
more suitable for set, deliberate, and solemn meditation? only this I affirm,
that either a solemn, or an occasional meditation is a Morning-duty. In some
sort meditation and prayer should ever go together; Psalm. 5.1, 2.3.
and David thus, couples them, Give ear to my words, O Lord, consider my
meditation, hearken to the voice of my cry. -- My voice shall thou hear in the
Morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee. Now these
Morning-meditations (if occasional or ejaculatory) may be on such Objects as
these.

1. Upon my first waking I may think on that Morning of my Resurrection, when
the Lord will awake me from the dust; it is but a while till the trump shall
sound, Awake, Isa. 29.19.
and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs; and
then shall the earth cast out her dead.

2. Upon sight of the Morning-sun I may think on that Sun of Righteousness that
enlightens Heaven. The Sun that shines on me was only created for this nether
World, and yet how glorious is it? Oh then what light is there in that City
above, that has no need of Sun, Re. 21.23.
or Moon, or Star, for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the
light thereof.

3. Upon the putting on of my apparel I may think on that garment of
Righteousness where with my soul either is or should be clothed. Alas! what is
this outward Robe but a Rag, or at best an excrement of dead worms, of which I
have little reason to be proud? But my Souls Robe is as a garment cut out of
the Sun, Rev. 12.1.
and put upon me. And there appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a woman clothed
with the Sun. Oh that I may be clothed with that Sun of Righteousness, or with
that Rightousness of the Son of God, that I may appear before God as I am in
him, pure and spotless.

I shall not instance in any other objects of my Mornings meditation; only if
I find my spirit most active and fit for meditation at such a time. I should
then go on, and spare more time for set, deliberate, and solemn meditations.

2. I should pray; and to this Duty I may join the reading of the Word. That
this is a mornings Duty the Scripture is express: Psalm. 5.3.
In the Morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. Psalm.
88.13.
-- And in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. -- And evening, and
morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud, Psalm. 55.17.
and he shall hear my voice. It is true, that Prayer and reading of the Word
are two distinct exercises, yet that they mutually help one another is most
manifest, and consequently are fit to be joined together; for the word
ministers matter of prayer, and is the ground of our petition, who have no
promise to be heard, unless we ask according to God's word, 1 John 5.14. And
the fitness of the morning for these exercises is evident, not only because the
first of time belongs unto God, but also the heart being then most free from
worldly thoughts, it is therefore fittest for Holy exercises; and withal, when
in the beginning of the day the heart of man is seasoned with Holiness, and
with the fear of God, he shall find himself the better fitted to walk humbly
with God all the day after.

2. All the rest of the day till evening should I spend my time in the Duties
of my particular calling, nor know I the least reason why any man in the world,
high or low, rich or poor, should be herein exempted. Adam must not eat his
bread without sweat and labor. Abel was a keeper of sheep. Cain a tiller of
the ground. Genesis 3.19.
Jabal was a Tent-maker. Jubal the father of such as handle the harp. Genesis 4.2,
20.21, 22.
Tubal Cain an Artificer in Brass and Iron. All the the Patriarchs of Israel
were but Shepherds; and Jesus Christ himself was a plain Carpenter.

But you may object, may I not herein lose my time as to God's service? One
would think, if this were my last day I should do no other work but pray, or
hear, or read, or meditate, etc. I answer --

1. I grant there are such times wherein God calls us extraordinarily to such
spiritual Duties all the day long; as either in afflictions felt or feared, or
in some special mercies expected or received. And there are those times we call
the Lords days, wherein we are to do no work ordinarily but of a Spiritual
nature And there are such times wherein God holds forth an opportunity of
exercising graces, or of doing good; and so to embrace the occasion is one
piece or part of our redeeming time. Gal. 6.10.
As we have opportunity let us do good to all men. And your care of me has
flourished again, Phil. 4.10.
(said Paul to his Philippians) but ye lacked opportunity. It seems their care
for the Apostle was intermitted for a season, for want of oppertunity to send
unto him, but now they put forth again as flowers in Spring. I doubt not but in
such cases as these, we may, and must for the time dispense with our particular
callings. Yet. --

2. In my ordinary constant daily course I am to be in the exercise of my
Particular calling, with which I may either mingle some actings of grace, or
ejaculatory Duties, as suddenly to look up to Heaven, and to behold the face of
God, to whom I am to approve my self in my particular calling; or if they
clash, I am solely to follow my particular calling, and to leave other
Spiritual actings till their appointed season. Nor do I herein decline God's
service. For 1. I follow my calling out of an awful respect to the eye,
presence, and command of God, who has said. Six days shall thou labor: Yea I
do what I do in civil business as the work of Christ, so that I may say at that
time now am I about the work of God, and of Jesus Christ.

2. Seeing my self thus working for him, I may easily apprehend that for that
time I honor God as much, nay more by the meanest servile worldly act, than if
I should spend all that time in Prayer, Meditation, or any other Spiritual
employment to which I had no call at such a time. It is noted therefore, by
some, of Peter's Wives Mother, that when Christ had healed her of her Fever,
she sat not down at Table with Christ in Communion with him, which (no
question) was sweet, but she ministered unto them (i.e.) she ran to and fro, and
served him, and acted for him, wherein she showed more love, Mat. 8.15.
and gave him more honor, than if at that time she had enjoyed Communion with
him in a nearer way.

But I hear others object, May I not take up some little of this time in
recreations? what, must I always be on my calling? Is there not a time to
every purpose under Heaven? Eccl. 3.1, 4.
a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance.

I answer: There is indeed a time to recreate; but that time is then, I say
only then, when our bodies or minds are wearied with our other employments. O
what a sad thing it is to see many spend a whole day, it may be a whole week in
unnecessary sinful recreations! What, is this to redeem the time? or dare I
thus spend the last day of my life in this world? Surely, God's people that
make conscience of their Duties, should not meddle at any time with recreations
(though in themselves lawful) without true cause, and a just calling thereunto;
nor should they use them any longer, nor to any other end, but only to quicken
their minds, or to revive their bodies, that so they may return with some
lightsomness and alacrity to their callings again. He that spends his time
lavishly in recreations, is like him whose Garments are made of fringes, and
his meat nothing but sauces. I am not against recreations lawfully used, but
God forbid that we should trifle away our time (more worth than worlds) upon
foolish, vain, empty, end unnecessary toys.

3. The evening should be closed up with spiritual duties. If you ask what
Duties? I answer.

1. The evening is a time for prayer, Let my prayer be set forth before thee as
incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice. Psalm. 141.2.
To this of prayer I join reading the Scripture, and good books; for it is fit
to close up the day with the same duties wherewith we began it.

2. The evening was Isaac's time for meditation: And Isaac went out to meditate
in the field at the even-tide. Genesis 24.63.
It may be in this Duty the morning is not so seasonable for some tempers; but
shall the evening pass without some spiritual Holy meditations? Some conceive
the evening to be the very season of set and deliberate meditation; and in this
case how fruitful might I be in the use of that Ordinance of Looking unto
Jesus, as he carries on the great work of our Salvation from first to last? O
that this Duty of meditation, either on that, or any other spiritual subject,
were not so neglected as it is by Christians themselves! Jod. 1.8.
The Lord gave Joshua a charge, that he should mediate on his Law day and
night; Psalm. 1.2.
and David's character of the blessed man is, that his delight is in the Law of
the Lord, Psalm. 63.6.
and in his Law does he meditate day and night. And David's own practice was to
remember God upon his bed, 1 Timothy 4.15.
and to meditate on him in the night-watches. And Paul's charge to Timothy was
to meditate upon spiritual things, and to give himself wholly to them. Or if
you will have another proof for the evening-season, not only was it Isaac's time,
but David's time, Mine eyes prevent the night-watches, that I might meditate in
thy word. Psalm. 119.148.


3. The evening is a season for self-examination. This is another glorious
ordinance which many Christians use occasionally, and against some good time;
but to set some time apart for this every evening, and that in conscience, as
they do for reading the word, and Prayer, where is the Christian almost to be
found? I am sure it was David's charge. Commune with your own heart upon your
bed, and be still. And agreeable to this was his practice, Psalm. 4.4.
I call to remembrance my song in the night, I commune with my own heart, and
my spirit made diligent search. Chrysostom on these words of David, Psalm. 77.6.
What means this (says he) commune with your own hearts upon your bed? Post
doenam, Chrysostom. Expos. in. Psa. 4.4.
thus answers himself, after supper-time, when ye are going to sleep, and are
ready to ly down on bed, and have great quiet and silence, without the presence
or disturbance of any, then erect a tribunal for the conscience. -- And when
neither friend disturbs you, Docuerant nos saepe patres nostri, etc. Dovoth.
tom. 1.
nor servants provoke you, nor multitudes of business do press upon you, then
take an account of your life, what you have done in the daytime before. And
Dorotheus lays it down as a rule which the Christians of his time had learned
of their forefathers, that in the evening they should question themselves how
they had passed the day. Biblioth. Pot^. p. 14.
Oh that Christians now would Sum up their accounts at the foot of every page,
I mean, that they would call themselves to scrutiny every evening when they are
ready to compose themselves to sleep, as to the little Images of Death!

4. The evening is a season to consider my Privileges in Christ. Psalm. 48.
When David was ready for his Bed, I will lay me down in peace, and sleep
(says he,) for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. See how he speaks of
peace, and rest, and sleep, and safety: all these were Privileges. Me thinks
it is a sweet conclusion of a good days work, and a blessed farewell to the
World if this evening were my last, and that immediately I must go to God, to
consider of some of those glorious Privileges in God and Christ. I might
instance in my peace, and rest, and sleep, and safety, by virtue of a promise,
or covenant of Grace; or I might instance in my Election, Redemption,
Reconciliation, Adoption, Sanctification, Glorification: But because these are
commonly handled; and our communion with God and Christ; and the spirit of
Christ is the most ravishing Privilege in this World, my soul carries me out
for the present to pitch on this. Dr. Owens communion God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.
One of our Worthies has writ eminenly on it; and for a taste of his excellent
work, the sweeting of my last thoughts with such an excellent subject, I shall
contract it thus,

1. I would consider my communion with God the Father in love. This the Father
peculiarly fixes upon the Saints; and this they are immediately to eye him in,
God is love. Christians walk of times with exceeding troubled hearts concerning
the thoughts of the Father toward them; they are well persuaded of the Lord
Christ and his good will; the difficulty lies in what is their acceptance with
the Father, what is his heart toward them? Now here is the work of the Gospel
to discover the love of the Father: this is the will of God, that he may
always be eyed as being, kind, tender, loving, yea as the Fountain and Spring
of all gracious Communications and fruits of love; and when Christians
apprehend this, that God is love, and so rest upon him, and delight in him as
such, then have they communion with the Father in love.

Now for the exercise of my soul in this blessed communion, the directions are
such as these. --

1. I must eye the Father as Love. I must not look on him as one that is
always angry; but as one most kind and tender in himself, and as one that has
had thoughts of kindness toward his Saints from everlasting.

2. I must so eye the love of the Father, as to receive it by faith; I must
believe this love of God as for my self. Certainly his love is not mine, nor
will it be mine in the sweetness of it, until it be so received. Either I must
know it, assent to it, embrace it, and have all my affections filled with it,
or it will be in vain as to my Communion with God the Father.

3. This love must have its proper fruit and efficacy upon my heart in a return
of love to him again. To this purpose God loves, that he may be beloved: this
is the return that he demands, Pro. 23.26.
My son, give me thy heart, thy affections, thy love O the Privilege of
Saints! they have meat to eat that the World knows not of they have close
communion and fellowship with the Father; they deal with him in the interchange
of love; so that every one of them may say. If I have hatred in the World, I
will go where I am sure of love; though all others are hard to me, yet my
Father is tender and full of compassion, I will go to him, and satisfy my
self in him.

4. I would consider of my communion with God the Son in grace. So the Apostle
speaking of our communion with him as Mediator, concludes his Epistles, 1 Cor.
6.23.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Not to mention any other
grace, Gal 6.18.
but his perchased grace of justification, or acceptance with God the
directions for this Communion are such as these. Ephesians. 6.24.
--

I must eye Christ's doings and sufferings; not as for himself but for his
Saints, Phil. 4.23.
and for their Righteousness. He was made under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5.
that we might receive the adoption of Sons, And he bare our sins in his body
on the Tree. 1 Thessalonians. 5.28.
This was the end of Christ's life and death, to work out a complete
Righteousness for believers, 2 Thessalonians. 3.18.
Gal. 4.2.
as to a perfect acceptance before God. 1 Pet. 2 24.


I must approve of this Righteousness of Christ as that alone which is
absolutely complete, and able to make me acceptable before God. Of this I am
convinced, that if I die this night, there is a necessity of a Righteousness,
wherewith I must appear before God; and if I have nothing to commend me unto
God but my own Righteousness, oh how should I appear before his glory? there is
no other name but Christ whereby I can be saved; and there is no other
Righteousness but Christ's whereby I can be justified. Surely shall one say, in
the Lord have I Righteousness and strength. Isa. 45.24.


3. I must make an actual commutation with the Lord Jesus as to my sins, and
his Righteousness. And to that purpose 1. I must hearken to the voice of Christ
calling me to him with my burden, Come to me thou poor soul with thy guilt of
sin, for that is mine; this agreement I made with my Father from all Eternity,
that I should come, and take thy sins and bear them away; they were my lot,
give me thy burden, give me all thy sins, thou know not what to do with
them, I know how to dispose of them well enough, so that God shall be
glorified, and thy soul delivered. 2. Upon this call I must lay down my sins at
the Cross of Christ upon his shoulders. This is faiths great and bold adventure
upon the grace, faithfulness, and truth of Christ, to stand by the Cross, and
say, Ah! he is bruised for my sins, and wounded for my transgressions, and the
chastisement of my peace is upon him: He is thus made sin for me; here I give
up my sins to him that is able to bear them; he requries at my hands that I
should be content to throw my sins upon him, and to this I consent. 3. Having
thus by faith given up my sins to Christ, I must draw nigh, and take from him
that Righteousness which he has wrought out for me: To this purpose he tenders
himself and his Righteousness to be my Righteousness before God; and by my
acceping of it, I complete this bartering and exchange of faith, and come into
communion with Jesus Christ, as to my acceptance with God by grace. 2 Cor.
5.21.
He was made sin for us, that we might become the Righteousness of God in him.


3. I would consider of my communion with the holy Ghost in comfort. John 14.26.
We read usually in the Gospel that he is the Comforter. John 15.26.
Oh the condescension of the Holy Ghost! he willingly proceeds, John 16.7.
or comes forth from the Father to be our Comforter; he knew what we were, and
what would be our dealings with him; he knew we would grieve him, provoke him;
quench his motions, defile his dwelling place, and yet he would come to be our
Comforter. Now for my communion with the holy Ghost herein the directions are
these. --

1. I must ask him of the Father in the name of Jesus Christ. This is the daily
work of Believers; they look upon, and consider the holy Ghost as promised to
be sent, and in this promise they know lies all their grace, peace, mercy, and
comfort; for by him so promised are these things communicated. Luke 11.13.
O then how should I ask him of the Father, who is as ready to bestow him on
me, as I am to give my children bread? If ye being evil know how to give good
gifs unto your children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the holy
Spirit to them that ask him?

2. If comfort come, I must learn to act faith distinctly on the Holy Ghost, as
the immediate efficient cause of all my comfort. It may be the Spirit is given,
and be tenders, or administers consolations, but then I do not consider him as
the Comforter, why surely this grievs him: a lively faith will take notice of
his kindness; upon every work of consolation that I receive, I should write
this Motto, This is from the Holy Ghost, he is my Comforter, and the God of all
my consolation.

3. I must return praise and thanks, and honor, and glory, and blessings to
him on the account of those comforts I receive from him. When I feel my self
warmed with joy, supported with peace, or established in obedience, I should
then ascribe to him the praise that is his due. And this praising of him is no
small part of my communion with him.

Say now, is not here a Privilege worthy of my consideration? would not a
thought of this, Psalm. 119.54, 25.
and my acting in this, leave a sweet favor in my soul when I am going to my
Bed as to my grave? Psalm. 63.5.6.
David could say, Thy statutes have been my song in the house of my Pilgrimage;
Psalm. 149.5.
I have remembered thy name O Lord in the night. And my soul shall be satisfied
as with marrow and fatness, Isa. 26.9.
and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. Job 35.10.
Ay, but when must this be? He answers, When I remember thee upon my Bed; Psalm.
42.8:
and meditate on thee in the night-watches. And he fastens it as a Duty upon
all Saints, Psalm: 77: 6:
Let the Saints be joyful in glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds. And
the Church resolves upon it, With my soul have I desired thee in the night, and
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. Surely it is God (says Elihu
who gives songs in the night. And in the night (says David) his song shall be
with me. And 'twas a blessed remedy to his heavy Soul, I call to remembrance my
song in the night. Oh that with such thoughts and considerations of my
communion with God, and Christ, and the spirit of Christ, for of some other
Privilege, I might every night go to my Bed! for then like the Philomele
should I sing in the night; yea then would my Soul be satisfied as with Marrow
and fatness, and my Mouth would praise him with joyful lips.

I might instance in many other duties which would then be seasonable, but
these are the main; and if this day were my last day, or if this night I must
sleep my last in this world, yet I should comfortably hope that in the doing of
these duties in a spiritual manner, I had in good measure redeemed my time; and
that when I awake, though I never awake till the Resurrection day, yet then
should I see God face to face, and I should be satisfied with his likeness:
Psalm. 17.15.

I have now done; only before we part, I would say something of the deceased
party as to our edification, and so an end.

You know I have been sparing in this way, because of many abuses, and
especially because all promiscuously look for praises at their death, howsoever
they spend their life. But now God has removed me from this pastoral charge,
and I shall not here perform many of these last offices of love, probably never
more than this; and therefore at this time I shall crave your patience and
attentions to what may be spoken without any prejudice to truth or harm to you.

The Duty I am pressing on you, is to redeem the time; and this I believe of
the deceased party, that she redeemed her time. I shall not speak of her Birth,
Education, Progeny, Nobility: Stemmata quid faciunt? Alas! what is all this to a
Funeral-Sermon? Nor shall I speak of her youth or flourishing time; as I am a
stranger to it, so I believe she had, or might have her failings in that time.
The temptations of honor, riches, prosperity, and youth are stronger than most
imagine; and therefore prayed David, Remember not the sins of my youth: Psalm.
25.7. and all that are honorable may pray, Remember not the sins of my honor,
nobility, and greatness in the world. For my part I shall not take notice of
these things, or of those times, but rather speak of her redeeming the time,
since that time that forsaking the World in great measure, she gave up her self
in a more retired and solitary way to serve her God.

Now then if here I begin; She has for these many years redeemed her time; as
thus, 1. In life, 2. In Death.


1. In life, it will appear in her general and particular calling.

For the first, ordinarily every Morning and every evening she was exercised in
those duties of Meditation and Prayer: This was her course, not by fits and
starts, but daily, in her pleasant Walks, or private Chamber, she spent both
her early and later hours in Communion with God. Nor speak I this by report
only, for of her goodness and bounty she was pleased every Spring to invite me
to her House, and by this means I was acquainted with her constant course.
Indeed I was the more willing to embrace her welcome, because her House seemed
to me as a College for Religion, or as a retirement from the noises and more
frequeent Temptations of the World, and this gave her, and me, and all that
pleased, an happy opportunity to continue our devotions without interruption.
Some Books she had for contemplation, others for an Holy conversation, others
for meditation, others for devotion; of all sorts some, and of all these sorts
she made some use; but of all books for constant use and practice she preferred
the Bible, telling me often that other Books had their use and delight; till
with often reading they became more ordinary, and then they seemed to lose of
their former luster, glory, and excellency; but the Bible was in her
often-reading ever fresh, and green, and new: She found in it still such per
petual streams of Holy, Heavenly, and Spiritual delights, that (as Teriullian
said) she could not but admire and a door the fullness of the Scriptures.

2. Ordinarily she spent the rest of the day in her works of the needle, with
her maids about her: Or if other things of Houswifery had interposed, she was
never so transported with honor, as to scorn her duty in the way of a
particular calling. Well she had learnt that idleness was the rust and canker
of the soul, the Devils cushion, pillow, chief reposal, his very tide-time of
Temptation; and therefore with conscience and faithfulness she was diligent in
her particular, as well as general, calling. Now and then she would have
visited poor cottages, and relieved their necessities; but ever was she
courteous to the Neighborhood, and careful in the affairs of her own House.
Take all together, and for ought I know she might be a pattern to most of the
Ladies in our Nation, or at least as a bright Morning Star amongst other stars.

2. She redeemed her time in death, or near her death; now indeed she was taken
off her particular calling, and therefore this time she spent (as she could for
sickness) in the exercise of spiritual duties, and spiritual graces. For duties
she was much in them, of which we speak before; and for graces she shined, and
was most eminent in such as these. As --

1. In meekness: She was of a meek and quiet spirit: seldom have I seen her
exorbitant in passions, but often have I seen her amidst provocations quiet,
meek, gentle, and easy to be entreated. In her sickness she carried it as a
lamb; not a word of passion or peevishness issued out of her lips, so far as I
observed. The very Image of Christ was, in this respect, drawn fair within her,
Learn of me, for I am meek: Matthew. 11.29. Christ a meek Christ, and she a meek
creature.

2. In humility, She was of high descent, and sprung of Royal blood; yet humble
in heart, and lowly in spirit. She never scorned the poorest Creature, but
often stooped to wonderful condescentions, as I conceived. In her sickness, as
well as death, she laid her honor in the dust. She was far from the opinion of
them that think humility a debasement, and meekness a derogation from their
repute; no, no, she had othewise learned of Christ; humility was her Ornament,
and therewith she decked her self (in the Apostles language 1 Pet. 5.5.) or
clothed her self, both in health and in sickness, when she could put on no
other clothing,. Hence she was styled by some, the humble harmless Lady.

3. In patience, submission, and contentedness of spirit to be at God's
disposal. She had a sore sickness, and because of her former health it was to
her the sorer. Of many years before she had not layn sick in Bed one day, but
many a turn had she took in her Walks and Gallery, and through much exercise in
that way she had the advantage both of her health and communion with God; but
now the Lord laid her on a Bed of sickness, not for a day, or two, or three, or
four, but for a long while together. She that before had walked with God, was
now God's prisoner; and such was the nature of the sickness, that she could not
stir nor move one foot, yet was she patient and submisive to God's hand; she
kissed the rod, she learnt the Churches lesson, I will bare the indignation of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him: Micah. 7.9. She never murmured not
repined one whit, but as she was taught, so she learnt and conformed to that
frame of Eli and David, Lord here I am, do with me as seems good in thine own
eyes.

4. In faith. She was ever and anon, during her, sickness acting faith, often
she acknowledged her own nothingness, vileness, wretchedness; that she was of
little faith, and of no ability, in respect of her self, to help her self.
Indeed her weakness in faith, in grace, and in all performances was her
constant complaint; and this made me to mind her of that promise, that he would
not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, until he brought
forth judgment unto victory: Mat. 12.20. Some others I have seen most
confident in their sickness of salvation, whom though I dare not censure,
beause unacquainted with their grounds, yet I ingenously acknowledge that I
like dearly of an humble, trembling, self-condemning frame. Sure I am, that
they who are vilest in their own eyes, are persons in whom God most delights.
I remember how Paul in Scripture bespattered himself, but are not those
passages his beauty-pots? Give me a man amongst you that will lick the dust of
Jesus feet, and I dare say of such a one, that Christ will take him into his
arms, and lay him in his bosom: it was her condition, she was all in
confession of her spiritual poverty, yet she cast her self into the
blessed-bleeding arms of Jesus Christ; yea she lay at his feet crying, Lord, I
believe, help thou my unbelief: and again,, I rest upon Christ, and upon Christ
alone for Heaven and Salvation: and again, Though the Lord slay me, yet will I
trust in him: and again, He has delivered, and he does deliver, and I trust in
him that he will deliver me still: and again, Hold out faith, and anon thou will come to vision. This last word, hold out faith, was one of the last words
she spoke on that last day of her life.

5. In her love to Ministers. Her heart was wholly set on Christ; and as a true
sign of it, she loved Christ's image, especially in his Ministers. And now I
speak my own loss; amongst others she was pleased to cast her affections on the
unworthiest of all my Masters messengers. In her lifetime she preferred me to
this place; the Lord made her the first wheel of his providence in bringing me
hither, and it was some trouble to her spirit that I left this pastoral charge
before she left the World. Indeed she honored all the Ministers of Christ, yea
the very function it self for Christ his sake. Oh how will she rise up in
judgment at the last day against those that make it their work to reproach,
vilify, and contemn the dispensers of Gods word:

6. In her love and charity toward all. Many discords have been in these sad
times, and she has suffered much im many respects, yet in her approaches near
to the confines of Eternity, I desired her to forgive others, as she desired
God to forgive her; at which she proclaimed it very affectionately, that She
freely forgave all the World; and she desired all whom she had offended to
forgive her. Her children then kneeling about her, she gave them a blessing, as
Jacob gave to Joseph and his children: this blessing was pronounced with that
cheerfulness; heartiness, and fervency of spirit, that it melted hearts, and
caused aflood of tears round about, her Bed; in so much that she was forct to
rouse up her self, and to bespeak them, as Christ did those weeping women, Weep
not for me, but weep for your selves; why should you weep for me that am going
to my Christ, and to those joys prepared by Christ? And then she gave a
charge; the subject of it was a relative, respective duty to be performed by
brethren; it concerned him most who was the beginning of her strength, or the
excellency of her power: Genesis 49.3. and so far as Justice, or Religion calls, I
presume it will never be forgotten by him.

7. In her desire to die, and to be with Jesus Christ, which was best of all.
Sometimes she cried, Oh when will that good hour come! And again sometimes, Oh
that I were dissolved, that I might be with Christ! But telling her of her
duty, that she must wait, for waiting was a posture fit for servants; Psalm.
123.2. Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and
as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon
the Lord our God until be have mercy upon us. Why then (said she) I will wait,
why Lord I will wait until my change shall come Only she minded that promise,
Heb. 10.37. For yet a very little while, and he that shall come will come, and
he will not tarry. One thing was her trouble, she was afraid that her strong
heart would not yield without much struggling to the stroke of death; of this
she told me and others once and again; her reasons were best known to her self,
but she prophesied truly; for indeed when death came to her heart, she uttered
such groans that she outgroaned all our prayers. At last death by degrees
overcame the strength of nature, and then she calmly and quietly left the world
in the midst of our prayers; just in that passage, that her soul might be taken
up by the Lord Jesus Christ into the Bridegroom chamber.

You see now how she redeemed the time in life and death. As Christ said to the
Lawyer, so I say to you, Go thou and do likewise, Luke. 10.37. It is but a
while that all of you have to live, and therefore I beseech you improve time,
lay hold of every season to get to Heaven. Live every day as if it were your
last on earth. Walk accurately exactly, circumspectly, not as fools, but as
w^se, Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

Soli Deo gloria.

