An Account of the Great DEFEAT THAT Major General Kirk Gave the Irish Forces
near CHARLEMONT, Under the Command of the Lord Strabane, and Colonel
Gordon-O-Neal. Likewise the Transactions of the Late King James in Ireland,
Since the Arrival Of His Grace the Duke de SCHOMBERG.
YEsterday Sixty Sail arrived here from Carrickfergus, confirming the Account I
gave you in my last, of the Surrender of that Place, after a Siege of Eight
Days, during which time were heaved into it a great number of Bombs. Seven Men
of War Battered it for the space of a whole Night, so that it is now little
else save a Heap of Ruins.

The Earl of Antrim being Governor thereof, Duke Schombergh Complimented him
and his Lady with his own Horses, and a considerable Convoy, to secure them
from the Rabble. The first Bomb that fell into the Town having a long Fuze, did
not Fire suddenly, but Fizzing a little, a dozen ignorant Irish of that Garrison
came about it, and at their Cost experienced its Fatal Influence.

Major General Kirk with his Forces, and those from Enniskellen, upon their
March toward Charlemont, we are told, were Attacked by 800 Horse under the
Lord Strabane, and a Body of 1200 Foot under Colonel Gordon-O-Neal, and Colonel
Maxwel. The Fight was obstinate and bloody for some time, but, at length, the
Lord Strabane, with 30 leading Officers being killed, the Irish betook
themselves to Flight, leaving above 300 dead on the place, and on our side 70.

The Garrison of Charlemont, upon the News of our Success, drew out their
provisions and Artillery, with the choicest of their Baggage; and it is thought
they will desert, and blow up the Castle.

We are informed by credible Persons from Dublin, that King James's Officers
desert daily, and that a Captain and Lieutenant were shot upon that account.
The late King has left Dublin very disconsolate, and carried with him the
Batchelors of the Mint. It Is said he is gone for Athlone, intending to wait
there the Success of his Army. He has fortified that Garrison, and sent 300 Load
of Ammunition thither, having given Orders to the Lords Golmoy and Dungan to
break down the Bridge of the Newry, and guard that Pass with a considerable
Body of Horse and Foot. Some of the Lords of the Pale have sent to treat with
Duke Schombergh, in order to accept of his Conditions of Indemnity.

Licensed

Sept. 5. 1689.
LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-Bridge, 1689.


