THE SICK-MANS RARE JEWEL, WHEREIN Is discovered a speedy way how every Man may
recover lost Health, and prolong Life, how he may know what Disease he has,
and how he himself may apply proper Remedies to every Disease, with the
Description, Definition, Signs and Syptoms of those Diseases.

(VIZ.)

The Scurvy, Leaves Venerea, Gonorrhea, Dropsies, Catarrhs, Chollick, Gouts,
Madness, Frensies of all sorts, Fever, Jaundise, Consumptions, Ptisick,
Swoundings, Histerick Passions, Pleurisies, Cachexia's, Worms, Vapors,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Stone, Strangury, with the whole Troop of Diseases
most afflicting the Bodies, of Men, Women and Children; with a supply of
suitable Medicines; as also a Catalogue of the choicest Arcanas specificated to
every Disease Curing cito tuto and Jucunde, with many other things profitable
to be known. A piece profitable for every Person and Family, and all that
Travel by Sea or Land.

O Sanitas tu hominibus maximum bonum.

By B. A.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. and are to be Sold by the Booksellers, and
by the Author, at the Sign of the Angel against the Church-door at the upper
end of Thredneedle-street, near the Royal Exchange. M DC LXXIV.

THE PREFACE*
FR^^ndly (...) Health and long (...) are Two t^ings wh^^^ conduce so ^u^h to
^he happiness of Man, and are (...)table to the principals of Nature, as that
there is nothing more desirable; that this may be attained, you are here
instructed into the right way how you may enjoy these so desirable Jewels; the
Subject is the Knowledge of Diseases, but the end is Health and long Life, Rich
Jewels of great Price, whose commonness much abates the value of its Worth, and
of Universal Concern; for who is there from the highest to the lowest that is
not concerned in this Subject of procuring and preserving Health, how is this
Microcosm, this little World, the Body of Man besieged with En^mies? viz.
Diseases, the most form^dable you have here presented to your view, and
discovered from their first approach; so that every person b^ a view of this
Book may know that the Disease is that he or she is as^^ulted with; and for as
much as Di^^ases to steal upon us many times by little dnd little, that many
are past C^^e by ahat time they come to know what they ail, for Instance in the
Scurvy and Hectic, and we have known not a few in the Venereal Disease
surprised, some who (though they have been dabling) have not considered the
hazard till a Dart struck through the Liver, as a Bird hastes to the Snare,
and knows not that it is for their life; by which means they have not wronged
themselves alone, but their Relations through their Ignorance and unweariness;
whereas did they know what Disease they had, (it is to be hoped) they would
look out for Cure. This Book will prove of use to some, who by the means of
ign^rant or unnatural Relations, are infected with this Disease, as it happens
many time, to the first sort of these, viz. Women, and are for a long time
distempered, and hardly discover it till approaching death, and others very
difficultly Cured, of which sort we have Cured, which by the means of this
little Book may timely know themselves infected, and with less hazard, disgrace
and infamy to themselves and Families, and with lesser Charge obtain their Cure.

And there is yet another sort, and these are Persons of Quality, such as take
Nurses into their Houses to nurse their Children, and those also that put out
their Childen to Nurse; how useful this Piece may be to such you may guess,
when you consider how much surprising grief, trouble and ruin is often brought
into Families by infected Nurses, contracted sometimes from their Pocky
Husbands, sometimes from the sucking of Pocky Children: It is near Forty Years
since we made an Observation upon the sad Event of a Poor Woman nursing a
Sisters Child that was Pocky, by which she was Infected, and then her Husband,
and lastly her Child, to the Number of Three or Four, of which all perished
miserably, some at home and some in the Hospital; many such warnings we have
had in latter Years. Now this Book will instruct all such how to examine Nurses
by such necessary question, and to make such pertinent and skilful
Observations, that they need rarely be deceived, by which your persons will be
secured from danger, your little ones from miserable ruin, and your Families
from a blot, and ^he ^onted Disputes, who must he the ^ause, pr^vented, which I
hope you do not look upon as a small benefit.

Next you have that Epidemical Disease the Scurvy deliniated, so clearly, and
yet briefly, that you may know its first approach, and apply your selves to
timely Cure and prevention, by observing all its Symptoms, you may know the
least Vestigium of this Disease, according to the description of its various
Concomitants, with the prescription of convenient and suitable Remedies: As
also you have in this Book the most Excellent sure specificated Arcana's
propounded, that will Cure cito tuto and Jucunde; so that first, none need
delay their Cure with those Medicines, though suitable, yet not so speedy and
certain as these Arcana's of ours. And secondly, those whose Diseases have
arrived to the highest pitch, may not without the use of these, suppose
themselves incurable.

And for as much as temperance in the use of those things, called (by
Physicians) res non naturales, are very necessary to the preserving Health and
prolonging Life; you have here propounded what Foods are convenient for persons
of any Complexion, viz. Sanguine, Chollerick, Melanchollick, and Phlegmatic, as
also many things necessary to be known concerning Bread, Beer, Wine, Tobacco,
etc. such things which have no small influence upon our Bodies to alter and
dispose them to Health or Sickness; so that every person of what Degree soever
may by this piece know how to govern himself; but in Cases extraordinasy you
may apply your selves to those more powerful Arcana's, which are ^ble (...)
^^ll up the seminal Causes of Diseases by the Roots.

And there are many Persons of Quality and Country Gentlemen that do much good
to their poor Neighbors and Tenants, and are provided with convenient
Medicines and good Receipts, that may far better know how and what to use (by
the help of this Book) than before, the Disease being so plainly deliniated and
described.

And then for as much as there be many Ladies and Persons of Quality, that
though they are little tainted with the Scurvy, yet some small approach they
may perceive by a kind of envy and spite of one of their best Ornaments, viz.
their well set Teeth by staining, scaling and roting, for which our Remedy for
that is infallible, and whosoever uses it will find it so*

There are yet another sort of Practicers and Country Physicians, who meet
with stubborn and rebellious Diseases, who scorn the force of common Medicines,
of which sort is the Scurvy and Leaves Venerea confirmed. We suppose we can
pleasure such not a little with such Weapons as shall encounter the strongest
Adversaries of this kind, and that these things reported and commended be no
Hyperboles: It will appear because these things are grounded upon Reason and
Experience, the two greatest Foundations of Indication in the whole Art of
Physic*

And then as to distracted people you may see and Examine the Cures we have
done; for which purpose we have a very good Convenience, in good Air, with
Garden-room, and good attendance, and all other convenient accommod^tion for
Persons of any Quality, and at reasonable Rates, and over whom we our selves
have a watchful and careful Inspection, and discharge the Cure with Conscience
and satisfactory Diligence.

And for such of any Diseases mentioned for the greater satisfaction and
certainty of Cure, who are willing to have our own oversight and personal Care,
for such we have convoniency of room, and other necessaries.

You have also our Scorbutic Drops, famous for the Scurvy and all Fevers,
wonderful useful for all Seamen, and Persons at Sea or Land, being the best
Antiscorbutick, opening Obstructions of the Viscera, strengthens the Parts,
kills Worms, takes away the cause of Fevers, quickens the Appetite, and does as
much as any one Medicine can do, unalterable in any Climate, small Dose,
without observing any difficult Diet, and Convenient and profitable for any Age
or Sex, hurtful in no Diseases, being friendly to Nature, and next of Kin to
our Vital and Animal Spirit.

All this is propounded for the pu^lick good, and that it may so prove, read it
over observingly, consider diligently, censure not till you do better; and
however accept it as a fruit of his affection, who means well.

THE INDEX.
Chap. 1. MEdicine defined. Page 1. Chap. 2. Temprraments. 4. Chap. 3. Of
Parts. 7. Chap. 4. Of Humors. 9. Signs of a Sanguine Person. 12. Signs of ^
Cholleric^ Person. 13. Signs of a Phlegmatic Person. 14. Signs of a Melancholy
Person. 15. Of Spirits. 19. Of the Faculties. 21. Of Actions. 22. Chap. 5. Of
tbings Natural. 22. Of Meats. 23. Of Sleep. 25. Exercise how to be performed.
27. Passion of the Mind. 29. Chap. 6. A Tract concerning the Scurvy. 33. Chap.
7. The manner of its Generation. 38, Chap. 8. A continuation of the Scurvy. 46.
Chap. 9. The Cause in the Blood. 51. Chap. 10. The Extrinsick Cause. 55 Chap.
11. The Signs abbreviated. 58. Chap. 12. Tbe Symptoms by which Persons may
discern that they have the Scurvy 59. Chap. 10. The Cure of the Scurvy. 68.
Vegitables appropriate to the Scurvy. 71. Rules to be observed in Bread and
Beer for Scorbuticks and all others. 72. Properties of the best Beer and Ale.
81 The Nature, usefulness and profit of Wine. 97. Of the Stone in the Bladder
and Reins. 104. The Diseases of the Spleen. 108. The Tenesmus. 110. Of the
Dysury. 110. Of the Strangury. 112. Chap. 13. The Leaves Venerea. 97. Chap. 15.
the Diagnostick Signs. 103. Chap. 16. Signs of the increasing Pox. 106. Chap.
17. Signs of an Inveterate Leaves Venerea 110. Chap. 18 Of a Gonorrhea. 116.
Chap. 19. Description of the Dropsy. 119. Chap. 20. The Hypochondriack
Melancholy. 124. Chap. 21. The Histerick Passion. 129. Chap. 22. The Jaundise.
113. Chap. 23. The Chollick. 135. Chap. 24. Diseases of the Liver. 138. Chap.
25. Cachexia. 142. Chap. 26. Inflammation of the Lungs. 144. Chap. 27. A
Pleurisy. 145. Chap. 28. An Impyemate. 147. Chap. 29. De Phthisis. 148. Chap.
30. A Catarrh. 150. Chap. 31. A Dysentery. 153. Chap. 32. A Diarrhea. 156.
Chap. 33. Caeliack and Lienterial Passion. 117. Chap. 34. The Asthma. 159.
Chap. 35. Of the Gout. 161. Chap. 36. Of the Angina or the Quinsie. 162. Chap.
37. Descriptioni of a Frenzy. 165. Chap. 38. Melancholy Madness. 167. Chap.
39. Of a Mania. 168. Chap. 40. The Palpitation of the Heart. 170. Chap. 41. Of
Worms. 171. Chap. 42. A continual Fever. 173. Chap. 43. An Intermitting Fever.
181. Chap. 44. A Hectic Fever. 186. Chap. 45. The Ricket. 189. Chap. 46. A
Convulsion. 191. Chap. 47. Of a Rheumatism. 193. Medicines for every Disease.
194. The great Arcana's. 209. Instances of great Cures. 219.
CHAP. I. Medicine Defined.
MEdicine is defined with respect A Galen de constitutione artis.
to its End, in this manner: It is an Art which teaches the preservation of
present health, and the restoring of that which is lost; or a Science by which
we protect the present health, and expel Diseases.

In Physic be these five parts:

First, (...), Physiology.

Secondly, (...), or Pathology.

Thirdly, (...), or the Semeiotical part.

Fourthly, (...), or the Dietetical part.

Fifthly, (...), or the Therapeutical part.

The first of these treats of those things which are called Natural; as
Elements, Temperaments, Humors, Parts, Faculties, Actions and Spirits. An
Element is defined to be, the least or most simple part of the thing which it
composeth: Or thus, the four first or simple Bodies are called Elements, Fire,
Air, Water, and Earth; or an Element is that most simple part which cannot be
divided into any species diverse from it self; and that which is not
perceptible to our Eye, but is imbarqued in the shell, or clothed upon with
those more (...) Bodies, which we call Elements. And therefore those pure,
virgin, or unmixed Elements, are rather to be conceived in our Minds, than
otherwise to be apprehended; because they present not themselves to any mortal
view: And they are called Elements, because they are those first Principles
that enter into the composition of all Natural and created Beings; and by
reason o^ their Effects, they are described or expressed by Hypocrates, by the
names of Qualities, as Hot, Moist, Cold, and Dry.

Of these Elements there are in number Four; Fire, Air, Water and Earth and
every one of these have a doubl^ Quality: The Fire is hot and dry, the Air is
hot and moist, the Water is col^ and moist, and the Earth is cold an^ dry.
These Elements, you see have eac^ of them two Qualities, viz. The Fire is hot
and dry, the Air is hot and moist, etc. that so their first Qualities might be
tempered by other qualities, viz. the Moistness of the Air might temper the
Heat of the Fire. And these Elements are by Philosophers divided again into
Male and Female; the Male are the Fire and Air, and the Female are the Water
and the Earth; the first of these, forms and concocts the seed; and by the
Air, as it were the sheath o^ ^^e conceived seed, sends i^ i^^o the Water and
Earth, there, as in its proper Matrix to be formed, according as the Archeus or
Spiritus Mundi shall dispose, and the Nature of the place or Womb shall be
adapt for those seeds, in order to the production of such and such an
Offspring. These Four Elements in the composition of mixed Bodies, retain the
qualities, and are so mixed on with the other, that no simple part may be found.

Of these Elements, two be Light, as Fire and Air, because these delight to
move upward; the other two are heavy, viz. the Earth and Water, because they
incline downward: The two first, as Fire and Air, are called Active, the two
latter are accounted passive: Because the first, by reason of their innate and
active heat, do act upon, and as it were incubat upon the other, as that
Divine Philosopher in his Genes. gives us an Account, The Spirit of God moved
upon the face and superficies of the Water, in which the Earth, the Womb of all
things, lay obscure.

From the Composition of these come all mixed Bodies, and from the variety of
mixtion comes the variety of Temperament.

CHAP. II. Of Temperaments.
A Temperament, which of the Greeks is called (...), is defined to be a due
Proportion of the four first Qualities of the Elements.

Avieenna defines a Temperament to be a Quality brought forth and arising from
a proportion of mixed Elements; it is a proportionable mixture of hot, cold,
moist and dry: And th^^ Agreement springs from the four fi^^ Bodies of the
World, and according to this proportion, Temperaments in Bodies receive their
Denom^nations. There is a double Temperament, one absolute, and to temperated
(...) the other ad Justitiam, in singulis generibus: the first is that wherein
there is an even and equal proportion of mixed Elements, neither more of hot
than cold, neither of moist than dry*

The Temperament ad Justitiam, is that which has not an exact Evenness o^
parity of Contraries, but that due ^ediocrity which it ought to have ac^^rding
^o its own Nature, or is convenient to its kind or species: So that the
Aequality of Mixtion is not received according to an Arithmetical, but
Geometrical proportion, and from hence arise the temperaments in Bodies, and
their Denominations. Hence it is, that one man is said to be sanguine, because
the Element of Air does most abound in that man; and another is Melancholy,
because he abounds in Temperament with the Earthy Faeces, which we call
Melancholy, and so of the rest, Phlegmatic or Choleric. Hence also arise the
temper of the parts which constitute man's Body: For Example, a Membrane is
dryer than a Vein, a Tendon than a Membrane, and a Bone than both.

From hence arise that variety of temperaments, with respect to the several
Ages of men; and therefore Pythagoras divided Man's Life into four Ages and
compared the whole course thereon to the four Seasons of the year; Childhood to
the Spring, in which time al^ things grow and sprout out, by reason of the
abundance of plenty of Moisture; and Youth to the Summer, because of the Vigor
and Strength tha^ men enjoy at that Age; and Man'^ state or constant Age to
Autumn, for that then, after all the dangers of fore^ past Life, the Gift of
Discretion an^ Wit acquire a Ripeness; like as the Fruits of the Earth enjoy at
that Season.

As also the temperament of the season of the Year, the Spring, according t^
Hypocrates, is hot and moist: but it i^ the Opinion of all men, that the Sprin^
is temperate, the Summer hot and dry, the Autumn cold and moist, and the Winter
cold and dry.

And from hence also arise the temperature of the Blood. The Blood, as
Temperature of the Blood.
Galen affirms, is most temperate, in that it is neither hot nor moist, but
temperate, as it is in its first composure. None of the four first qualities
exceeds The temperature of Phlegm.
other, by any manifest excess. Phlegm as that which is of a waterish nature, is
cold and moist: Even as Choler being The temperature of Choler.
of a fiery temper is hot and dry; but Melancholy assimilated to each, is
Temperature of Melancholy.
cold and dry.

And so much may serve to be spoken to Temperaments.

CHAP. III. Of Parts.
THe next thing to be handled in the part of Physiologia, is a Part, what it
is. A Part is defined to be (being largely taken) whatsoever makes to the
Constitution of a Humane Body. There are many Division of parts, but the
chiefest of all is into containing and contained: The Parts containing, are the
solid parts, which are sustained by themselves; and they are divided into
Similar and Dissimilar: And the Similar are again divided into Spermatick and
Sanguine. The Dissimilar parts are those which are not compounded from part of
that same Nature, but from other differing species; or otherwise they are
called Instrumental, because they are the Instrument of the Faculties and
Functions. Organical parts are divided into Animal, Vital and Natural; and
these are divided into Principal and Ministering. Those parts are called
principal, which have the Gubernation of the rest; and they ministering, which
are subservient and ministers to the rest.

CHAP. IV.
Of Humors.

THere are fluid parts which are sustained by the help of the other parts, such
as are the Humors and Spirits. The Humors are either Alimentary or
Excrementitious; the Alimentary humor is that that is dedicated for the
nourishing of the solid parts, which do draw their Original from a Commixtion
of the four Elements: But the Excrementitious, are the superfluous Liquors,
unusefull, and unfit to Nutrition; and these are distinguished into Primary and
Secondary.

The Primary are those which pass with the Chyle into the Liver; being put on
by the power of the Native heat in every part of the Body, are distributed by
the Veins to Nutrition.

And of these primary hu^ors there be four; Blood, Chole^ Melancholy and Phlegm;
which be mixed ^ll together in the Veins. This fo^^-fold mixture of humors is
called the Mass of Blood, by reason that the blood does abound in that Mass.

The name of Blood is sometimes taken largely for the whole mass of Blood, but
properly it signifies the more benign and purer part of it; generally the Blood
is accepted for the whole bloody mass well tempered, which from an equal
mixtion of the four contrary humors, and so there arises a harmony from a
just and decent proportion of humors; but if it be considered by it self as
pure and since (...) is hot and moist in temperature* (...) Nature it
resembles Air, and not as by Reason of this tempeature, but also in
consistence, color, savor and use it is discerned from other humors Blood is
of such a mediocrous consistence, that while it is retained within the bounds
of Nature, it appear not thicker nor thinner; it is of a red color, a sweet
taste; it mightily nourishes the musculous parts, as often a^ it exceeds
above the rest, it makes men fleshy, flourishing, fair, pleasan^ and merry.

But Alimentary bile is the thinne^ part of the bloody mass, partaking o^ a
fiery Nature, by temperament hot and dry, of a yellow, or a pale yellow; to
taste bitter, men in whom it abounds, are choleric, lean, hardy, quick, soon
angry.

But the Excrementitious is drawn forth to the bladder of Gall, and that it
might stir up the Ejection of the Excrements, and that it might gently cleanse
off the Phlegm and hindrances adhering to the Intestines.

Alimentary Melancholy is the thic^^^ Melancholy. what.
part of the mass of Blood, by nature Earthy, in Temperament cold and dry, in
color black, in taste sour; men in whom it abounds, are sad, thoughtfull,
morose, severe, constant, the more solid parts of the body dry.

The Excrementitious is carried to the Spleen, where the Alimentary part which
yet remains, being the more benign Juice, the rest is separated, when it is
pressed into the stomach by the Vas breve, that it may stir up Appetite to
meat, and does endeavor to retain the Meats there, till they be concocted.

The Alimentary Phlegm is the more thin part of the bloody mass, of a waterish
Nature, in temperament cold and moist, in color white, in savor sweet, men in
whom this abounds, be dull, sleepy, gross, fat, they are clear and soft,
administering Aliment to the Brain, and other cold moist parts.

Excrementitious Phlegm is a serous, or a wheyish superfluity, which is
separated from the blood, and is transmitted to the Bladder by the Ureters,
where it is called Urin.

Here follow the Signs of a Sanguine person.
HE has a flourishing and a Rosecolour in his face, as it were with an equal
mixture of white and red, by reason of the skin lying outmost; of a red,
because of the Blood spread underneath the skin: In manners he is courteous,
gentle, easy to be spoken to, of a lovely Countenance, and a smooth forehead,
seldom angry, but taking all things in good part; for as is the nature of
humors, so is the disposition of manners, their Dreams are pleasant, they are
troubled with Diseases arising from the Blood, as frequent Flegms, many
sanguine Pustils breaking through the skin, much bleeding, they delight in the
use of cold and dry things, and are affected with hot and moist.

Signs of a Choleric Person.
Choleric men are of a pale, or a yellowish color, of a lean, slender, rough
habit of Body, with fair Veins, and large Arteries, a strong and quick Pulse;
their Skin being touched, feels hot, dry, hard, rough and harsh, with a
pricking and acrid Exhalation, which breaths forth of their whole body; they
cast forth much Choler by Stool, Vomit and Urine; they are of a quick and
nimble wit, stout, hardy and sharp, Vindicating of Injuries received, liberal
even to prodigality, and somewhat desirous of Glory, their sleep is light, and
that from which they are quickly awaked, their Dreams are fiery, burning, quick
and full of fury; they are delighted with meats and drink, that are somewhat
more cold and moist, and are subject to burning and Tertian Fevers, the
Frenzy, Jaundise, Inflammation, and other Choleric Pustils.

The Signs of a Phlegmatic Person.
THose in whom Phlegm has the dominion, are of a whitish colored face, and
sometimes livid, and swollen, with their body-fat, soft and cold to touch, they
are molested with phlegmatic diseases, as Oedomatous Tumors, the Dropsy,
Quotidian Fevers, falling away of the Hairs, and Catarrhes falling down upon
the Lungs, and the aspera Arteria or the Weasen; they are of a slow capacity,
dull, slothful, drowsy, they do dream of Rains, Snowes, Floods, Swimming, and
such like, that they often imagine themselves overwhelmed with waters, they
vomit up much watery and Phlegmatic matter, or otherwise spit and evacuate it,
and have a soft and moist tongue.

And they are troubled with a doglike hunger, if it at any time should happen
that their insipid Phlegm become acid: and they are slow of digestion, by
reason of which they have great store of cold and phlegmatic humors, which if
they be carried down into the windings of the Cholick Gut, they cause murmuring
and noise, and sometimes the Cholick; for much wind is easily caused of such
like phlegmatic Excrements, wrought upon by a small and weak heat, such as
Phlegmatic persons have, which by its na-natural lightness is diversely carried
through the turnings of the Guts, and distends and swells them up, and while it
strives for passage out, it causes murmurings and noyses in the Belly, like
wind breaking through narrow passages.

The Signs of a melancholic Person.
THe face of a melancholic person is swart, their countenance cloudy, and
often cruel, their aspect is sad and froward, frequent Schirrhous or hard
Swellings, Tumors of the Spleen, Haemorrhoids, Varices, or swollen Veins,
Quartane Fevers, whether continual or intermitting, Quintane, Sextane, and
Septimane Fevers; and to conclude, all such wandering Fevers or Agues set upon
them, but when it haphappens, the melancholy humor is sharpened, either by
adustion or commixture of Choler, then Tetters, the black Morphew, the Cancer
simple and ulcerated, the leprous and filthy Scab, sending forth certain scaly
and bran-like Excrescences, being vulgarly called Saint Menis his Evil, and the
Leprosy it self invades them; they have small Veins and Arteries, because
Coldness has Dominion over them, whose property is to streighten, as the
quality of heat is to dilate; but if at any time their Veins seem big, their
largeness is not by reason of the laudable blood contained in them, but from
much windiness, by occasion whereof it is somewhat difficult to let them blood;
not only because that when the Vein is opened, the blood flows slowly forth,
by reason of the cold slowness of the humors, but much the rather, for that
the Vein does not receive the impression of the Lancet, sliding this way and
that way by reason of the windiness contained in it, and because that the harsh
dryness of the upper skin resists the edge of the Instrument. Their bodies seem
cold and hard to the touch, and they are troubled with terrible Dreams; for
they are observed to seem to see in the Night, Devils, Serpents, dark Dens and
Caves, Sepulchers dead Corpses, and many other such things full of horror, by
reason of a black vapor diversely moving and disturbing the brain, which also
we see happens to those who fear the water, by reason of the biting of a mad
Dog. You shall find them froward, fraudulent, parsimonious, and covetous even
to baseness, slow speakers, fearful, sad complainers, careful, ingenious,
lovers of solitariness, Manhaters, obstinate maintainers of Opinions once
conceived, slow to anger: but angered not to be pacified: But when Melancholy
has exceeded Natures and its own bounds, then by reason of putrefaction and
inflammation, all things appear full of extreme fury and madness, so that often
they cast themselves headlong down from some high place, or are otherwise
guilty of their own death, with fear of which notwithstanding they are
terrified. But we must note, Changes of the Native temperament, do often happen
in the course of a man's Life, so that he which awhile agone was sanguine, may
now be choleric, melancholic, or phlegmatic; not truly by the changing o^
the blood into such humors, but b^ the mutation of Diet, and the cours^ or
Vocation of Life, for none of a sanguine Complexion, but will prove choleric
if he eat hot and dry meats; a^ all like things are cherished and preserved by
the use of their like, and co^traries are destroyed by their contr^ries; and
weary his body by viole^ Exercises, and continual labor: An^ if there be a
suppression of choleri^ Excrements which before did freel^ flow, either by
Nature, Will or Art; b^ whosoever seeds upon meats gener^ting gross blood, as
Beef, Veniso^ Hare, old Cheese, and all salt meats, without all doubt sliding
from his Nature; will fall into a melancholy te^per, especially, if to that
manner Diet, he shall have avocation full cares, turmoils, miseries, strong a^
much study, careful thoughts and fea^ and also if he sit much, wanting
Ex^cise; for so the inward heat as it w^ defrauded of its nourishments, fai^
and grows dull, whereupon gross a^ drossie humors abound, is gone out of the
belly, shall stuff his panch with more: Who presently after meat runs into
violent Exercises, who inhabit cold and moist places, who lead their life at
ease, in all idleness; and lastly, who suffer a suppression of the phlegmatic
humor, accustomely evacuated by Vomit, Cough, or blowing the Nose, or any
other way, either by Nature or Art. Certainly, it is very convenient to know
these things, that we may discern if we at the present be phlegmatic,
melancholic, or of any other temper, whether he be such by Nature or Necessity.

Of Spirits.
IN order of Nature, that that offers it self to the next hand, is concerning
Spirits. A Spirit consider as a part of a man, and that which enters our
Constitution: is defined to be an aerie, thin and clear substance, the seat of
the native heat, the Vehiculum of the Faculties, and Instrument of the
out-going Functions; and of these there be two sorts: one is the In-nate, and
the other is the In-flowing Spirit. The In-nate Spirit is that which is put
into every Similar part by the Principles of Generation, and that which of the
Greeks is called (...), and is the Foundation of the Humidum radicale: The
In-flowing Spirit, is that which breaks forth from elsewhere, and nourishes
and preserves the Faculty, and innate heat, carrying it every where to the
acting the Functions. Of this In-flowing Spirit there be three kinds, Animal,
Vital, and Natural:

The first is the Animal Spirit, an^ that which is begotten from the Vital
Spirit and the inspired Air, into the Ventricle of the Brain, and distributed
by the motive and sensitiv^ Nerves, giving sense and motion to the whole Body.

The Vital Spirit is that which is begotten in the left bosom of the heart,
and the prepared Air in the Lungs whence it is distributed to all the part^ by
the Arteries.

The Natural Spirit which goes forth from the Liver by the Veins with the
Blood, is poured forth into the Extreme parts of the Body, the Author of
Generation, Nutrition and Increase.

Of the Faculties.
A Faculty, it is the Innate power of the Soul, used to the performance of
Actions, and it is defined by Galen to be the Effecting Cause of Actions, and
therefore is called a Faculty, Quod quae facit, facere possit.

So that is understood by the Name of a Faculty, which has a power to do; and
these Faculties are stated to be Animal, Vital, and Natural: And that is the
Animal Faculty, which is only proper to the Animal, and for that cause it is
so called: That is Vital, which the Vital begets in the heart, and is sent
forth from thence by the Arteries, for the preservation of Life, whence also it
receives the Name of Vital.

The Natural Faculty is that which is in the Liver, and sends Aliment to all
the parts of the Body by the Veins.

Of Actions.
AN Action proceeds from a Faculty, called in Latin a Function, and therefore
also they call it an Operation: And as an Action, so also a Function is
threefold, Animal, Vital and Natural.

But Action is defined by Galen to be of two sorts, Animal and Natural.

From the Animal they are called Anamae Actiones, but from the Animale,
Actiones Animi.

CHAP. V. Of Things not Natural.
THese Res non Naturales, are s^ called, because they are not o^ the number of
those which enter into the Constitution or Composu^ of man's Body, as the
Elements, Humors and the rest, which have been briefly mentioned already. There
are six thing which are Res non Naturales: The ambient Air, Meat and Drink,
Sleep and Watching, Motion and Quiet, Excretion and Retention, and Perturbation
of the Mind; in the right use of which does consist the pr^^ervation of Health.
And to this purpose, that Air is to be Air.
chosen, which is neither thick, nor rimy, nor cloudy, neither near to standing
Pools or Rivers, but thin and serene, neither too hot, nor too cold, neither
too dry, nor too moist, neither infected with the ill Gales of Lakes, common
Sewers, Sinks, nor the filthy breath that is exhaled from dead Carkases, nor
corrupted by putrefying Dungs, or any thing that sends forth filthy fumes,
neither that which is sent forth by winds out of the Mountains, into the Vales
and Caves, and shut up in other hollow places, but pure and thin.

Of Meats.
THat Food is to be chosen which is Of Meat.
of good Juice, easy of Concoction, that has not much Excrementitious matter;
but Food of an ill Juice, is to be rejected, the particulars of which, you will
hear more hereafter, upon treating of the Scurvy. Those are called Foods of
good Juice, which are neither too hot nor too cold, dry, or moist, but
^emperate, neither too glutinous, nor too thin, but of a Medium, because they
beget good Blood, that is neither too thick, nor too thin.

The Quantity of Food must be measured Quantity.
by the Ability of the Concoctive Faculty, and of whole Natures Ability to
distribute that which is requisite to the nourishment to every part; and
therefore the quantity must not abound the power of the native heat; and to
this end it must be well chewed and ground by the teeth, that being swallowed
into the stomach, the first shop of Nature, it may be the easier concocted.

The Time of taking Food must not Time.
be before the fore-received Food be cast out, by the power of the Expulsive
Faculty, into the Guts, out of the Stomach.

The Drink must be Beer well boy'ld, The drink.
made of Barley-malt, or mixed with Oats; it must not be red nor white, neither
sharp or sour, but well boiled, (if Beer) and clear, and pure, of good odor.

The Quantity of Drink must answer Quantity of drink.
the Quality of the received Food; for if the Food be more solid and dry, the
Drink may be more liberal; where the meats are more moist, the Drink must be
the less.

Much swashing of the stomach with The Time.
drink at Meals, is disapproved as unwholsom; and yet it must not be too
sparing, because that will not quench the thirst, which is to be regarded.

As to the Time of Drink; as Hunger does admonish us when to eat, so Thirst
does in like manner advise us when to drink; and that for the most part, either
in health or sickness, is the best Rule; so that where a person is apt to be
thirsty, he may drink more to supply the want of moisture, and may serve to the
wetting or moistening of the Stomach.

Of Sleep.
SLeep ought to be pleasant, and in the mean between deep and wakefulness; for
as that sleep is not best which is troubled, so neither is that which is too
light, and from which a person is very quickly awakened, but the immoderate
deep sleep is worst, Persons are not to sleep till the perfect concoction of
the Aliment is over, which is about two or three hours afte^ the Food received,
profitable sleep is answerable to the constitution of the body*

For longer sleep is more fit and needful How long Sleep.
for Choleric Bodies, and Melancholic, than for Sanguine and Phlegmatic.
When you lie down in you^ Bed, first lie upon your right side, tha^ the meat
taken last may descend to the bottom of the Stomach, and after tha^ upon the
left, that the concoction man be helped by the Liver lying upon the Stomach;
which being perfected, li^ again to the Right side, that the Chyl^ may be more
easily distributed to the Liver; but lying upon the face is judged by all, to
be the cause of mos^ grievous diseases.

The most convenient time for Slee^ The Time of sleep.
is the Night, two or three hours afte^ Supper, because of its peaceable quie^
and humidity.

Of Exercise.
EXercise ought to be moderate, neither too gentle, nor too vehement, neither
too quick, nor too slow.

Lawful Exercise is, until the body wax warm, and appear somewhat more full,
and there arise the florid or rosy color of the face; and sweat, and hot
vapors, are perceived to break forth, and the respiration is great and easy,
and as long as the Exercise is continued, it be quick and equal. And the Body
beginning to grow weary, longer Exercise will cause stifness and weariness to
assail the Body, and the Body flowing with sweat, will suffer loss of the
Spirits and humid substance. Exercises are to be according to the habit and
Constitution of the Body; those bodies that are full and gross, and Bodies
repleated with humors, must use such Exercise, as may correct the distemper of
the body, which may be more vehement and laborious, yet so that they be not
begun till the first and second concoction be over, which may be known by the
yellowness of their Urine; and always this is to be observed, the Exercise is
to be suitable to the Food received: so that if the Feeding be larger, the
Exercise is to be the more; if the Food be more sparing, the Exercise is to be
the less: The Exercise is to be first gentle, then more vehement, and afterward
more gentle again. There is another sort of Exercise which is performed by
Friction and is useful for those who by reason of Infirmities are not able to
take the benefit of Motion, and is to be performed according to Reason; so that
the Sweat breaks forth, the filth of the Body, and such Excrements as lie under
the skin, may be allured and drawn out.

But as there are many and great advantages accrue to the Bodies of men by well
managed Exercise, so great harm proceeds to the Body from idleness and sloch;
for gross vicious humors heaped up in the body, are the Authors of Crudities
and Obstructions, Gouts, Apoplexies, and a multitude of other diseases.

Of Passions of the Mind.
PAssions of the Mind have a great Influence upon the health of our bodies; so
that as our Passions are, so (very much) are the state of our bodies altered:
Because by these the expulsion of the native heat with the Blood and Spirits,
are carried inward or outward; and these Passions are in Number Four; Joy,
Anger, Sorrow, and Fear.

Joy proceeds from the Heart; for the thing causing Joy or Fear being
conceived, the Faculties move the heart, which shaken and moved by the Faculty
which has dominion over it, is dilated and opened, as ready to embrace the
exhilerating Object; but in the mean time, by the force of that dilatation it
sends forth much heat and Spirits together with the Blood into all the Body, a
great part of which coming to the Face, dilates it; the Forehead is smooth and
plain, the Eyes look bright, the Cheeks become red as died with Vermilion, the
Lips and Mouth are drawn together, and made plain and smooth: Some have their
Cheekdented with two little pits, which from the effects are called laughing
Cheek^ because of the contraction or curbin^ which the Muscles suffer by reason
^ their fullness of Blood and Spirits, a^ which is nothing but to laugh. Jo^
recreates and quickens all the Facu^ties, stirs up the Spirits, helps
co^coction, makes the Body to be bett^ in liking, and fattens it; the heat,
blo^ and Spirits flowing thither, and t^ nourishing dew or moisture, water i^
and refreshing all the Members; from whence it is, that of all the passions ^
the Mind, this only is profitable, ^ that it exceeds not measure; for i^
moderate and unaccustomed Joy caries so violently the Blood and Spir^ from the
Heart into the habit of the Body, that sudden and unlooked f^ death ensues, by
a speedy decay ^ strength, and the lasting Fountain ^ the Vital Humor being
exhausted which thing happens to them which are less hearty, as Women and ol^
men.

Anger causes the same effusion o^ heat in us, but far speedier than Joy
therefore the Spirits and Humors are so inflamed by it, that it often causes
putrid Fevers, especially if the body abound with any ill humor.

Sorrow and Grief dryes the Body in a way contrary to that of Anger; because by
this the heart is so straitened, the heat being almost extinct, that the
accustomed Generation of Spirits cannot be performed, and if any be generated,
they cannot freely pass into the members with the Blood; wherefore, the Vital
Faculty is weakened, the lively color of the face withers and decays, and the
Body wastes aaway with a lingering Consumption.

Fear in the same manner draws in the Spirits, and calls them back, not by
little and little, as in sorrow, but suddenly and violently; hereupon the Face
grows suddenly pale, the extreme parts cold, all the Body trembles or shakes,
the Belly in some is loosed, the Voice as it were stays in the Jaws, the
Heart beats as it were with a violent pulsation; because it is almost oppressed
with the heat, strangled by the plenty of Blood and Spirits abundantly rushing
thither, the hair also stands upright, because the heat and blood are retired
to the inner parts and the outmost parts are more col^ and dry than stones; by
reason where of the outmost skin and pores in which the roots of the hair are
fastened, ar^ drawn together.

Shame is a certain affection as it were mixed of Anger and Fear, therefore in
that Conflict of (as it were) contending passions, fear prevails over Anger,
the Face waxes pale, the Blood flowing back to the heart, and these symptoms
arise according to the vehemence of the abated or contracte^ heat: But if on
the contrary, Ange^ get the dominion over Fear, the Bloo^ runs violently into
the Face, the Eye^ look red, and sometimes they even foam at the mouth.

There is another kind of Shame, which the Latins call Verecundia, and we
Shamefastness, in which there is a certain Flux and Reflux of heat and blood,
first recoiling to the heart, then presently rebounding from them again, but
that motion is so gentle, that the heart thereby suffers no oppression nor
defect of Spirits. Wherefore, no accidents worthy to be spoken of, arise from
thence; this effect is familiar to young Maids and Boys, who if they blush for
a Fault committed unawares, or through carelessness, it is thought an Argument
of a virtuous and good disposition.

CHAP. VI. Tractatus de Scorbuto: OR, A Tract concerning the Scurvy. The
Description of the Scurvy, with the internal and next Cause which is radicated
mostly in the Blood and Nervous Liquor.
IN the ancient Medicine there is so little mention made of this Disease, which
we in our days c^ll the Scurvy, and there is so sparing a description made of
it, that some have doubted whether there have been any such Di^ease as is now
almost Epidemical in man^ places, where in former times it was n^ known, and
with which almost all d^ labor, or think that they are afflicte^ This Disease
(it is apparent) did put for ^ it self in former times, but its own O^ springs,
(as in the Lues Venerea, and Ri^kets,) were discovered long after. Y^ this
Disease, although known by oth^ Names, and observed by the Ancien^ and also the
Cure of it, has been d^vered to the succeeding Ages, by ^ more dull wits, as
appears sufficiently the Testimonies of Hypocrates, Areti^ Pliny, and others.
There is little to ^ said, as to the various Appellations this Disease, yet I
shall give you a tou^ We shall therefore proceed to the op^ing and right
Explication of it, wh^ yet has been so diffused, and does ^tend it self to
such Variety and Multi^city of Symptoms, that not one d^nition, or scarce any
single descript^ can comprehend it.

Howsoever, not wholly to pass it o^ we have little among Authors, tha^
certain; yet among the ancient Mast^ of Medicine, there are various Na^
appropriate to this disease, of which some are taken from the Disease, some
from the symptoms, as it appears from Celsus and others, where it is taken
from the various symptoms of this Disease. Which shall be handled when we come
to discover the symptoms, signs, or evil and pernicious Concomitants of this
formidable Disease.

As to the Name, Scorbutus, it takes its Original from Scorbuck a Danish word,
^ut used by the Saxons, and borderers upon the German Sea; and in Latin, by
some Gingipedi^um, because that in this Disease the Gums and Feet are infected
^ith a corrupt Blood, and thence one in^ication of a right manner of Cure is
ta^en to be well achieved by a well mun^ifying and cleansing of the Blood.
Pli^y in his Natural History calls it Stoma^ace and Sceletyrbe: and of his
Opinion ^s Strabo in his Book of Geographa, but others suppose this (...), to
be a spe^es of the Palsy. However or in what ^anner this Disease was found to
show ^orth its symptoms in those days, when ^s it was but in its Infancy; in
process of ^me, we find it has arrived to the pitch ^f one of the most
formidable Dseases inc^d^nt to these Northern Climates, o^ more ^pidemical than
most other distempers. To stand much upon the ^^me and from thence to suppose
to dedu^ any thin^ of the Nature and Essence ^ this Dis^a^^, does seem
difficult, if not i^possible; b^c^use (as was binted before these App^^^^^ions
seem to take the^ rise chiefly (...) the symptoms, which appear to be ^o
numerous, that as w^ said, no one single Definition can comprehend it.

Notwithstanding some have thus d^fined it, that it is a corruption of cru^
humors; and mostly of Atrabilis refu^ing from the Compass of the ^elly, a^
contained Bowels, bu^ most of all from the stuffing and intemperature of t^
Spleen, which is proper and peculiar that part: And it also acquires ^ diff^ing
degree of putridness from the ma^cious form and species of other humou^ and it
weakens and (...) by litt^ and little, by a (...) Fertility ^ symptoms, all
the (...) of the Bod^ the Bowels (serving and dedicated Nu^^^tion* and placed
(...) Reg^on ^^ the B^^y) are ^^^^^pted ^he Su^ject, and do administ^r the
Original ^ this Disease: But above the rest it is chiefly attributed to the
Spleen; in truth the (...) of it, the Liver being sound, the attraction is
hindered by the intemperature and obstruction of the atrabilous humor, which
for that cause being mixed with the blood, does infect the whole Body with a
consuming or pining corruption.

This definition carries in it a great proportion with the Disease, viz. In
respect of the chief Seat, the Spleen, and the other encompassed Bowels.
Secondly, in respect of the humor which is Atrabilious, or burnt Choler.
Thirdly, with respect to the Cause, the obstruction of the parts destinated to
Nutrition. Fourthly, to the Numerousness of the Symptoms, which are very many.
Fifthly, as to the End which is very afflicting. And lastly, the corrupting the
Blood, which (as such) is accounted the Parent of this Disease, all which shall
be further demonstrated and illustrated by that which follows.

CHAP. VII.
The Manner of the Generation of the Scurvy.

PHysicians have labored much to d^monstrate the Manner of the production of
this Disease, and the mo^ evident is taken from an Analogy the the
Fermentations of Wines bare ^ the Fermentations and Concoctions ^ our Food
received into our Body, an^ the various alterations that it suffers b^ our
innate heat, and other Concomitan^ of producing Chyle, and the fitting it i^
the various workhouses of our Body ^ the great end to which it is designe^
viz. the Nourishing of our body: an^ to this Analogy it is observable, that t^
Juice expressed from the Grapes, begi^ in short time to put forth it self into
m^tion; and by this there is by a certai^ Fermentation, an Alteration and a
Rari^cation, the gross and dull is made spirit^ous and lively, the thick is
made thi^ the tart is made sweet and pleasant. An^ that that was unfit to be
taken into ou^ Bodies, by reason of its heterogeneit) is by this Fermentation
made most homogeneous or Friendly to our Nature, but in this there are several
things or accidents observable.

First, that when the Faeces are separated

Secondly, the Sulphurous parts of the

Thirdly, it is not seldom, that there Acetum or Vinegar.

There is yet another Intemperature of Wines, viz. when the spirits being
deprest, the saline and sulphurous particles combined together, are exalted:
And this may be done in Wines in a twofold manner. And this is observable, that
Wines may degenerate into Vappa* or Vinegar, and that sometime from the Spirit
being depressed, and also the Sulphur with the Salt does become musty, clammy
or slimy, which we call Wine over-fretted, or become ropy in either Mutation,
the Spirit being brought under the Yoke, the sulphurous and salin^ being
associated together, they excel^ the other Elements, and so they may change
into the gross disposition of it^ own Liquor; notwithstanding these things are
not done altogether in the same manner in both: Wherefore in the first,
Dyscrasia, or Intemperature o^ the Wine, the Sulphur somewhat abidet^ with the
Salt, but in the latter, the Sal^ rather existeth with the Sulphur, bu^ whether
it be one or the other that i^ made most powerful, the dominion o^ the Spirit
being driven away, the other adheres to it, and takes away its du^ state; the
manner of both seem explicable.

Note, When Generous Wines have long waxed hot, the particles being much
agitated, and by little and little being wounded, the spirit partly evaporates,
being rapt up with the grosser Elements, it is suppressed. In the mean time the
Sulphur (the abundance of which) is advanced by a greater agitation, and then
the Spirit is brought under the yoke adhering to the salt, and lifting it up,
it alters the mixture of the Liquor; then by reason of the Excellency of the
sulphur, combinated with the Salt, thence comes the mustiness, even as with
thin Wines longer kept. The Salt exalted, and made victorious, it depresseth
the spirit, and from thence it induces a sharpness to the subjected Latex, and
then afterward the exalted Salt which is in a lesser quantity, getting the
Sulphur to it self, and joining of it intimately to it, does turn the substance
of the Liquor from thin into thick, and as it were Oleaginous, and from a sour
savor into a very ungrateful, and (as it were) a Mustiness.

These being the Productions by reason of the Fermentation in Wines, you shall
see how amply the Analogy will hold between this Fermentation, and the manner
of producing the Scurvy.

It is to be understood, that the Aliments received into our Bodies, are first
concocted, and as it were gently boiled in our Stomachs, by which means there
is made a separation of the gros^ and the excrementitious parts, which are
unfit to nourish, and are cast forth into their proper Receptacle, viz. the
Guts.

In the mean time, as it were by a certain Fermentation, by which those things
that were before thick and gross, are rarefied, and those that were fixed, are
spiritualized, and they are made volatile; and this is done by separating their
Excrements, that there might be an assimilation of that which is profitable to
our Bodies, and to administer a pure Aliment, that so they might afford matter
to our spirits in manner as has been above demonstrated, in the Fermentation
of Wine: As Planerus brings that sentence of his, That Meat and Drink in our
Stomachs is resolved into an Air, which is drawn and passes into the
Mesaraicks, and is changed by a certain Concretion into the species of Blood;
and not only those parts of Aliments and Drinks are rarefied and made volatile,
as it were in our Bodies, but even that salt it self which is in these
Aliments, and is assumed in with them, though fixed, yet are rendered volatile,
spiritual and as it were Animal: And this is not difficult to believe, if any
one will take notice how these volatile Salts and Spirits may be drawn out of
Horns, and Bones, and Urines of Animals.

And so while all things are well performed in our Bodies, the Aliments are
resolved in our stomachs, and the parts unfit to nourish, are separated; but
those things which are proper to nourish, are by the proper and peculiar
Faculty of the Stomach and Bowels elaborated, and by that means rendered
consentaneous to humane Nature: But when in our Stomachs and Intestines they
cannot attain to that similitude and form which they ought to have, to nourish
our bodies.

They are sent to the Liver, which is (as it were) the workhouse of the blood,
to be more fully elaborated; but as the purer blood is elaborated in the Liver,
the grosser part of the Chyle is (by the large quantity of the Serum, with
which it is moistened, and reduced to a greater aptness to ^^uxibility and
motion, and is attracted by the Spleen, and that part of the Chyle which yet
remains thick, (by reason of Pontick and Acid Qualities) is there elaborated
and changed into blood fit for the nourishing the neighboring parts.

And these things being rightly done, and fitly ordered in our Bodies, the man
continues sound and in health; but if by reason of an ill manner of Living, and
if they shall eat crude gross and naughty Diet, and shall gorge themselves with
many sorts of Food, so that it is not able to separate from the Body, though
otherwise in health and strong, by the power of concoction those vicious
Excrements with which the concoctive power labors, but so the Chyle abounding
with many gross and tartarous parts, and comeing to the secondary Bowels
destinated to concoction, it happens that these gross salt and fixed parts
cannot all be attracted by the Spleen, neither be all sufficiently elaborated
there; and so that concoction which ought to ferment, and as it were to
spiritualize all the Aliments, is hindered, and the grosser parts of the Food,
with the fixed and tartarous, carried in abundance with the Meats, is sent away
gross, in its fixed nature, being not able to render them volatile, rarefied
and Animal, as they ought, and the impure, unprofitable, and tartarous parts
cannot be separated from the useful and profitable, whence the Bowels
appointed to the second concoction, at length wax too weak to discharge the
abundance of gross humors, and by little and little are debilitated, and from
thenceforth are rendered more unapt, so that they cannot correct the Coction
and Elaboration of the Aliment, and the overmuch thickness of the humors, and
that which is deficient in the Rarification and Attenuation, (how to express it
in one word, is not easy) and from hence appears the Reason of the
controversy about the Name: Gr. Hortius calls it (...), or Crudity, and that
he accounts the nearest and properest Name for this Disease.

And therefore that Salt and the grosser parts of the Chyle, when all cannot be
attracted from the Spleen, and elaborated and attracted by the Liver, without
Impediment, even that which is the subtiler part of the Chyle, as that which is
familiar to it, and naturally more apt to the generating good blood, and cannot
expel all things from Nature, because of the abundance and unaptness, they
stick in the first ways, and abide in the branches o^ (...) Porta and
Mesaraick (...) the Mesen^ary it self, Pa^^r^^ and (...)* and by reason that it
is wo^^ to administer matter of Cause to such humors, they are continually
increased every day: And to these salt, gross fixed humors, there are joined
and mixed other crude and vicious humors, and are detained in these places;
and so ^he Cymists do call the foulness* of these humors heaped up in the
first ways, Tartarous.

Having premised these things, let us return to the Analogy that seems to be
between the Fermentation of Wine and the Blood o^ Humo^rs, and concerning ing
the first note in the Fermentation of Wine*

CHAP VIII.
(...) when the Faeces are separa^^^ and (...) to the bottom, if they ^^^ again
elevared to motion, or if any Heterogeneous Exotic Sulphur be cast into the
(...), from thence there will arise a notabl^^ (...), which unless it be (...)
to the ruin^ of (...) whol^ (...) lik^ (...) there b^ ma^y thing which (...)
mixible with ^^^ blood, which ^eing mixed wi^^ (...) ^oe ^i^der ^he mo^ion and
Circulation of it, and trouble the Oeconomi^* Indeed these are not so well
performed, the nourishing Liquo^ ^eing reduced to a muddiness, ^^ inordi^^^ely
ferments the blood, and also ^ha^ Liquor is made to degenerate from its statu
quo prius, into a base and flat Liquor, and being such, stirs up the Fitts of
intermitting Fevers, but the vapo^ou^ Excrem^nts of the Blood, the Rasa, or
Iraseibiles, choleric and atrabilious, retained in its bosom, it brings forth
Catarrhes, Dropsies, Jaundies, Melancholy, (...) ^any other Effects. And*

Secondly, The Sulph^^^us part (...)

Thirdly, There frequently happens a close Union or Constriction of the Sulphur
with the wearied or tired spirit, the saline parts being brought to a
fluidness, it excells the rest in power and force, and so the Liquor passes
into an Acetum or Vinegar, and from the Acidity of the Blood, are produced
Melancholy Distempers.

Fourthly, There is yet another intemperature viz. when the spirit being
depressed, the saline and sulphurous particles combining together, are exalted;
and this may be done in Wines in a twofold manner: And this is very
observable, Wines may degenerate into Vappa or Vinegar, and that sometimes from
the spirit being depressed, and also the sulphur with the salt exalted
together, does become musty, clammy or slimy, which we call Wine over-fretted,
or become Ropy, in either mutation the spirit being brought under the Yoke, the
sulphur and saline being associated together, they grow too powerful for the
other Elements, and so they may be changed into the gross disposition of its
own Liquor, notwithstanding this thing is not done in the same manner in both*
For in the first Dyscrasia, or Intemperature of the Wine, the Sulphur somewhat
abides with the Salt, but in the latter the Salt rather existeth with the
Sulphur; but whether it be one or the other that is made more powerful (the
dominion of the spirit being driven away) the other consents with it, and
takes away its due state: the manner of both is explicable.

When Generous Wines have long waxed hot, and by little and little being
wounded, the Spirit partly evaporates, and being rolled about with the other
grosser Elements, it is suppressed; in the mean time, the Sulphur, (the abundance
of which is advanced by the great Agitation and the Spirit) is brought under
the Yoke, adhering to the Salt, and taking it up, it alters the mixture of the
Liquor, and then by reason of the excellency of the Sulphur combined with the
Salt, thence comes the mustiness, even as with thin Wines long kept, the Salt
excited and made victorious, it depresseth the Spirit, and from thence it
induces a sharpness to the subjected Latex, and then the exalted Salt which is
in it, in a lesser quantity getting the Sulphur to it self, and joining it
intimately with it self, turns the substance of the Liquor from thin into
thick, and as i^ were Oleaginous, and from a sour savor into a very
ungrateful, and as i^ were a Mustiness.

It is very probable that the Bloo^ may be thus altered in the Scorbutio^
Affection; as Wines, as often as the^ wax hot, they degenerate into Rop^ and
stinking: For this Disease is not ^ much from the Faeculency mixed wi^ the
Blood, (although such have bee^ and the Supplement of them may ^ known before)
but it depends upon the habitual Intemperature of the Bloo^ and the Argument
is this, Because a rad^cated Scurvy is so difficultly cured, a^ sometimes not
at all, we may state t^ Dyserasia sanguinis is the Parent of t^ Scurvy, even as
we constitute a Dup^city of the Wine, to wit, a Sulphuro-^linan, and a
Salino-Sulphurean: F^ where there is the greatest variety ^ Distempers which
are attributed to t^ Scurvy, all these may chiefly and ve^ aptly be referred to
two heads or Fo^tains of Evil, Viz.

CHAP. IX.
THE first is that in which the Blood is touched with the Scorbutic Mia^ines,
or the prae-existing heat, in which, to wit the Sulphur, having got the
prae-domination, gets the salt to it self; wherefore that being made more
rancid, or Rammish, waxes inordinately hot in the Vessels, and the Excrements
being ^urnt, to wit, the Concretions of the Sulphur and Salt, the Sulphur
wholly forsakes it self, and is dispersed here and ^here; the which truly
being drove ^utward, do produce spots, Pustuls, Ex^nth^mata, and Ulcers, but
being dispo^ed inwardly, they occasion Vomitings, ^nrdialgia, or heart-akings,
Diarrhaeas, ^r Dysenteries, and also most cruel pains: ^n the scorbutic
Rancidity of this kind ^f Blood, temperate Remedies only, and frequent
Phlebotomies, (as Scurvy-^rass, Horseradish, and other things, en^owed with a
sharp and biting taste,) are ^onvenient; and for the like reason musty ^r
rancid Wines are cured, by taking from them their Faeces: Moreover by the
pouring in of Milk, Starch, Ising-glass and of other things, asswaging or
mitigating them.

In the second place, in the Blood no^rishing the Scurvy, the Salt having g^
the Dominion, it joins the Sulphur to i^ wherefore that is not so hot, but it
b^comes thick, as ropy Wine, and as it we Mucilaginous, it is slowly circulated
^ the Vessels, and whiles it passes the Bo^els it is apt to stuff them, and to
fast^ the muddiness to them, such Effects oft^ times are made without cutaneous
Eru^tions, there are produced short breatedness and weariness, they labor wi^
a spontaneous Lassitude, a straitness ^ the breast, and often times they are
o^noxious to Fainting of the spirits, Vertig^ and Convulsions; but in these
scorb^tick Dispositions they are wont to u^ Remedies more hot, and those endow^
with a volatile Salt, and also Chalybia^ which does thin and stir the blood: A^
truly in the same manner do they hand Ropy Wines, viz. They ought to ^ much
shaken and stirred.

Thus far concerning the Radicate Principles of the Scurvy in the Blood Mass;
and here it is to be explained from what Causes the Blood, (the Parent of the
Scurvy, degenerating from its proper goodness) does take that diseasie
disposition: Notwithstanding, it ought first to be shown, in what manner the
seeds of this Disease, with the other Humor in general, is cast into the
nervous Juice.

From the Blood driven forth the Borders of the Brain, does still forth a most
subtle matter, as for Animal spirits, so for a Vehicle, and does scatter them
there continually, by the whole nervous kind, that Latex, as long as the Spirit
and Salt is well combinated or volatilised with it, remains very powerful:
there is also a little water with which these are diluted, there seems little
need of Sulphur and Earth, and yet that Concretion of the Spirit and volatile
Salt, which can pass through all things, does penetrate, actuate, and irradiate
that most excellent humor.

Concerning the beginnings of the Scurvy, until the Blood (being thick) and
Tone of the Brain are vitiated, that Dewy Liquor of the Brain and Nerves, as
yet spirituous and sweet, abides not very unfit to every Office to which it i^
appointed; but afterward being impoverished by the bloody Mass, and much
enfeebled, it is dropped out, inclinin^ toward a soureness: Moreover from the
faeculent, and as it were the rancidous or muddy blood, heterogeneo^ particle,
are administered, much infeste^ with an Animal Regimen.

And the Brain being made more wea^ within, are admitted without repuls^ and
thence is powered out into the ma^rowy Appendix, as also the nervou^ with the
moistning Juice; hence no^ there follows (the failings and the Eclipses of the
scattering Animal Spirit in^ every Region) distractions, and doloro^
complaints, and Cramps, wherefore Pa^sies, Convulsions, Vertigoes, Pains,
Tre^bling, and other preternatural Afflict^ons of the Brain and Nervous kind,
an^ the more forceable Roots producing the Scurvy are wont to follow.

And hence it is to be noted in genera^ that in these three does consist the
sco^butick spot, affixed to the nervous Juice viz. That the dewy Liquor of the
Brai^ and Nerves, is become much more thi^ or impoverished, which does
degenerat^ a Crasi Spirituo-salina, toward a soureness, which is replenished by
the heterogeneous and morbifick particles. Hitherto we have shown how the first
seeds of the Scorbutic Affection, are sown in the Blood, and therein to the
Nervous Juice.

CHAP. X.
THe more remote and Extrinsick Cause comes from the six things non Naturales.
First, Air that is corrupt, naughty, moist, thick, putrid and cold, cloudy,
sultery, and marine; the unpleasant and cloudy season of the Year, moist places
near the Seacoasts, Laky, wet dwelling, and Habitations under ground,
obnoxious to unclean and filthy Exhalations arising from foul Inundations of
the Sea and Rivers, from whence Hepatick and Splenatick Afflictions are stirred
up.

Secondly, Foods, not only in Quality but in Quantity, and in Variety, hurt
much: (Multa fercula, multos morbos ferunt.) In Qualiity, if they be of an evil
Juice, corrupt, too hot, too much burnt; these easily admitting of putridity,
and are contrary to the nature of the Bowels; which First are, the Flesh of
Bulls, Rams, Sows, Goats, Deer, Water-fowls, Musty diet, or too Old things,
salted, dried in the Air, dried with smoke, or kept too long with Salt, Red
Herring, Pickled Herring, Biscuit, Pease, Beans, Old Cheese, Cabbage, Chestnuts.
Among Drinks, those are forbidden, tha^ are made of a foul and stinking Water,
drinks made of Wheat, thick and faeculent* Wines, black and slimy, impure,
thick, not only taken to satiation, but also taken against thirst, and Drinks
too copiously taken into the stomach hurt the Mesaraick Veins and Liver, so
that they cannot perform their other Offices.

There are other Causes of this Disease, in some it may draw its rise from an
hereditary Cause, when the Parent^ have been much infected with the Invasions
of the Scurvy, as when the Paren^ Father or Mother are scorbutic; and so it
becomes Hereditary also by sucking the Milk of a Scorbutic Nurse; and some
think it may be taken by Contact, and intimate Conversation, as drinking in the
same Cup, by Kissing, and by the drawing in of the Breath of those infected:
And this by some is thought the Cause, why in the Lower Saxony the Scurvy is so
frequent, they suppose that by drinking in the same Cups, that scorbutic, that
having their Gums lax, and inflamed with crude Blood, their mouth stinking,
give or communicate the same to others, and so also their Companions, Si
scilicet vir cum faemina scorbutica fluxu albo laborante concumbat, may take
it; want of motion, an idle sedentary Life does contribute much to this
disease, Fastings over much, immoderate watchings, great and unseasonable
Labor and Exercises of Body, suppressions of yearly Evacuations, immoderate
Sleep, frequent perturbations of Mind, anxious Cares and Solicitudes, and
things of that kind, which does lessen the Native heat, and increase Crudities.

CHAP. XI.
Signs showing the Scurvy has already i^v^ded the Body.

First, A Heaviness of the whole Body. Secondly, A spontaneous weariness, which
notwithstanding Bodies that a^^ more gross and big, may not so soon pe^ceive,
without a contin^^l Exercise.

Thirdly, A certain straitness of the Praecordi^m.

^ourthly, A debility of the Legg^.

Fifthly, An i^ching, redness, and pai^ of the (...).

Sixthly, The color of the Face incl^^ing from a paleness to a dusky.

Wherever these are found jointly you may with certainty pronounce they (...)
the Scurvy. Not that these be al^ ^he Signs of this disease, but that this
^^uculent disease may be the more unmasked, and every ordinary Capacity may
understand whether he or she have the Scurvy; you shall here have a more
particular List of well-nigh all the symptoms of this Disease.

CHAP. XII.
THe Scurvy first invading, there is presently a sense of heaviness and
weariness without a manifest Cause over the whole Body, mostly about the Vessel
dedicated to Concoction, and that from Cacochymia, pressed out of all the Veins
by the whole frame; for by the heap of humors in this Evil, there is need that
the powers be stirred up.

2ly, They are troubled with a difficult and slow breathing, especially between
Labor, when the sick is moved or stirred, by Reason of a flatulent humor
lying under and distending the Hypocondries, together with the neighboring
parts, the Diaphragma, and Organs of Respiration.

3. Oftentimes they are driven over the whole Body, but chiefly through the
external parts, as the Arms, Belly, sides, Hips, between the Entrance of the
back, having a notable passage by the Veins that passes down by the back, but
chiefly the spots do bud and put forth themselves in the feet and legs.

4. When the Fountain and Fuel of this Disease is circumscribed in the Bowels,
that neither much of it is powered forth into the veins, then either the Veins
it self, or both, do begin to swell in the Panch-belly, and so they are
rendered bigger, but chiefly the Spleen, which swelling, or being puffed up
with Afflatus, and glutted with the muddy part of the blood, it spreads to a
greater magnitude.

5. The fifth symptom of this disease is, that from hence is produced an
extenuation of the Body, by reason of a defect of the more benign Aliment and
nutritive Juice, or from impure Food, the blood being not sufficiently cleansed.

6. The Appetite, the Faculty of the stomach, the desire of Food needful and
necessary to Life, is dejected, conflicting almost continually with a
nauseating, loathing and aversion to all food, with some it is dulled, but with
others the natural habit of the stomach, is well-nigh lost, and truly all
these things are wont to happen by reason of the disparity of the humor
flowing, as from the Liver, so also from the Spleen into the Center of the
stomach.

7. The Seventh symptom is this, that sometimes one, sometimes another of the
Hypocondra^ are afflicted with pain, and as it were with an obscure deadness,
wherefore they are vehemently distended by winds or Flatus that hides, and are
shut up in these places, from whence the power of Rising up, and going does
arise.

8. Eighthly, The pain of this place is not perpetually circumscribed and
abiding here but every where, now here, now there, according to its wandering
disposition; now in the sides, and anon in the lower parts of the Body, and by
and by through the whole Body; and thus it very imperiously maintains its own
bounds.

9. In the first which is extended to the Loins, the Loins seem as though they
were broke, and in these there is perceived too much blood abounding in the
great Veins of the Loins, before the arising of marks, Buboes, the Haemorrhoids
being stopped in men, and the monthly Courses in Women; and other pains running
over the whole Body, but chiefly the Joints, sometimes with, and sometimes
without a tumor, sometimes with a certain quivering, and discovering its self
of its own accord, and often times it resembles the Gout.

10. The tenth symptom is (...), or swounding, which does assault many, the
heat and spirit being wearied, even as it is wont in the Hypochondraick
affection, in which often times there is certain Respits or Intervals, as it
were, the Spirits leading themselves to the Castle of the heart, as to its
strong hold.

11. If the humor pass downward, because Nature with its own Gravity makes it
to travel into the Veins, there is pain, with a Flatus, and vexes their extreme
parts abundantly.

12. Some are Costive, or more sparingly go to stool, by reason of the dryness
of their bodies, but others are attended with fluxes.

13. The Urin appears muddy, and yet it neither resideth to the bottom, nor
has any troubled Sediment at the bottom.

14. There is such pulsation of the quivering Arteries as there is in them that
are afflicted with a Quartan Ague, which is weak hard and frequent.

15. And if the Praecordia's by reason of ill Living have been inflamed by
heat, because of the straitness of the place, the matter having been shut in as
in a hot Oven, a Fever will arise, gentle to the touch of the hand, neither
having any period or time of Endings.

16. The Scurvy has frequently its own periods, with which by little and
little it is dissolved, and returns as it were again per Circulatum vel
circuitum.

17. When the flesh of the Gums by its nature being softer because of its
Texture, and being moistened with vapors from the impure Bowels, scorching by
the power of the heat from below, truly they then are most apt to be filled,
and then it arises into a less and fluid humor.

18. The Gummes do begin to itch at their roots, because of a scorched, putrid
and salt humor, moistened by its Ichor, with which by its nature is acrid and
sharp, propagated either by contagion, being stopped no longer, and by taking
another course, and afterward it has by staying in the place acquired an
Acrimonia.

19. The Scurvy is always accompapanyed with the stinking foetor in the mouth.

20. Another Infirmity that attends the Scurvy, is a weakness and feebleness in
the knees, for which cause, the sick can walk but slowly, though he endeavor
much, by reason that the Muscles and nervous parts are overcharged with gross
and melancholy humors, as also a Contraction of the Nervous parts, that many
cannot set their feet plain upon the Ground.

21. To some there happens an obstinate stifness of the Jaws, that they cannot
well gape or yawn, by reason of the stubborn stifness of the Joint of the Cheek.

22. In some there happens a convulsive motion of the Muscles and Nerves, in
others a paralytick distemper; in some a swelling in their legs, in some the
Scurvy and Dropsy are complicated together, in others there is an Atrophy,
viz. a Consumption of some one part, whiles the rest are in good plight, by
reason of undue attraction of Aliment.

23. There often happens a trembling and palpitation, and great Assaults of the
Heart, and these Passions are merely convulsive from the Cardiacous Nerves, to
wit, of the Praecardium and Heart it self, by reason of the spasmodical matter
that besieges it.

24. Some annoyed with wandering Fevers, and also sudden suffusions of heat, and
also Cold in several parts of the Body, now hot, and anon cold, flushing heats
in their faces, especially after meals, until the Concoction be over.

25. Also Scorbuticks are wont to be molested with copious sweats, and
specially in the night, because the nutritive Juice every day brought into the
Mass of blood, by reason of the intemperature, impurity and foulness of it, is
very little assimilated, being rejected of the blood, breaks forth under the
form of sweat; but because that Nutritive Liquor, whiles it is assimulating, is
made worse; being sick it produces not a Fever in its own manner, the saltish
intemperature of the blood, which being less apt therefore, abides in the
burning Fits; these immoderate kinds of Sweats, continual Fevers, with other
Chronical Diseases, do often happen to scorbutic persons, where the Nutritive
Liquor by fault of the assimulating Blood is perverted more than the concocting
Bowels.

26. In Scorbuticks the Urine appears red, like a Lie made of Wood-ashes and
this we pronounce as an undoubte^ sign of this Disease; for whiles the serou^
Latex, dissolved with the saltish and sulphurous uncocted particles, some do^
impart and communicate to it the highly saturated, and as it were the Lixivial
tincture, and also such a Urin abounde^ much with Contents, which when it ^
cold does praecipitate to the bottom.

27. To this sad disease there happe^^ a copious spitting, and oftentimes
(...) bloodiness and swelling of the Gumme^ and then a Sponginess, and after
th^^ putrefaction, as also an aerosion of the Teeth, and looseness, or a falling
ou^ accompanied with a stink of the mout^ the reason of which better appears,
if be considered, that there are constit^ted certain peculiar Ducts, to wit,
S^livales, or Vessels serving to spit, b^ which the serous humors are copious^
discharged, these arise from various Gla^dules, viz. a Parotidibus,
maxillaribus, su^ lingualibus, and are terminated much (...) the parts about
the Gums, or very ne^^ them; the constant office of these, is (...) send down
the spittle for certain uses i^ to the Cavity of the mouth: and it is further
to be observed, that the superfluous, gross and vicious are separated, as the
gross are by Sweat and Urine or other ways, from the blood, so these are
carried out of the Body by this way.

28. Marks breaking out in the Legs, and other parts of the Body, is the
Pathognomical sign of the Scurvy, as has been already mentioned.

Thus I have given you a brief account of the Signs and Symptoms of the
Scurvy, which appear to be many, and in many, very truculent or severe. And
this the Reader is to note by the way, That no person may judge themselves free
of this disease, because they have not all these symptoms attending at once,
for that person is rarely to be found that is so, though some we have
recovered, that it was difficult enough to perceive the absence of any one of
these symptoms.

CHAP. XIII.
The Cure of the Scurvy.

THere are four Intentions by which the Scurvy is cured, and the banished
health is recovered: The first i^ Evacuation, the second is Alteration, the
third is comforting, and the fourth is the removing the symptoms, but
forasmuc^ as these chiefly depend upon the Pharmaceutical, or Curative part of
Physic that shall be referred to the use of other (Athleteses) I mean those
Medicines specified in the Index Medicamentorum a^ the end of this Book, which
have power to extirpate the seeds of this disease^ corroberate the parts, open
obstruction^ banish the symptoms, and consequentl^ bring in the banished
health: therefore passing that, we shall proceed to the nex^ thing, as that
which is very necessary for all to know, and easy to follow, an^ and which
will compensate the price o^ this Book, in answering that necessar^ Question
which is requisite to be propounded by every scorbutic person, and that which
will have a tendency to do much in several of the Intentions propounded, and
that is, What is the Diet to be shunned, and what is the Diet to be followed?
And here it is to be observed, that under the Name of Diet; Meat and Drink are
not only to be understood, but also the Manner and way of Living, consisting
in Sleep, Watching, Venus, Bathings, Exercise, Idleness, Perturbations of the
mind, and all such things which are done in the Bodies of Mortals.

Two things are principally to be considered in Meats, The first is such as
must respect the strength of the sick; the second must respect the Disease: All
Diets in this Disease ought to have the faculty of thinning, cutting, cleansing
and of opposing the Disease; it must be of good Juice, fit to nourish the body,
and that in favor of the Bowels, helpful to Concoction, the chief and proper
Instrument of which is the native heat, which must not be impoverished by
binding things, but rather by defending and preserving, by penetrating things,
that they may nourish and be restoring.

The Food which is allowed to scorbutic Persons, is Beef meanly salted and
young, Veal, Mutton, Lamb, Goats, Pork because it is easy of Concoction^ and
nourishes much, roasting Pigs, the Hind, Kid, Rabbets: Foul, Capon^ Cocks,
Hens, Chickens, Pullets, Cockerels, Turkies, Partridge, Railes, youn^ Doves,
Black-birds, Thrush, Larks, Snite^ the Heath-cock, Linnet, Teal, Radg^
Green-geese, Marrow of Bones, the Live^ of Fowls.

The Sole, the Trout, Plaice, Flou^ders, Whiting, Salmon-peal, Smelt^ Breame,
Codfish, Oysters, Lobsters Prawns, Shrimps, Pickerel, Perch, Gudgeon, Dace.
The moderate use of pu^ and clear Wines, Water Gruel, Barley broth.

Their drink may be good Wine, esp^cially Rhenish, which is to be preferre^ and
good Beer well hopped and boiled and not too new: the Air ought to b^ hot and
dry; frequent and moderat^ Exercise is good, Venus, Sleep, Watche^ and
affections of the Mind, ought to b^ moderate, and suitable to the Complex^on
and Constitution.

Meats to be shunned, are all manne^ of Flesh that is old, hard, over much
salted, and things dried in the smoke, salt Fish, Beef much salted or old,
Bull-beef, Martlemas Beef, salt Fish, pickled Herring, fresh Herring, pickled
Oysters, heavy Bread, or Bread too coarse, but midling Bread is best. They are
to abstain from Sugar, Honey, and all acid, sour things. A sedentary and an
idle Life, is that which greatly promotes this Disease.

Vegetables appropriated to the Disease of the Scurvy, are,
Wormwood Sorrel Wood Sorrel Maidenhair Agrimonia Round Birthwort Asarabeca
Bettony Bistort Borrage Bugloss Dodder of Time Ceterach Chamaedry Celandine
Cichory Enula-campane Rinds of Ash-tree Fennel Fumitory Broom-flowers Liquorish
The Bark of the root of Cappar. Hyssop Liverwort Hopps Motherwort Myrabalanes
Moneywort Docks Parsley Pimpinella Polypodium Horseradish Rhubarb Scabias
Tamaris Thyme Valerian Nettles Corants Raisins Scurvy Grass Watercresses
Brooklime Oranges Limons Limes.
RVLES concerning BREAD and BEER, which is the Best.
FOrasmuch as the Scurvy and many other Diseases are produced very much from an
ill manner of living, without a regard had to those things mentioned above,
called Things not Natural; and among these, Bread and Beer have no small share,
we have in this place given you some Directions concerning those two principal
and universal Foods, Bread and Beer, by the ordering and due use of which you
may find great advantage in preserving your selves from this and other
Diseases. Bread above all Foods deserving the pre-eminence, for that it is the
staff of man's Life, that universal support without which man cannot well
subsist. One of the greatest Judgments and severest punishments that God
inflicts upon a Nation or People, is the want of Bread, next to the Food of the
Soul (the Word of God.) If Bread therefore be of so much moment to the
comfortable being of man's Life, surely there ought to be a great care taken in
the choice of the best Bread: in making of the best Bread, a great regard is to
be had, in choice of the best Corn, and manner of preparing: and forasmuch as
there are diverse sorts of grain wherewith Bread may be made, yet of them all
there are three principally to be used, Wheat, Rye, and Barley; for Beans or
Oats are rarely used, but in very great scarcity of the former, for Beans being
very hot and dry, the bread made of it is very dry, brittle and hard to digest,
and also unpleasant, and cannot be wholesome, unless for very strong and robust
Bodies; for it makes the Body to abound with Wind, and affords too little good
Aliment. In some Shire^ in England, and also in Wales, they make bread of Oats,
in manner of Cakes, but this Bread, though it be of light digestion, yet it is
windy, and affords but ^ weak nourishment to the body, it is pleasant while
new, but dry and unsavour^ if kept a little space.

But God having generally blessed thi^ Nation with plenty of Wheat, Barley an^
Rye, we shall chiefly speak of them; an^ of these three, Wheat may claym the
pre-eminence, as being of the best temperature, for it is soonest digested, an^
affords the best and most laudable, an^ strongest nourishment, and is
accommodated to all Constitutions, Ages, Sex^ and Climates (if it may be had;)
wherefore it is in want of this if any make shift with any other, but this
bread i^ purer or more impure, according to the sineness or coa^seness of the
flower o^ which it is made.

The Meal is divided into three sort^ Simila, Secundarium, and Furfures, bu^
some being more curious will have fou^ parts, Pollen, Simila, Secundarium, an^
Furfures.

Pollen is the very finest and purest pa^ of the flower, and of this is made
the finest and purest bread, and most profitable for weak, loose, thin and
extenuated bodies, but not so good for those that be strong and healthy.

The second is that which is called Simila, and this is the mean between the
finest part of the flower and the coarsest.

Secundarium with the finest part of the flower is made the best nourishing and
wholsomest bread, and most used of Families of greatest worth. But that bread
which by some is called Second Bread, or Secundarium, is that which is most
used in the houses of Farmers and Yeomen; this Bread does not give so great nor
so good nourishment as the former, because it has in it the finer part of the
bran, but it quickly forsakes the stomach, and makes the body soluble,
especially if tender and weak: but it is therefore profitable for such as be
costive. And to this some add a little Rye, and that makes a Bread very good
for strong and healthy bodies.

But bread made of the more branny part of the Meal, gives a very bad and
Excremental Nourishment to the body, and by some is called Panis Cancarius; but
if the Wheat and Rye being mixed, and the courser part of the bran, separated
by a sierce, there will be made a brown household Loaf, very agreeable to
Laborers. But that bread that is in most use, and best for Families in common,
is when the coursest part of the branne is sifted out of Wheat-meal, and this
is wholesome and easy enough digested, and make the body soluble, and fittest
for healthy bodies; for there i^ an abstersive faculty in the bran, by Reason
of an acid and penetrating spirit, which he that is but meanly skillful i^ the
first may discover, as also the bran^ when but in a mean quantity makes the^
bread of a due porosity, that so the Ferment of the stomach may as an universal
menstruum enter the parts of the bread, and sooner dissolve it, and this is
also profitable f^r gross and corpulent bodies.

But Bread made of Corn as it come^ from the Mill, is not so wholesome for the
former Reasons, because it is of hard digestion, and fills the belly with
Excrements.

Bread made of Rye is in nothing comparable to that of Wheat, being cold,
heavy, hard to digest, and by reason of the massiveness thereof ^^ very
troublesome and burdensome ^^ the stomach; it breeds clammy, ^ough and
melanchollick Juice. The bread made with the mixture of Rye and Wheat, which is
called Miscelane Bread is far wholesomer than that that is made of Rye only:
but the bread made of Rye and Barley, is not so good as the former.

The Properties requisite ^n good and wholesome Bread.
THer^ are seven things required in the Bread that is good and wholesome to the
stomach.

The first is that it be made of the best Wheat; for as the Wheat is in
goodness, so is the bread in goodness or badness. Of Wheat there are several
sorts, but that which is reputed the best is Lammas Wheat, because that is
commonly ripe about the beginning of August, whose Ears are bare and naked, and
there are two sorts, the White and the Yellow; but the Yellow is best, vielding
most Flower; and of the (...) the finest Manchet-bread, and (...) ^^rk That
Wheat which grows in high and d^ Ground, is much preferred before tha^ which
grows in low and moist. The best Wheat has a yellow color, a clos^ and
compacted substance, clean, weight^ and hard, not easily breakable betwee^ the
teeth; but that which is of a loo^ and an open substance, and grows i^ low and
moist places, is not so good ^ And though some of the Qualificatio^ may be
wanting, yet it ought to be of ^ hard and close substance, and weighty.

A second Property is, that it be fit^ leavened, by which the body be we^
opened, and for which cause it is mad^ to be more easily digested, and yields ^
better and a more plentiful Nouris^ment. Unleavened bread has bee^ judged to
be unwholsom by all the an^^ent Physicians, because it is of hard d^gestion,
and breeds humors, obstruc^ing the passages of the Chyle. No^withstanding we
find that no bread is ^ lighter digestion than our fine Manche^ But by that
Rule of the Ancients, a^ Cakes, Simnels, Wafers, Fritters, Pa^ cakes, and the
like are to be rejected, except they be well corrected with some other good
Ingredients.

The third Property is, that it be temperately seasoned with salt, for Bread
unseasoned is hard of digestion, and breeds obstructive humors, and being
over salt, breeds adust and melancholic humors.

The fourth property is, that it be light, and duly open, and such as may be
Honeycomb like for hollowness, not too hollow and porous, but rather like a
very fine Sponge all over full of small holes, not over-slapt with water to
save pains, no black and dun Listes toward the bottom.

The fifth property is, that it be well wrought and labored with the hand or
Break, that the Dough by that means may become even and equal through all its
parts, without either knaps here and there, or pappie patches, as it will be
for want of pains.

The sixth property is that it be well baked; for bread that is too much, or too
little baked, is of hard digestion, and ill distribution, and very troublesome
to the Stomach.

The last property is, that it be not eaten over new, whilst it is hot, nor
when it is stale, or grown dry: because it will fluctuate in the stomach,
slowly descend fill the Bowels with wind, by reason o^ its vaporous humidity,
it dulls the senses confounds the Memory, and greatl^ hurts the Brain;
wherefore hot Brea^ is hurtful and unprofitable; and als^ Bread that is stale
and become dry, i^ not so profitable; for it is hardly digested and yields
little nourishment: Brea^ made into greater Loaves is fit to be eaten after
twenty four hours baking, and i^ Summer that it be not above two daye^ old, and
three days old in Winter; for by how much it is indurated by drying so much
worse it nourishes.

Biscuit bread is only convenient for moist stomachs, and them that are
phlegmatic, or full and gross, and have desire to grow lean; for it is a very
great drier, and therefore such as be Mela^cholick and Choleric, are to
forbear i^ as hurtful to such; and what is said o^ this may be said of the
Crust of brea^ but it is good for the phlegmatic.

Pasty crust, though pleasant, yet it i^ not very wholesome; for it quickly o^
fendeth the stomach.

The Properties of the best BEER and ALE, our two most usual Drinks in England.
AS we said of Bread, so we say of Beer and Ale, that the goodness is better or
worse, according to the goodness or badness of the Grain of which it is made:
And though there ^e many Grains that may be malted, our best and wholsomest
Beer and Ale is made of Barlymalt; and as there were Rules to be observed in
the choice of good Wheat, so in like manner it is in the choice of good Barley,
and also Malt.

Beer made bitter of the Hop, is not to be drunk till the Hop, by the
Fermentation of the Beer, be fully and thoroughly spent; for otherwise it is of
a fuming nature, and therefore it ingendereth rheums and distillations, it
offends the Sight, and weakens the Sinews, and repleateth the Ventricle of
the Brain with troublesome vapors, and therefore very much hurts the
external and internal Senses; and therefore Beer so considered, is worse than
Ale: but if Beer be not too bitter of the Hop, and that it be not drunk before
the bitter force of the Hop be spent, it is far more wholesome than Ale, for
that the power and Efficacy of Hops is profitable in opening Obstructions of
the Liver, Spleen and Kidneys, and cleanses the Blood from all corrupt
humors, by provoking of Urine, and causing choleric Excression by Stool, and
is much better than Ale for such as be Choleric, and have hot Stomachs; but in
Winter Ale of greatest use, and being mixed with small Be^ is best for such as
have the Stone or Gravel ^ the Kidneys or Bladder; for Ale is very Em^lient,
and dilates the parts; and by reason its clamminess, it defends the parts
throu^ which the Urin passes by besmeering them wi^ its clammy or slimy
moisture; and it m^ also alter the disposition of the Urine, and some thing
dull its Acrimonia: It is also good ^ Aged people, (being well boiled and
strong) nourish their old Age; and being of moist pa^ it may amend the dryness
that accompanyes the Age. As to the heat of Beer, it is in this as all other
ferment^d Liquors, for the Older the are (provided they do not decay and grow
fl^ the Stronger they are: and this may serve ^ a general Rule, That when any
fermented ^quors grow Tart, Acid, Rammish and Pontic^ they are unfit for common
Drinks, for they b^den the Stomach, over-heat the Blood, stir V^pours heat
the Liver, and strongly combat wi^ the Ferment of the Stomach; and this is mo^
especially perceived in Beer that is over-sta^ and in Choleric and
Melancholic Constitu^ons.

This Rule may be observed as to warm Bee^ That persons in health drink their
Beer cold ^ long as they conveniently can, as young a^ strong people; but those
that be weak or d^bilitated by sickness, and tender Constitution^ may drink
their Beer a little warmed. But the Palats, and Stomachs, and Experience may
affo^ them the best Allowance.

There are required six Properties in good Beer.

The first is, That it be not sour, or any other unpleasant savor.

The second is, That it be clear, and well defoecated, otherwise it increases
gross, flatuous, and pituitous humors.

The third is, that it be well boiled, otherwise it will be fulsome to the
stomach, and fills the body with windy humors.

The fourth is, that it be old and purged from its dregs; and by old is not
intended two or three years old, but from six weeks to two months, or three,
according to the strength of the Beer, and as it is hopped; if it be stale, it
is chiefly to be desired in the Summer. Beer too new is unwholsom, and so is
that that is too old.

The fifth is, that it be neither too strong, nor too small, but of an
indifferent strength.

And the last is, that the Malt of which the Beer is made, be of a full and
good Corn, as was hinted before: Beer made of Malt made of one part of Barley,
and as much Oats, is more cooling, and is more fit for hot Constitutions.

But this must be observed in Beer, and all other Liquors that are drinkable,
that Temperance in them all, is the way to health, and they that observe not
that, go out of the Kings Highway, and are Authors of their own hurt and Ruin.

Some ANIMADVERSIONS upon TOBACCO, with some Directions concerning its Use.
THis Herb Tobacco has been of no sm^ esteem among the Indians of America; is
called Ni^otian, from one Nicot, who g^ the first Intelligence of this Plant,
and by ^ Spaniards, [Tobacco,] from an Island so called* which this herb did
abound; but of the Indi^ it was called Petu^ or Petum; and some thi^ this is a
proper name, if derived from Peto, ^ reason it is far setched, and much desired.

This Plant is hot and dry in the third degr^ and has a venomous and
deleterial proper^ for it being any way taken into the body, it t^ menteth and
extremely troubles the same w^ violent Ejections, upward and downward, ^ it
shows forth its power with great varie^ according to the Constitution and
Temperati^ of persons, and as they are more or less ^ customed to its use, as
also with respect to ^ Manner how it is taken. The most common w^ of using it,
is by receiving the fume into ^ mouth, and by this means it shows forth varie^
of Operations, for some it stupifies, whereup^ there follows a drunken-like
lightness of ^ head, and especially if there be much taken ^ once, and also if
the person be unaccustomed ^ its use. Its Operation is various, for it*s a
stro^ and violent Emetick, working forceably by V^mit, whereby we have known
some have be^ sent to their Graves by the violent Operation of this Plant, viz.
by the Infusion of this Herb. It works also downward with great force; to some
it proves a great Anodyne, causing sleep, and composing to rest; in others it
stirs up the Faculty to oppose and reject sleep; in some, being taken by a
Pipe, it purges, causing Gripes and torments; not as other corroding things, as
Scamony and Colocinthys, which preyes upon the Bowels, but working by an occult
property, for the Stomach and Intestines having been imposed upon by an Exotic
and strange Guest, the Faculty of the part is presently stirred up to discharge
it self in haste, in that way that is most proper to the Bowels, offended with
respect to the Nature of the Plant, and propensive working thereof.

That it is Anodyne, is greatly probable, not only from the Experiment that
some have of it, for which cause they take it at bedtime, but also from that
frequent Experiment that has been made of it, viz. It Is fume only being
administered Glyster-wise, in that dolorous Grief the Iliaca Passio, in which it
seldom fails of giving ease for a time. It is diaphoretick, by opening the
Pores, and causing gentle breathing Sweats, and for that it is best taken at
bedtime, physically used, viz. Two or three Pipes being taken in sixteen or
twenty four hours, it opens Obstructions of the Bowels, Liver, Spleen, Ureters;
it dryes waterish humidities, it exsiccat^s the Body, is good for Dropsical
distempers and Constitutions, and all Rheumatismes, where there is not a
Hectic accompanying, it repells melancholy fumes, allayes the Irritations of
the Womb, stops the Fits of the Mother, help^ Concoction, dispatches the mass
of Food ou^ of the Stomach into the Bowels, and thence t^ the Draught: It is
very penetrating, by reason it abounds with a volatile Salt, and sharp O^ in
great quantity, and of great force, it is often proved effectual in Rheums and
Defluxions into the Eyes, being taken the ordinary way in ^ Pipe.

It is singular in outward Applications, it di^poses Ulcers and Fistulaes to
healing, it is ^ powerful Remedy against Tetters, Ring-worm^ all scabby and
filthy cutaneous Ulcers, bei^ applied by Unguents or Lotions, viz. the Roo^
being boiled in Water, and the places bathed ^ only beware you use it not to
the Stomach an^ Belly; for if to the Stomach, you may be su^prized with strong
Vomits, if to the Belly, wit^ many stools.

It is chiefly good for cold and phlegmatic Co^stitutions, cold and waterish
Diseases, Hydropical persons, and such as abound with cold waterish stomachs:
But let those that be of a ho^ dry and choleric Temperament and Constitution,
beware of it; for in such it over-heats the Liver, scorches the Blood and
humors, alte^ the Temperament of the Body to greater dryness, introduces a
Hectic it destroys the Oe^^nomia of the whole body, it nauseates the Stomach,
induces the Vertigo, dulls the App^tite* causes a preternatural drought or
thirst, stupifies the senses, over-heats the Brain; it too much attracts the
moisture and humidity of the whol^ Body to the mouth, and by that indangers the
Aspera Arteria, and the Lungs, by defluxions, it rots the Teeth, overmuch
heats and inflames the Gummes, and by that means makes the blood in that part
(as we call it) more Rank; it disturbs the faculty of the Stomach, and hastens
the Expulsion of the Mass too soon, before the due time of Concoction be over,
and with the same haste hurryes it out of the bowels before the Chyle is duly
concocted, and afterward attracted by the Mesaraick Veins, whence the Body
waxes lean, and more feeble: And because the Aliments being over heated, and
somewhat mixed with the volatile Salt of Tobacco, they are together carried to
all the parts; and then if the Blood, being waxed over hot, be the Parent of
the Scurvy, why may not the improper and immoderate use of Tobacco be brought
in amongst the List of Causes? especially considering that the use of Tobacco,
and the Disease of the Scurvy, are both alike Epidemical.

By this you may suppose, that Tobacco is not of such universal use as is
conjectured, and that it is to be used not wantonly but physically.

That therefore persons may know whether it be fit for them to use it, they
must first consider their Constitutions, whether they be Phlegmatic or
Choleric: And for this they may have recourse to the first part of this Book,
and to its proper Chapter, to which the Index will direct; for it is only fit
for moist, phlegmatic Constitutions, and not for Sanguine, Melancholic and
Choleric.

Secondly, Consider (upon a trial) what Effect it has upon you, laying no
weight upon the ^tracting Rheum to the mouth, for the movi^ of the Jaw and
Mandable will attract moist^ to the mouth, the rolling of a pebble Stone, a^
many such things that have no Efficacy in the^ selves, will pro^ure, by reason
of motion mo^sture in the mouth.

Thirdly consider, what diseases or distempe^ you have confirmed, or
approaching, for whi^ you would use it, with respect to what you h^ h^ard above.

Fourthly, You must respect the Measure Quantity you take, that it be Medically
used litt^e at a time, that Nature may not be so ^ customed to it, that she may
take no notice of ^ as has been mentioned already.

Fifthly, That it be taken at due Seasons, a^ that must be when the Concoction
of the For in the Stomach is fully over, which is two ^ three hours after
Meals, such whose Bodies makes soluble were best to take it in the Mor^ing, but
such who are weary by Travel or l^bour, were best to take it at bedtime* For
tho^ that are troubled with sumes rising from benea^ whether vapors from the
Womb, or othe^wise, let them take it when the Vapors begi^ to stir, such who
are Dropsical, and offende^ with waterish humors, may take it three tim^ in a
day, in the Morning, two or three hour^ after Dinn^^, and at bedtime.

The sixth thing to be considered, is the manner of taking of it, whether in a
Pipe, or b^ chewing, as some do, or by snuff as the I ris^ do. To resolve
this question, forasmuch as the taking the fume by a Pipe, the Tobacco being
fired, and the fire increased by sucking and drawing in the Air; thence is
produced an Oil and Volatile Salt of Tobacco, which is descryed by its hot and
biting tartness upon the Tongue, and more plainly demonstrable by a trivial
Experiment. But this Oil and volatile Salt is the same in kind, that is drawn
by the Chemical way, whereby this Oil and Salt being pressed out by the fire,
and uncloathed of its gross body, becomes more hot and fiery than before, it
being consented to by all Chemists, that the products of the fire carry with
them an Impress of its fiery Atoms, by which these things become more fiery
and Caustic, and therefore are not so friendly to the Stomach, this Oil and
Salt being with the moisture of the mouth conveyed, or gliding down into the
Stomach, is the cause of that variety of Effects that is wont to follow, and it
is not to be questioned, but the fume so drawn, and pressed out by the insuck'd
Air does carry with it some portion of this Salt and Oil; even as in Wood,
whose smoke sticking to the Chimneys, is called Soot, and by distillation,
yielding an Oil and Salt inferior to few: but still these Virtues or Powers
are according to the Variety of Concretes, whence by burning this smoke or fume
arises, as may be apparent in the soot of Wood, and that of Sea-coal, yet if
this Coal be distilled, it yields an Oil and Spirit in a large quantity, and
the Oil is endowed with more and greater Virtues than (I believe) most Imagine,
yet the soot of these do greatly differ.

We may therefore observe, that the fire impresses a greater heat upon Tobacco,
than did appear to be in it before, wherefore this may be better for hydropical
persons, and phlegmatic Constitutions, than for others; and they whose Livers
are not overheated, and that which is chewed, is better for others of a hotter
temperament.

But we prefer chewing of Tobacco, before that taken in a Pipe, being not so
hot, and having the same Physical Virtues in all respects. Taking it by
Snuffing is good for those whose Brains are annoyed with Rheumatismes, and are
dull and heavy, to help the Brain, to expel superfluous moisture, and to draw
it to the Nostrils, which is the best way to evacuate the Brain.

But let such who have pains in their head be careful of Snuff, lest by it
they are made blind, by forcing the morbifick matter to the Optic Nerves, and
by that means obstruct the passage of the Visive Spirits to the Eye, and still
remembering, that which way soever it be taken, Moderation must still be
observed.

Of the Nature, Usefulness and Profit of WINE.
THat most excellent Liquor which we call Wine, it is the Juice of the Vine,
exalted by Fermentation, which ferment it has in it self. It has received
many and various Names, according to the singular and excellent Virtues it puts
forth in the Bodies of men; it is called by Paracelsus, Sanguis Terrae, the
Blood of the Earth] in resemblance to the Composition of a Humane Body, for as
that part of a humane Body which we call Blood, does far excel the rest, so
this excellent Nectar the Juice of the Vine, does far excel all other
Vegetable Juices. Quercetanus calls it, Omnium Vegetabilium Princeps, The
Prince of all the Vegetables. In holy Writ it has received the highest
Epithets of all inanimate created things: It is called the Wine which chears
the heart of God and Man; and Solomon counsels, To give Wine to him that is of
a heavy heart, that he drink and remember his misery no more.

In sum, it is the most excellent Liquor of all other, created and appointed
for the exhilarating and reviving the heart of man; it cheers the heart,
enlivens and quickens the vital Spirits, it helps Concoction, Distribution and
Nutrition, it wonderfully resists Melancholy and sadness, i^ quickens all the
Vital and Animal Functions, i^ stirs up and restores in a wonderful manne^
all the Actions of the Body, it strengthens the natural heat, and opens
Obstructions, it quickens the Circulation of the Blood, dissolvet^
Coagulations, refreshes and warms all the part^ of the Body, it quickens the
Wit, and procuret^ a bold and pleasant behavior, it greatly increases the
Vital spirit, and because it is of thin an^ sprightly parts, it is of all other
the soones^ snatched into Union with our spirit; and of thi^ is made the best
and noblest Menstruums useful in Chemical Preparations, (though there may be
some more powerful) they not being so fit to be received and entertained into
our first Shop, viz. our Stomachs, as this; and also it is not so easy to
attain them, as these: And more over, it is not easy to believe how powerful
Menstruums may be prepared out of this E^cellent Subject, both from it self
alone, and b^ other adjuncts friendly and homogeneous to ou^ Nature. But to
speak of it as it is of common Use, it wonderfully amendeth the coldness o^ Old
Age, it makes a man Courageous in Bod^ and Mind.

These are the excellent Commodities of Wine, but these are to be understood
with respect to the due and lawful use of them, not in Drunkenness and
Intemperance, for being so used* (or rather abused,) nothing can be more
hurtful^ to Body or Mind; for it destroys the Life, it weakneth the Body,
dulleth the Understanding, it consoundeth the Memory, enfeebleth and destroys
the Reason; in sum, it overturneth all the Facultyes of Body and Mind; of a
wise Man, it makes a Fool; the sharp and pregnant, dull and sottish; it turns a
good Nature into a churlish and brutish; good Education into froth and flash;
an honest, and naturally virtuous Mind, into a careless, loose and Extravagant,
taking neither care for himself nor others; it hastens old Age, over-dryes and
consumes the Radical Moisture; it makes a Civil Man a Bedlam, knowing no
difference between himself and others, it weakens the Sinews, induces the
Lethargy, Palsy, Trembling of the Hands.

And therefore Wine (though a Liquor nearest of kin to our Natures if
spirituous and good, yet) the Excess is to be avoided, as hurtful to all the
Functions of Body and Mind, and that it be moderately used that distillations,
exsiccations drunkenness or Inflammations do not follow.

For being taken out of due measure, in stead of a help it will prove a ruin,
and in stead of a remedy an overthrow.

But there being diverse sorts of Wine, and these sorts varying much, and some
being more suitable to one constitution than another, and some to one Age than
another; it is very requisite that every man understand the differences of
them, and their several qualities, and chiefly of such Wines as are most common
with us

And as to the Temperatures of Wine, it is generally agreed to, that all Wines
are of a hot temperature; but though they agree about the first qualities, yet
they agree not about the second, for some will have them of a hot and dry, but
others of a hot and moist; but it is not to be questioned, but these Wines
differ among themselves, according to the Nature of the Grape, and also
according to the Nature of the Soil and Climate where they grow.

White and Rhenish Wine is most near eac^ other in nature and property, they
are of thi^ and penetrating substance, they heat and nourish the body less than
other Wines, they are quickly concocted, and speedily distributed t^ all the
parts, they therefore do not annoy the head so much as other Wines, they
attenuat^ and cut gross, thick and clammy humors; provoke Urine, and cleanse
the Ureters of Slyme, Gravel and Sand; they cleanse the Blood, and carry off
tartarous Filths, open Obstructions of the Spleen, Mesentery; and Mesaraicks,
they mitigate pains of the head proceeding from hea^ of the Stomach; they
procure sleep, comfort the Stomach, help concoction, and moisten the Body; but
this is much to be understood with respect to the Constitution, Age, Sex, and
State o^ Body, and Measure of using, for these Wines are most accommodated for
young, hot Constitutions, and corpulent Bodies, hot Seasons of the Year, and
such as affect to be Lean and slender, and therefore it may conduce much to ho^
and corpulent Bodies to drink White, and especially Rhenish Wine in the Morning
fasting; and for cooling and pleasantness to add a little sliced Limon, and to
mitigate the acidity, with a little fine Sugar, and this may be repeated with a
little before Meals, and chiefly for them that have hot dry Stomachs, or are
subject to Obstructions of the Stomach or Mesaraick Veins, and of the Liver and
Reins; for it wonderfully refreshes a hot and dry Stomach, but it is no way
good to drink White Wind or Rhenish at Meals, or soon after meals, only it may
be allowed to them that are afflicted with much astrictness of the Stomach, for
being drunk too soon after Meats, they disturb the Meats, and too much hasten
their passage from the Stomach, before they be concocted, and by that means
they pass into the Bowels undigested, whence it comes to pass, that the body
does greatly abound with flatuous Crudity.

White and Rhenish Wine are very pernicious for such as be Rheumatick and
subject to fluxion and distillation of humors to the Lungs, Breast, Joints, or
any other parts of the Body, and for lean Constitutions; and therefore let this
serve for a Caution to such as be subject to the Gout, or any Rheumatismes,
that in stead hereof they drink Milk or Water.

Claret Wine is in Temperature and Nature very near to these, but of an
astringent faculty, which is clearly discovered by the astringent savor
thereof; it greatly strengthens the Stomach, breeds good humors, stirs
and quickens the Appetite, quenches Thirst, it greatly helps Concoction,
exhilarateth the Heart; it is very profitable for them of a hot Constitution,
that have hot stomachs, and are young, but it greatly offends a moist and
cold Constitution that abounds with raw and crude humors, and is subject to
distillations from the head, and this chiefly if it be taken immoderately. This
Wine is chiefly to be taken with meat, for then it puts forth and proves
profitable in the fore-recited properties; and above all this Wine is most
hurtful, in regard of the rheumatick Nature of it, the most pernicious to
Gouty and rheumatick persons.

But being with moderation taken at Meals, it is for temperate bodies, (being
pure and quick Wine,) not much inferior to the Regal Wines of France, for it
rectifieth the Stomach, and comfort it; it is acceptable to the heart, and
breeds good blood; it is deemed the best of all Wines for Choleric Bodies,
and for Phlegmatic the worst. It is not good to drink this Wine between Meals,
but in the middle of the Meal take a draught or two, and if you please you may
dulcifie it with a little Sugar, and this will make it the more acceptable to
the Stomach, and comfortable to the Heart; and by observation of these, you may
expect a quickening of the spirits, a pleasant Cheerfulness of mind, there
being a good Concoction of Meats, consequently a healthful state of Body.

That high and rich Nectar called by the Name of Sack, (which so richly abounds
with that most excellent Vegetable Sulphur, for which cause it is in high
estimation with all those Northern parts of the World,) is deemed to be hot in
the third degree, and of thin parts, and therefore it does more vehemently and
quickly heat the Body. The over and unseasonable use of this Wine, does
over-heat the Liver, exsicccate the radical moisture, inflame the blood, and is
hurtful to bodies of a hot and dry temperature, but the moderate use to them
to whom it is agreeable, it helps the Stomach to digest, furthereth the
distribution of the Meats to all the parts of the body, concocteth the crude,
and consumes the Excremental humors; and in sum, it mightily strengthens
all the powers and faculties of Body and Mind. It is most sit for Old Age, weak
Stomachs, cold Constitutions abounding with crude humors, cold Countries, and
cold and moist seasons of the year; it is chiefly to be drunken after meats of
a gross substance, and such as consist of an Excrementitious moisture, as
Pork-Flesh, Fish, etc.

And though there is a difference even among Sacks, yet what is spoken of one
may indifferently be applied to all; though some commend Sherry-sack as most
profitable to the Stomach, to further and help the Concoctions and confirm the
Habit of the whole body: and of all Wines they esteem this the best at meals,
for the Aged and persons of a cold and phlegmatic Constitution, but yet such
as are of a hot, lean and choleric temper and Constitution, must forbear it.

Canary Sack, so called because it comes from the Canary Islands, differs
from Sherry in Sweetness, as also in Color and Consistence, it is less
Penetrative and more Nutritive. Canary is an excellent Wine to be taken at
Meals, for its pleasant taste, refreshing odor, and comforting the Stomach; it
is best for cold Constitutions, old bodies, and weakened by labor, it must be
^autiously used, for it is a Wine which if liberally taken, it will quickly
inflame, and therefore warily to be used by hot and choleric Bodies.

Malmsey is a Wine in Operation very hot, and being sweet, it nourishes very
much, and therefore it is commended for old, cold and weak and decayed Bodies,
but is very hurtful f^r such as be hot, because it is very easily converted
into Choler: it is judged by some to kil^ Worms, by a certain hidden Property,
however it is a very convenient thing to give any Medicine for the killing of
Worms, as that by whose sweetness the Worms will be induced t^ prey upon the
Remedy.

Mu^kadel is very much like Malmsey, wherefore in defect of that, this may be
used; it is als^ an excellent Wine for all old, cold bodies: b^ such as are of
a hot temperature must forbea^ this Wine.

Bastard is in virtue not much unlike Muskadel, and may be used instead of
that, thoug^ there is the same Inferiority in this to Muskadel, as in Muskadel
to Malmsey, and the ^s^ of this is likewise hurtful to hot and youn^ bodies.

Alicant Raspy or Tent, it is made of the Juic^ of Mulberries, etc. it is of a
gross Nature, notwithstanding it is quickly concocted into blood and is
therefore fit for lean and thin bodies* whose humors are too fluxible; For
person^ that are weak, and wasted, and consumed by sicknesses, and that need
much nourishment, and that is easy of Concoction, but for gros^ bodies, and
such as are subject to Obstruction* it will quickly prove nauseous and hurtful.

Wine of Orleance is stronger than any other French Wine, and in taste very
pleasant; it is in goodness scarcely inferior to Muskadel, it is hurtful to
such as have weak Brains, hot Livers, and such as are of a choleric
Constitution: for it does speedily over-heat the Liver, and annoy the head; but
there is not a better Wine for cold and phlegmatic Constitutions, and those
that have weak Stomachs; for it comforts the Stomach, helps the Concoction,
vivifies the Spirit, because it contains a generous heat in it self, and it
also furthereth the distribution of the Meats, and through the mediocrity of
its substance procures a good Nutrition, to them that be of a hot and
choleric temperature, and also to them that be young, it is very hurtful, but
very proprofitable to the phlegmatic and aged persons.

Greek Wine is of a blackish red color, and is of a temperate nature, sweeter
and hotter than Claret, yet accompanied with a pleasing sharpness, it breeds
good blood, reviveth the Spirits, strengthens the Liver, and comfor^eth the
Stomach, cheereth the heart, it is most profitable for those that be weak and
aged.

Red Wine is of an astringent faculty, of a sharp austere taste, and it is
chiefly good for Physical uses, to stop fluxes of the Belly, and Choleric
Vomitings.

There are also other French Wines for pleasantness of Taste and Mediocrity of
strength, substance, color and taste, do for most bodies at meat, excel most
other wines, which are in use familiar to the Kings and Peers of France; they
notably comfort the Stomach, further Concoction, and the Distribution of Meats,
and hurt not the head with vaporous fumes, they are very convenient for every
Age, Constitution, and Season (and indeed as they are) so they deserv^ the name
of Regal Wines.

Also there is a great difference in Wines, by reason of their Age; for wines
that are New, are unwholsom, and the more new the more unwholsom, for they
being new and unfermented (by which the Sulphur of the wine is set at liberty)
they are as yet of gross and Excremental substance, have in themselves little
heat: for that cause they do not help but much hinder the Concoction and
Distribution, they cause Cholick, Torments, and breed Obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen and Reins; but in process of tim^ these superfluities and
rawness, are by Fermentation overcome, and the thick is become thin the dull
quick and lively, and that that was heterogeneous to our nature, is become most
agr^eable to our Constitution.

Though you are to observe, that all VVine^ have not the same time of
continuance; for thos^ wines that are less rich with sulphurous spirits will
not la^t so long as those that are, as White wine, Rhenish and Claret; for
these in six o^ seven months, according to the smallness of the^ attain to the
height of their goodness, and d^ begin to decline after a year, and lose much ^
their goodness, and this is proportionable to the smallness of them, but those
stronger sorts o^ wine which abound with a sat Sulphur, as Sack* Muskadel,
Malmsey, decay not till they be tw^ or three years old; for these, by reason of
their strong heat do reserve their prefect Vigor, for a long time: and as
these wines are unwholesome whilst they are new* so are they also if they be
too old; for when they have passed four or five years, they are unwholesome,
because they over-heat much; for they acquire the more heat, the older they
are; and in sum, such wines are to be shunned, except only for Medicine,
because they alter the bodies overmuch that drink them, and therefore not fit
for Aliments; such wines hurt the sinews, hinder procreation, because they dry
too much, they disturb the understanding; and because they abound with tart and
vehement fumes, they affect the membranes of the Brain with cruel pains. Take
heed therefore of wines over-old or overnew, and the Newness of wine is to be
considered according to the Nature of the wines, for white and Rhenish wine may
be used sooner than those other more fat and sulphur^ous wines; and therefore
Galen says, that Must or New wine, has no other use but to move the belly:
which if it want that faculty, it is to the body extremely ill and hurtful.

You are to observe five things in exhibiting of wine:

The first is, That you give it not to Children, for it will not agree to their
hot and moist Constitution, they would thereby be over-hot, and their heads
filled with vapors, whence would follow many Evils.

The Second is, That it be not given to Youths from fourteen years to twenty
five, for wine is very repugnant to them, because it does out of measure heat
their hot and fiery Natures, i^ would stir them up to enormous and Evil Action.

The third is, That it be very moderately given to young men, as for instance,
from Twenty five to Thirty five; for otherwise it will dispose them to wrath
and unlawful desires, du^ the Wit, and destroy the Memory.

The Fourth is, That it may be given more liberally to men in their Manhood, as
from Thirty five, to Fifty years of Age: But when they are past Forty years,
they may begin t^ drink and refresh themselves with wine, with the proceeding
Caution of Moderation, and especially if they be not of a hot Constitution; but
if so let them abstain from the hotter sort of Wines and above all from the
often use of them; for the head and sinews will be much offended by them.

The fifth is, that it be given with more liberality to old men, and these may
drink the stronger sort of Wines, and this chiefly when they are in the latter
part of old Age, as from Sixty to the end of Life.

There accrue four excellent Commodities by using moderately pure Wine:

The first is, because it greatly corrects the Coldness of Old Age, and
produces a bette^ temperament of heat, and increase of heat.

The second is, because it expels Fatness, an^ resists Melancholy.

The third is, it makes them in old Age slee^ well, which is many times wanting
by reason of the drieness of the Brain, and fewness of Vapors.

The fourth is, because it removes Obstructions, and cheereth their Old Age,
and preserves their humidum radicale.

These VVines, specially the Canary, Rhenish, and White, are of excellent use,
when they are made Medicinales, by the admixtion of such things as are
appropriate to any distemper, as Wormwood-wine for the Stomach, Betony or
Rosemary-wine for the Head, or other Cephalic things, according as the
Distemper of the sick shall indicate, as Viper-wine for malignant Diseases, or
opening Obstructions. And in like manner, wine may be made Medicinable for all
the parts of the body, and here I shall give you an excellent Medicinal Wine.

Take the Roots of Angelica, one ounce; Sassafras half an ounce; Mace one dram;
the flowers of Rosemary, Bettony, Cowslip, Borrage, Bugloss, of each two
drammes, Saffron a penny-weight; tops of Tamarisk one handful, Roman Wormwood
two drammes. Put these into two quarts of White or Rhenish Wine, the Roots
being first bruised, and all tied up in a fine Rag, and after they have stood
two days, five or six Spoon-fulls may be taken for pains in the Head, Stomach
or Back, pains or stitches in the Sides, pains of the Liver, or Obstructions of
the Spleen: And this may be taken Morning and Evening; it is also good against
the Scurvy, and al^ foeminine Obstructions.

Of the STONE.
IT oftentimes happens that our Bodies ar^ even a Quarry of Stones, but not
such a^ might make to the building of the Aedifice^ or structure of the Fabric
of our Body, b^ rather to the ruin of the whole; for there is n^ part of our
Body wherein Stones may not b^ generated; for they are generated in the Head*
Tongue, Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Bladde of Gall, Spleen, Intestines,
M^sentery an^ Womb; but when they are called Stones; pe^ Autonomasiam and
Catexochen, they are the^ to be understood to be begotten in the Reins ^
Bladder, because they are more frequently generated in these parts: If the
Stone besieges the Bladder, that is called (...), but i^ the Reins do labor
with the Stone, it is calle^ (...) N^phritis.

The Stone is defined thus: It is a solid an^ hard body grown together into the
form of ^ Stone, for the most part in the Reins and Bladder, affecting them
with a Nummeness, from an Earthy and salt humor, bringing Obstructions and
Distention. The material Cause of the Stone (r^jecting the Opinion of the
Ancient^ concerning the heat exsiccating, indurating an^ converting the gross
and viscid matter into ^ Stone) is supposed to be a Stonifying Juice* viz. An
Earthy matter mixed with a Saltish, in an equal proportion; but the Efficient
Cause to be a Stonifying Spirit placed in that Juice; we draw in this
Stonifying Juice with the Aliment which is found every where in all the Earth:
And so, if by reason of the debility of the Concoctive and Expulsive Faculty,
or because of the abundance of that Juice, all cannot be separated in the
Stomach, and expelled from thence, but it then passes by the Ductum Thoracicum
together with the Chyle to the heart, and thence with the blood is carried into
the Aorta, and at length is drove by the emulgent Artery into the Reins, where
it sticks to those extreme small branches of the Artery, or in the fleshy parts
joined to them, and being hurried continually by the arrival of the blood in
that place, by little and little puts on the form of Gravel, which (if the
sense of the Reins be stirred up with the roughness of them) it expels the
Sands leisurely with a serous humor; but if the Gravel be generated in the
Reins that be weak, and there be perceived a dull sense in them, and they are
retained till they are united together, they then grow into Stones, which at
length by a more forceable stirring of Nature, it stirs up the Excretion of
them; and in the same manner is to be understood the generation of the Stone in
the Bladder; for if the temperature of the Bladder be not as it ought, the
Urine (which should come out clear, exactly mixed with all its parts) passes
forth muddy and troubled, and the Earthy and Tartarous parts, being not exactly
mixed with the watery, settleth to the bottom of the Bladder, and there by an
innate power tend^ to Coagulation, and so passes together into ^ Stone.

The antecedent Causes of the Stone, are, (beside the dull and stupid sense of
the affecte^ parts) much Cramming and Crudity, unseasonable motion of the body
after meat, all Meat^ which are gross, and afford but a small Juice, unripe and
austere wines, black, thick and swee^ wines, but most of all, musty, new, thick
an^ muddy Beer, also continual Riding, Leaping and all motion which is made by
the Back, the immoderate use of Venus: To this place belong Hereditary
disposition to the Stone; but the reason of that Stonifying augmentation in the
Reins of some, but of others in the Bladder, i^ the strength or weakness of
those parts, by which the more weak Reins do fall more easily into this
Distemper of the Stone; for which caus^ those parts that are more strong, are
most afflicted with the Stone of the Bladder, and is more frequent to Boys,
but Old men do mostly labor with the Stone of the Reins.

These be the Signs of the Stone in the Reins* First, A fixed pain about the
Loins: Secondly, For the most part the Urine is crude, thin an^ waterish, by
reason of Obstruction, sometime^ bloody, when the Stone begins to move it self,
and dilates the passages and Pipes of the Processes, breaking the flesh:
Thirdly, A dullness, straight down the Legs: Fourthly, A pain in the Testicles
on that side in which the Stone is, and the drawing or Retraction of it upward:
Fifthly, Nauseousness to such a Subversion that they loath all meat, and being
received in, they presently belch it out.

These be the proper signs of the Stone in the Bladder: First, A frequent
pissing, so that at length he come almost to piss continually, that he can
scarcely forbear pissing: Secondly, A suppression of Urine, the Stone beating
of it back: Thirdly, A Tenesmus, which comes by the consent that the Anus has
with the Neck of the Bladder: Fourthly, A pain afflicting in some the whole
Ductum Pudendi, and in some only the Glans, and that most cruel toward the end
of pissing, when the Stone is stirred by the course of the Urine, and as it
were presses the Sphincter Muscle with greater violence: Fifthly, There is a
frequent erection and itching of the privy part: Sixthly, A sandy substance in
the Urine; and by that word Sandy understand a gross thick Gravel, to which
there is mixed a fat Earth; this is that Clay-like Earth that sticks so
stiffely to the botom of the Chamber Pot like snot.

For to preserve from the Stone and Gout, the use of Rhubarb, through the whole
year, is judged convenient, at least to be taken thrice in a month, from two
scruples to a dram at a time, either by swallowing without the mixing any
other thing with it, or by mixing it with Sugar of Rosis: The continual use of
Sugar of Rosis, some do approve above all others, in preserving from the Stone,
there is scarcely any thing that may conduce more to the preservation from the
Stone, and without any hurt or trouble helping all the parts of the body, but
chiefly the Kidneys: this wholesome help is temperate, and that if the Reins be
made larger, t^ a convenient state of Nature it self, that it man draw or cast
forth those stones, but if they b^ full and obstructed, then it abstergeth, if
the^ be hot it cools; it cleanses the Stomach from all Excrements, above all
others, and strengthens it, it drives away all distillations; therefore it
is greatly approved, if it be taken eve^ day in the Morning one hour before
Dinner, als^ if it be taken twice or thrice in a month, from one Scruple to
half a Dram.

Of the Disease of the SPLEEN.
THE Spleen, which is a certain Cook-roo^ made for the receiving of the earthy
an^ muddy part of the blood, that at length being there fermented and exalted,
it may pass in^ a Ferment, as in favor of heat to the blood, again to be
dispersed abroad.

This Spleen is infested with many diseases such as these, Obstruction, a Tumor
distendin^ the part, a Scirrhus, Pain, Inflammation, ^ Wound, an Ulcer, etc. It
frequently laboure^ with an Obstruction, and that from the sam^ Causes which we
have proposed in the obstruction of the Liver; it is known by a weight an^
resistance in the left Hypochondria with a certain pain, and chiefly after long
walking, in lengt^ of time there is perceived a livid color of the Face, and
there appears other tokens of Melancholy prevailing.

A Scirrhus is a hard Tumor of the Spleen, having its rise from an indurated
gross humor, it has the same Cause with a Scirrhus in the Liver, and both
have the same diagnostick signs, save only in the Scirrhus of the Spleen the
hardness and resistance is perceived in the left Hypochondria. Sometimes a pain
afflicts the Spleen without hardness, and that rises from a flatus, which
distendeth not only the substance of the Spleen, which is almost without
sense, but also the encompassing Membrane it self.

It is distinguished from the pain of the Colic by this, that it is more
grievous and fixed only in a place. An Inflammation of the Spleen, is of the
same nature with an Inflammation of the Liver, it differs only in this, that
this is very seldom from pure blood, but most frequently from gross and
melancholy blood, and it has the same Cause, as well the Adjunct as the
Antecedent.

The Signs are a Tumor and hardness in the left Hypochondria, stretched forth
to the Diaphragma and Shoulder; also there is a pain and pulsation in the same
Hypochondria, a continual Fever, a loathing of Meat, a thirst, a small
blackness of the Tongue; they are most troubled lying upon their right side,
because of the weight of the Bowels lying upon the Stomach, and sometimes also
the left if the Tumor be great; and sometimes this Tumor is of the figure and
form of the Spleen, and sometimes it fills the whole left Hypochondria, and
sometimes it appears below the Navel, the multiplied matter occupying the
neighboring parts, and especially the Navel.

A TENESMVS.
A Tenesmus is a continual, cruel, eager desire to go to Stool, but in vain;
for that they can discharge nothing from them, or little o^ no Excrements come
away: Nevertheless they ought to cast forth something, and when they have, they
are stirred up with new desires to go to Stool, although by endeavor they ca^
do nothing. The part affected in this Evil, i^ the Extremity of the right Gut;
the Cause is any thing that stirs up the Expulsive Faculty of the right Gut,
as an Exulceration of the righ^ Gut, from a Dysentery, or from a sharp, biting
and salt humor sticking to a Tumor of the neighboring parts, also a Stone
sticking in the neck of the bladder, also a cold intemperature of the part,
contracted from sitting upon a col^ Stone, or long stay in the Water.

Of the DYSVRIE.
THE Dysurie is a difficulty of Pissing, o^ an Excretion of Urine with great
pain and torment, it differs from the Strangury by a manifest Effect: That in
the Strangury or dropping of the Urine, the bladder does not tarry till the
whole Urine be gathered together, but expells it as it were presently, with
pain; but it stays in the Dysurie, and truly continues longer than is meet,
but when it is discharged, the Sick perceives a pain, and such difficulty, that
oftentimes (unless he press the place of the Bladder with the hand, or he use
great endeavor,) the Urine flows not freely.

Moreover, in the Strangury it is neither restrained nor liberal, for it is
made by drops; but in the Dysurie it is liberal, but not restrained; or if it
be not made freely, it is wholly restrained: The Cause is either in the Urine,
or in the Neck of the Bladder; in the Urine, when it passes forth more sharp,
by reason of a more hot Diet, or by the mixtion of sharp and acrid humor, as
Bile and salt Phlegm, or of Pus flowing out of an Abcessus being broke; or if
there be an Exulceration or Inflammation in the neck of the Bladder, which
makes the Urine passing that way sharp. By the Name of a Dysurie is sometimes
understood, that which is called the Heat of Urine, for there are the same
Causes in both.

Of the STRANGVRY.
(...), (from (...), Gutta, a Drop, and (...), Vrina, Urine,) it is an
Excretion of Urine made by drops, either with or without pain, and a continual
desire to make water. The Cause of this affect is sharp humors, the Stone, an
Inflammation of the right Gut, or of the Womb, and also Pus sent from the Reins
o^ Bladder, all which produces this affect, by stirring up the Expulsive
Faculty of the Bladder, by reason of the Sphincter Muscle. The External Causes
are, the drinking of Wine, or faeculent Beer, eating of crude Aliments, as
Pease, Beans, etc. And this Diseas^ is someti^^s mixed with the Ischury and
Dysury.

CHAP. XIV.
The Leaves Venerea.

Leaves Venerea has obtained variety of names, the Neopolitan Disease, Malum
Indicum, the Indian Evil, Morbus Italicus, the Italian Disease, and by
Fracastorius Siphilis Pudendagra, the Great POX, but in common Morbus Gallicus,
the French POX, a name by which it is as well known as any, it may aptly be
called Flagellum Dei Irati, the stroke of a Provoked God: It is defined thus,
The POX is an occult and contagious Disease of the whole substance of the Body,
bewraying it self by Pustles, Marks, Ulcers, Torments and Pains; the Efficient
cause is an occult and venomous Quality contracted by contagion and touch, and
sticking in a certain Humor, as the subject; but this pernicious spot,
although it spread it self abroad by various ways, yet it is mostly propagate
into Mankind by a Venereal Copulation; and this Evil being sowed, the cruel
Symptoms bud through the whole Body, the Mind is sad, the Body is weary and
heavy, the Face pale, Pustles breaking forth chiefly about the Forehead, and
then over the whole Body, there is felt a wandering and vehement pain now in the
Head, anon in the Muscles, and by and by in the Joints, and chiefly molesting
in the night, bewraying it self by a stinking and foeted Gonorrhea, Ulcers and
Bubo's arise about the Privy-parts, there also happen naughty Distillations,
which do Erode one while the Palate, another ^hile the Uvula, and sometimes the
Jaws and Almonds, sometimes consume the Lips, in some the Nose, in others the
Eyes, and in some the whole Privy-parts are consumed, and all the Members do
languish, there is no desire to Meat, no sleep but sadness, and a continual
disposition to anger.

Some time they are accompanied with a small Fever, there happens a shedding of
the Hair, a falling out of the Teeth, and when the Malida becomes very
inveterate there are Cancerous Calous, Fistula's, Ulcers and Tophies, viz. in
various parts of the Body a Caries or Rottenness of the Bones, and first in the
Cranium, then in the Palate and Nose, a Hectic Fever, a Consumption, Cachexia,
or an evil habit or disposition of the whole Body, Falling Sickness, Deafness,
Blindness, Exastocis, or bunching out of the Bones, and these are done in a
double manner, either by the adhesion of the gross or viscide matter fixed or
fastened to the Bones, or in the manner of an Excrescence of the Bone from the
Interno meditullium, or inner part of the Bone; for although the Bone by his
own Nature is hard, yet it is Extendet, and increased by the power of the venom.

These are the Signs and Symptoms by which you may know this horrid Disease,
and come to a Judgment whether you be infected, yet for your better Information
(and that because all these Symptoms are hardly, if ever, found in any one
person, and if they should, that person may justly doubt of his Cure) we shall
give you a more particular descition of it. Physicians have given many
differences of this Disease: Brusanola has given 234. Differences, but many of
them are useless and unprofitable, the more useful are brought under the Number
of Three or Four.

1. Differ. In former time it was observed by Physicians, That upon an Impure
Copulation there immediately followed Gallical Symptoms, sometimes they grew a
little remiss, and shortly after departed without means, but sometimes there
followed most grievous Symptoms, and those very stubborn and hard to be Cured.

2. Differ. The second Difference is fetched from the Cause and manner of the
Contagion where the Leaves Venerea is hereditary, and was derived from the
Parents into the Issue, with the Seed and Blood; but now having a Being in the
World by an Impure Copulation, it is communicated by Kisses, Pocky Nurses,
Garments, pulling on of Gloves, and such like things.

3. Differ. The third Difference is taken from the Signs and Symptoms eminently
following, as Buboes, Gonorrhea, falling of the Hair, pains of the Joints; for
neither the Symptoms and Signs which do follow, and are new, are not the same
in all. Eustachius tells us he had observed many Young Men to have lain with
one and the same Whore in one and the same day, and nevertheless one has had a
Gonorrhea, another the falling of the Hair, another a Bubo, another a Caries,
another a pain of the Head, another preternatural Effect, and all this has
happened by reason of the various disposition of Bodies, and debility of the
parts, and variety of Humors; for the weak parts do more easily take to
themselves the evil and viscious Humors, then the stronger one has a more
purer Body, another a more impure, and which being corrupted with the veneral
quality, do stir up other, and other Diseases and Symptoms, according to
variety of Diseases and Symptoms, which sometimes are joined and complicated
together, do enumerate fewer or more Differences.

4. Differ. The Fourth Difference is taken from the time, as this Leaves is one
while new, and another while old, some in the beginning, some in the
augmentation, some in the state, and some in the declination, from which there
arises Four Degrees of this Disease from the Defferences, the time, the
variety of concomitant Symptoms.

1. The first Degree is most light, when only the Hairs of the Beard and Head
by little and little, without any hurt of the Body, fall off.

2. The other Degree is worse, when the whole Skin is besprinkled with many
marks or spots, and Extuberations, and these Symptoms in the form of Lentills,
sometimes much more large, sometimes visciated with a redness, and sometimes
with a Yellowness.

3. The third is more heavy, not only when the marks or spots, but also there
breaks forth Pustles and Hillocks at the first about the Temples and forehead,
behind the Ears, and then every where in the Head, but at length over the whole
Body.

4. But the fourth Degree of this Leaves Venerea is when it invadeth the solid
parts, the Ligaments, the Bones, Membranes, and Nerves, and corrupts them, in
which many Gross, Glutinous, and Malignant Excraments are gathered, which when
they abide about the Tendon or Periostium, they pull the Membrane, and drive it
from the Bones; they are wont to stir up most implacable pains, increasing
within night, from which Excrements there grows by little and little Tophies
with grievons pains Adequate, to the hardness of the Bones, which if it be in
the Bones, they are so enlarged and extended, that often times the Bones are
not only made of a monstrous Figure and Magnitude, but only that a Crimonious
Malignity does by little and little eat out the Bone, and with a Caries
consumes the Bones; of which more ln the Diagnostick part.

CHAP. XV. The Diagnostick Signs.
THough we have given you before the Signs and Symptoms of the Leaves Venerea,
yet that every one infected with it, may not only know that he has it, but may
determine to what Degree and Dominion this Tyrant has attained over his
Vassals: We have comprehended the Symptoms proper to every of the forementioned
Degrees under Three Heads or Squadrons, and under the first you have the
Symptoms that assault from the beginning, and do bewray the Disease in its
first approach.

They which ate first taken with this Disease, (presently they perceive a
lassitude and heaviness in the whole body, and sometimes a dullness after
sleep; there is a vehiment and wandering pain which he perceives now in the
Head, anon in the Joints, and then in the Muscles, and this pain is more in the
night then any part of the day.

The florid Color of the Face is changed, and there appears a Livid Circle
under their Eyes; they are sad and fearful, which before were jokant and merry,
and that without any other cause: And if this Disease be contracted by
Copulation, and has not yet taken the Liver, but as yet sticks in the
Pudendum, then the beginning Leaves Venerea bewrays it self by a Gonorrhea,
Ulcers and Bubo in the Pudendum, and when that Malignant Vapor is Communicated
to the Testacles and Vessels of Generation, the Seed is corrupted, and the
Generation of the Seed in the Genital Vessels is depraved, whence for good Seed
there is Generated a stinking and corrupt Humor, which does stir up the
natural Excresion, whence also a Veneral Gonorrhea bewrays it self, because in
this Galica it is joined with great ardour, and also pain, and sometimes with
an inflammation of the Testacles, and Veins of the Vessels carrying Seed; the
matter which is purged is far differing from Seed, viz. Yellow, Green, sharp,
and Eroding the Glandula; there also appears in the Pudendo Pustles of the
bigness of the Grains of Millet, sometimes it compasses the whole Crown, and
where they break forth, there is left white Ulcers, in which the Disease
increasing, they grew deep and Calous of a various Color, adjoined with pains.

Thirdly, also Buboes in this Disease do bewray themselves; for the seminal
Vessels are infected with the impurity very easily, which when it has, it
arises from a vena longa ab ipso hepate, it does communicate that verjulentsy
very easily to the Liver, and repeleth the same by the same from it self,
whence Buboes, as also Gonorrhea are stirred up, and these two Effects are
complicated and joined together, and are certain Signs of the Leaves Venerea,
and if the one be wanting, the other remains good; but if this Leaves be
contracted without the Venereal congress, as truly if it be taken by Kisses,
there is Ulcers about the Mouth, if from sucking of an infected Infant there is
about the Breast Inflammations, Pustles and Chops, if from Vestments and common
Bedfellowship then there is Pustles every where dispersed in the Skin; and so
you have the Signs of a beginning POX, or Leaves Venerea.

CHAP. XVI. Here follows the Signs of the Increasing Pox.
BUt if this evil be now increased, and waxes stronger, and this verulentsy be
communicated to the Liver, and from hence the Nutrition in the whole Body is
depraved, and all the Symptoms of this Disease enumerated in the History of
this Disease do show themselves, which truly though they do not afford every
one single, and inseparable, proper Sign of this Disease by it self; yet if
they are taken contained, and the peculiar Condition diligently considered,
this Evil is made very clear; for there is scarce any Disease in which there is
the Syndrome of all, so there be many so proper to the Leaves Venerea that they
are not found in the same manner in any other Disease, as Buboes, which are
perceived sometimes in the beginning, sometimes in the increase of this Leaves,
for which cause they may be discerned from other Buboes in the manner declared
in the first place, the crusty Scabs be the Indiciums or Signs of this Disease;
and sometimes being apparent in the Forehead and Head, resembling the Horns of
a Ram, in which there is contained a sanies matter, sometimes nothing, and they
appear in the Face, Head and Beard, and in the whole Body, but first about the
Pubem or Coxas, or Hip, if they be joined with a Tumor, and sticking first to
fleshy parts and Bones, especially in the Head, Forehead, in the forepart of
the Chin, they are the most certain Signs of the Leaves Venerea; for the
Venereous matter in the gross Humor has a Coroding and a Dolorifick
verulentsy joined with it, such as is not in other Tumors, which do arise from
a gross matter; for although Ulcers do oftentimes happen to arise in other
Diseases, yet if they are stirred up first in the Yard, and chiefly in the
Preputium, and about the Glandula, and near the end of the Yard, and also in
the Palate or Tonsils, and what is cast forth is putrid and stinking, and
there was before no inflammation of the part, nor no Signs of the Scurvy, but
Signs of the Morbus Gallicus; the Hairs of the Head do first fall, then the
Hairs of the Beard, and after that the Hairs of the Eyebrows, and then that
there is perceived Ulcerous Pustles, and sordid Scabs, this is a certain Sign
of the Morbus Gallicus; also in the same manner Rhagades and Clefts in the
Palms of the Hands, and Souls of the Feet, having no other precedent Cause, are
undoubted Signs of the Leaves Venerea, and so these Warts sometimes depressed
and broad, and sometimes large; and these Excrementiae, which they call Figs,
Condylomata and Crusted, if perceived in the Privy-parts, or in Ano. Certainly
this does sufficiently discover this Disease; and although pains of the Head do
happen in many other Diseases, yet if litele Hillocks and Gummy do approach the
Skin, if there be a Gonorrhea, and it be suppressed, and there has been a
Bubo, these be sufficient certain Signs of the Disease; also pains in other
parts of the Body; for if pains are not in those Joints, but in that Region
which is in the middle part of the Bones, and near the Joints, as in the
forepart of the Shin, or in the Shoulder Bone, between the Head and the Joint
of the Elbow, and these be most intent and sharp, and do wax sharp about the
Evening, and in the night, these also are certain Signs of this Disease; also
that Distillation which is familiar to this Disease, by which much Phlegmatic
and waterish Excrements are cast forth by the Mouth and Nose, by which the part
by which they pass are exulcerated; but first of all that Gallical Gonorrhea is
the chief and certain Sign of the Disease.

CHAP. XVII.
Signs of an inveterate Leaves Venerea.

THirdly, if the Evil be inveterate there may occur also the Symptoms of the
Disease of every Kind, as Callous, Fistula's, and Cancerous Ulcers, Tophies in
various parts of the Body, Caries of the Bones in the Shins, Arms, but chiefly
in the Crannium or Skul, in the Bone of the Palate and Nose, a Hectic Fever,
Pthisick, Cachexia, Falling Sickness, the falling of the Teeth, Deafness,
Blindness: To the truth of these things the Histeriographal part does
abundantly witness, as to what concerns the Differences, Verulentsy, although
the formal reason of it is known, which is known from the Effects; for
sometimes more, sometimes fewer parts are infected; sometimes the Contagion has
a greater power of acting, sometimes a less.

And thus we have run over the Signs and Symptoms of the Leaves Venerea with as
much brevity as a matter of such importance would admit, and with so much
clearness, that there is not any person of the meanest Capacity, but may from
this discovery discern whether he or she be infected with this Distemper, and
in time make out for Cure, you may here as in a Glass discover the least
approach of this Disease in your selves or Relations, and by that prevent a
great deal of shame and misery to your selves, Relations and Families, and
prolong your own Lives: You have here stated the Essence, Nature, Signs,
Symptoms, Concomitants, and Effects of this direful Disease, with its occult
Quality, how it is contracted, and that is always by Contagion in its first
Rise, though from thence may, and often is hereditary with all its Diagnostick
Signs.

We omit the Prognostic Sign, so called by Physicians, because by them they do
determine whether persons be Curable or not, and foretell the Effect that is
like to occur according to the Concomitant Signs; because,

First it would extend this Work beyond its design, being chiefly to acquaint
how every person might come to a certain Knowledge of their own Disease. And,

Secondly, we cannot suppose without a Delirium in our own Brain, that any
person that is infected with so Hostile and Formidable an Enemy as this is, and
a Domestic one too, would (being in his right Wits) neglect his Cure, and not
immediately seek out for it.

Thirdly, some upon Examination finding the Disease deeply rooted, the Symptoms
great, the Tyrant highly insulting over him, might despair of Cure when it may
be had, and so through mistake, and too much timerity run themselves upon ruin.

Fourthly, some who having but a lighter Touch or Infection might slight it,
and think it nothing, as we have known many of this sort, and so go on,
neglecting their own Cure, until they ruin themselves, and their Relations (if
they have any) whereas there are but few, or rarely any, but may be Cured, and
of whom we our selves have Cured many, and some too that have not hindered the
least business, and have been under almost any restraint (Venery only excepted)
and (their Relations being infected) we have Cured them, though to this day
they know not what they ailed; the Arcana's we use are such, viz. of that Power
and Energy, that they Cure Cito tuto and Jucunde, which is as much as any
Person can desire, small in Dose, and very easy to be taken, and may be
conveyed (by reason they are small in bulk) to any place, and the Rules so
plain and easy, that they may be observed without the least difficulty, the
Cure so certain, that one in a Thousand almost need not despair of Cure, if
they will be observant; for it is to be understood, that though many may be
Cured wlth rhat facility as is hinted, yet all may not without being a little
more observant in Rules somewhat more strict, and were it so, we have
convenience for any that will commit themselves to a more strict observation,
for privicy and certainty of Cure in Cases more than ordinary; and this is
worth your observation, which though as you have heard the Symptoms of this
Disease are numerous, and appear with a dreadful Aspect, in foul Ulcers, sordid
and stinking Sores, filthy and noysom Scabs, a ghastly Countenance, lamentable
complaints of dolorous pain, as you have abundantly heard, in so much that they
might almost have this Motto written upon them, (Mortuus est) yet by the
Blessing of God. we have conquered these sworms of Adversaries, healed and
dried up the Ulcers, caused the Scabs to fall off like Leaves in Autumn,
renewed the native heat, restored the Countenance to its former Floridity,
Cured the Hectic, dismissed the Consumption, and in some made him a new Man,
(as to his body) or so repaired the old, that there has in many to this very
day not appeared the least sign of the approaching ruin, to their great
satisfaction, happens of themselves and Families, and though they have had
Issue, yet these Offsprings are sound, strong, and enjoy perfect health,
without the least Token of an hereditary communication of the paternal spot,
and in all the marks or concomitants of perfect freedom from such things, there
appears to be no difference from them and others, of whom there was never no
cause of Jelousy; nay, and less than of some who are born of Scorbutic
Parents, or others annoyed with milder and gentler Diseases.

The reason of this Allegation is, because some doubt whether there be any
certain Cure for Persons, once infected with the POX, because some, who either
because they would not be Regular, and have fallen into the hands of some bad
and inexpert persons have failed of their Cure, or have been made worse, or
have paliated their disease, have taken on them the Phisiognomy of other
Diseases, and Masked themselves under the Vizard of the Scurvy and Gout, to
whom they are much obliged for this disguise; for the certainty of our Cure, in
this, as well as in many others, we could give you many Instances of persons by
Name, Place of Habitation, with Sex and Age of all sorts, and these performed
in Fourteen days upon infants, who cannot observe Rule, and who went any
whither, and did any thing but our own conveniensy, trust by many committed to
us, and love to our Neighbor must prohibit our Pen.

And so much may suffice for the description of this Disease, as to what
concerns the Cure, it cannot be expected that we shall say any thing of that,
for that would not answer the end proposed, and it would be useless; because
they may have the Medicines that will certainly Cure of the Author, and at the
place specified in the Title Page, with plain Directions, so that they may be
used in any Country, and distance from us whatsoever.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Gonorrhea.
THe Gonorrhea, a Brat of this Brood, (for the most part) and though it be
enumerated among the Symptoms of the Leaves, yet as ^o its distinct Knowledge,
and some other necessary Circumstances belonging, it will be convenient to let
you know, that though a Gonorrhea may arise from another Cause, yet it is rare
to meet with a Gonorrhea that is not a Symptom of the Leaves Venerea, or
contracted by a foul Copulation; we speak now as we have found in our Practice;
a Gonorrhea is a running, or rather a dropping out of the urinary passage, of a
Yellowish Livid, Bloody, Filthy, Sanies, like to puss, or matter not well
Concocted, oftentimes fretting and exulcerating the passage with the Acrimony,
and causing a painful erection of the Yard, and distention of all the Genital
parts; for in this Erection there is caused, as it were, a convulsive
Contraction of these parts, and hence it is, that the Patients complain, that
they feel, as it were, a String stretched stiff in that part which draws the
Yard as it were downwards, the cause thereof is a gross and flatulent Spirit,
filling and distending by its plenty the whole Channel or hollow Nerve, yea the
whole porous substance of the Yard, if to these Symptoms this be added, that
the urinary passage is exulcerated a grievous pain, afflicts the Patient while
he makes Water, for that the Ulcers are irritated by the sharp Urine passing
that way; for it is a viscious and acrid filth, which has acquired a venenant
malignity by the corruption of the whole Substance.

This description is sufficient for any person to come to a Judgment of
himself, upon suspicion of himself he may come to a conclusion in the
affirmative, that if some of these Symptoms be present, though they are not
all, nor to the utmost Degree, and especially if he has been dabbling; he may
conclude in the affirmative, that he has a virulent Gonorrhea, and by this be
admonished to look out for Cure, which we have with our remedies performed in
Six or Eight days to their great satisfaction; we have something to be
considered as to the Female Sex, and some distinguishing Signs by which they
might be able to judge of themselves, whether they have a Gonorrhea, for as
much as they are attended sometimes with weakness proper to their Sex, only
called Fluor albus. We have met with many that have had a foul corrupt
Gonorrhea, and have thought it only the weakness now named, and so have born it
to the hazard of their Lives, and by which many others have been ruined: But by
reason this Book may happen into the hands of some less modest, and our modest
Veneration of that Sex forbids any more than this hint; but if any be
surprised, as too many are in these days, and they desire our advice, they
shall receive a modest Information of particulars according to the Nature of
the thing, and Cure, if Curable, as it is not to be doubted, and so much we
thought convenient to add concerning a distinct description of a Gonorrhea.

CHAP. XIX. The description of the Dropfie
THe Dropsy in the Greek is (...), in Latin aqua-intercus, as to its species
is described to be a Tumor of the Belly, and of these there be Three sorts,
which have their several Appellations, viz. Ascites, Tympanites, and Anasarca;
that which is called Ascites may swell the whole Belly, even as a Bottle, and
therefore is called the Bottle-Bellyed-Dropsie, the principal species is, it is
a swelling of the Belly, having its rise from a waterish and serous Humor,
Collected in the capacity of the Abdomen; and sometimes there is concomitant a
Tumor of the Thighs, Feet and Privy parts, the nearest cause of this effect is
a waterish and serous Humor collected in the Abdomen, together with the vice
of the part containing the Humor? the Liver is not always in the fault, as
Anotomical Inspection of Hydropilal persons does testify; much less is the
Spleen always to be blamed; but the Vasia Lymphatica being of late more clearly
discovered, it is from the obstruction of these that the Water is poured into
the Cavety of the Abdomen, by which they are obstructed and stopped with any
viscid and gross Humor. The serous Humor which otherwise is wont to be
carried to the receptacle of the Chyle is forced to take its Journey another
way, and being beaten back whence it came, it makes the part to swell, which
for that cause is elevated with a Copidness, which being over much burdened, at
last they break, and so the Serum flows very easily to the Abdomen.

Or the Dropsy may happen from the Liver, being evilly affected, and when it
labourerh with a Scirrhus obstruction or inflammation, and so also a Dropsy
happens from a great wait of the Bowels, the thin small Coats of Lymphatical
Vessels being easily broke, as also from the Reins b^ing obstructed, the
Bladder hurt, the Womb being easily effected, the Dropsy may sometimes follow,
the Water is oftentimes in the Cavity of the Abdomen, and sometimes it is
received into little Bladders of a various Magnitude.

The second description of a Dropsy is Tympanites or a Tympany, receiving its
Name from a Drum, for the Belly being extended with Wind, if it be struck with
the hand, it gives a sound resembling that of a Drum, it is also Hydrops si^^is
a dry Dropsy, in this the Abdomen swells from a Flatus shut up in the
capacity or hollowness of the Belly, oftentimes also the Intestines in this
Affect is perceived to be distended from Wind shut up in them; but there is
very seldom a Flatus to be found, but there is also a Water mixed with it.

And oftentimes Winds are Generated between the Coat of the Intestines, and
Messentery, or from a debilitated Heat, or from the same too much scorched
drawing its own parts into a consent with the crude and gross Chyl.

Lastly Anasarca, which is called (...), and has a certain Affinity with a
Cachexia, and it is an equal Excrement preternatural of the whole Mass of the
Body, arising from the visciousness of Aliment, the cause is a Waterish Humor
spread over the whole Body, produced from a debility and intemperature of the
whole Bowels, by reason of which instead of good Blood there is generated a
Crude and Phlegmatic, whence it cannot agglutinate sufficiently, a naughty
nutrement necessarily follows. Others allege the obstruction of the
Lymphatical Vessels, by reason of which the serous Humor cannot be separated
from the parts.

These be the Signs of an Ascites, a swelling of the Belly, Feet, and
oftentimes of the Privy parts: The sick being rouled from one side to the
other, there is observed the sound of a fluctuating Water, the Urine is little
and thick, and sometimes Red; they have a great Thirst, a dry Cough, a
difficult Respiration, and an Extenuation of all the other parts, and also a
Febris lenta and continuenta.

In the Tympany the Belly being struck, it sends forth the sound of a Drum, the
bulk of the Abdomen is not so painful as in Ascites, but the Inflammation is
greater, Pains and Torments go before, or precede, especially about the Navel,
and the Side; the Sick lying upon his Face, the Belly remains distened and
hard, when the Sick turns himself, and is roul'd to either side, belching and
noise does frequently break forth, there is heard Murmurings and Grumblings.

In the Anasarca not only the whole Belly, but the Legs, Shins, also the Hands,
Arms, Breast, Face, and whole Body does swell, and the Fingers being pressed into
the Flesh, they leave the Marks and Footsteps of their Impression, and with
these there Frequently follows a Pale and Cadaverous Color of the Skin, the
Flesh soft and loss, the Urine thin and White, the Respiration difficult, a
continual and small Fever.

CHAP. XX. The Hypocondriack, Affection or Melancholy.
THis Affection has received this name from the place Affected, the Barbarians
do call it Mirachialis, and others according to the Authority of Hypocrates, a
flatulent or Windy affect, it is described to be a Phlegmatic and Choleric
foulness, or the filth of Atra-bilious Humor, gathered first of all in the
Branches of the vena porta, Celeack Arteries and Messenteries by reason of the
Spleen, and these too without putrefaction, from which the Humors savouring of
the nature of these do stir up many and various Symptoms, such as these,
Crudity and Rawness of the Stomach, a windy roaring of the Belly; sower
Belching, much Spittle, Phlegmatic Vomitings, pains of the Heart, or
Heartaking, binding of the Belly, Costiveness, an inflamed Heat of the
Hypocondries, which sometimes follows this Malady; as also a Redness of the
whole Face, occasioned from ascending Humors, the Urine sometimes thin
sometimes thick and Red, a Distentio Hypochondriorum, and frequently a
pulsetion and wandering pain of the Sides, difficult Respiration, pain of the
Breast, beating of the Heart, a Vertigo or giddiness, and swimming in the Head,
a dimness of the sight, Watching, Sadness, and Trouble of the Mind, troublesome
Fancies, in some grief and sadness; the parts primarly affected are judged to
be the Spleen, the Ferment of which being more or less stirred is wont to
produce these Symptoms; but sometimes the only error of Diet is wont to
generate this evil, there being no fault in the Stomach or Spleen.

Signs of the part affected is first if the Humor offending be in the Spleen
it self, then you may perceive a Tumor or hardness in the Region of the Spleen,
there is an evil and swarthish Color of the Face; if the Humor be contained
in the Liver, there is perceptable a Tumor in the Region of the Liver; but if a
Flatus, Windiness, Roaring or Tumbling, and Pains be perceived, it is in the
Vessels between the Stomach and Spleen, and chief if it be 6 or 7 Hours after
Dinner or Supper, and that there is not perceived a Tumor or Hardness neither
in the one nor in the other side; if the Stomach be originally afflicted with
this affect, it is known by the weakness and debility of Coction, or digesting
the Food; and because there is oftentimes (...), of the Stomach and Liver, in
this Affect it renders the Cure difficult.

This Disease is known to be very afflicting, the Symptoms very dismal and sad
to the persons afflicted with it, the Cure difficult, having been attempted by
many learned Physicians in vain; nay, often and for the most part these persons
seem to be worse while they are under the means of Cure than they were before,
by reason of the stirring of the Humor, that the Patients themselves despair
of Cure, (which it is easy for them to do) because they are always of a
doubting, fearing and dispairing disposition, mistrusting and suspecting the
worst of all things,

For this cause it is called Flagellum Medicorum, the scourge of Physicians,
because of their great endeavors and parts laid out in this Disease, and many
times a fruitless Issue; we have seen many persons in this afflicting and
dismal distemper attended with variety of Symptoms, some have not all the
Symptoms (God forbid they should) some have not the same, but this besure, that
all feels the influence upon their Minds, making them pensive, aggravating all
outward Affliction; when this Disease arises to the highest pitch, their mind^
are always rouling and tumbling, sometimes to this thing, sometimes to that,
sometimes to this place, sometimes to that, restless in every place and
Condition, and for the most part their Minds troubled and rolling about matters
of Religion, though to little purpose, being never satisfied in their Scruples,
but renewing to themselves new occasions of Trouble, and many times they ascend
to that degree, that being drove to despair, they attempt their own ruin, and
sometimes this ends in their own destruction.

We have our selves been very conversant with this Disease, having had many
Patients under our Cure, and have seen and heard what we here speak of, and
through the Blessing of God can give a very good Account of our selves in this
Cure, having Cured many, even persons that have been under the Skilful and able
Men, and that for a long course in Physic. I say we have recovered them that
have been as desperate as any; many pregnant Instances we can give of persons
in this City, who do acknowledge themselves obliged to us and will own it, and
this done upon persons afflicted with the highest Symptoms of this Affect, and
this we have done Cito tuto jucunde, considering (...) the stcbborn Nature of
this Disease by chance or good fortune, but ut Ars docet; and therefore by the
Blessing of Him who is the Fountain of Blessing, and without whom nothing is
Blessed, and whom we do Implore; for every good and every perfect Gift comes down
from the Father of Light: Neither do we speak these vaunting or boastingly, or
with Reflections upon any others that's not our manner, (being not after the
Pattern of our great Master) and who himself said, No Man lights a Candle and
puts it under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that it may give light to all
that are in the House; but for the public good, not doubting but others that
have need may receive the same.

And this is to be noted, That to our Knowledge we have met with none for many
years, (in our hands, but what have received good.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Histerick Passion.
A Disease which is familiar to, and very much afflicting Women, it is called
(...) suffocatio uterina, or in the English the Suffocation or Strangling of
the Womb; because Women in this Disease seem to be strangled or choked; the
Symptoms are so many, that it cannot be defined by one thing only; for now
there is a difficulty of Breathing, anon a Swounding, by and by the Animal and
other Actions are hurt, with a refrigeration of the whole Body, having its Rise
from a Malignant Vapor, elevated from the Womb to the superior parts; the
Blood and Seed does not only afford the original to this Vapor, but other
viscious and corrupt Humors in the Womb, whilst they put on a malignant and
venomous Nature this evil does invade by Fits, which do now return more
ftequently, and anon more seldom: They endure sometimes a longer sometimes a
shorter time according to the quantity of the matter, which is either more
slowly or more quickly Collected, so it is sooner or later discursed it is
familiar to Virgins, to Widows, Women in Childbed. Those things which show the
approach of this Affect is Nausiousness, Yaunings, Stretching of the Body,
Rumblings of the Belly, with Belching, Weariness, a sad Countenance, Paleness
of the Face, with the increasing Affect, it begins to urge a sense of
strangling, the Respiration is intercepted, and the Suffocation, and at length
all the Vital and Animal Actions are depraved, lessoned or abolished: Hence
there is perceived Deliriums, Convulsions in the Face, and Ligaments, and also
in the whole Body, a Vertigo, an inversion or rouling of the Eyes, Speechless,
an obscure or no Pulse, and other grievous Symptoms, in which the Womb is
sensibly stirred, and as it were rolled together; but the Affect or Histerick
Fit declining, the Intestines roareth, the Eyes are lifted up, the Cheeks are
overspread with a Redness, the Animal Actions are restorred, the Body waxes
Warm, deep Breathings are sent forth, and so the Sick by little and little is
restored.

This is distinguished from a Syncope, that here is often perceived some Pulse,
there is no breaking forth of a Cold Sweat, there is no Paleness, but rather a
tumidness or swelling, and sometimes a Redness, and it is stirred up by Sweet
smelling things, and they difference it from an Apoplexy, in that if these be
pricked there is no Snorting, and after the Fit they remember all that was said
or done.

And lastly it is distinguished from the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness, in this
the Convulsive Motions are not perpetually joined in the first time of the
Invasion, here is no Spittle found about the Mouth, and many of the Actions are
remembered after the Fit. Some will not grant that the part primarily Affected
is the Womb, but the Hypochondres, and they state the nearest Cause to be a
Flatus, an Air and Vapors, hurting chiefly by their Acidity and Austerity, by
reason of the visciousness, and the more Acid pancreatical Juice waxing hot,
the sharper Choler and more viscious Snivil in the Bowels; others again do
attribute it to the serous Filths born toward the original of the Nerves,
whence the animal Spirit affected with the Bloot, is stirred up at length unto
an Explosion, and they think this Effect chiefly and primarily to be
Convulsive, and to depend very much from the Brain and Nervous kind, being
affected: But lastly others do ascribe the Rise of the Histerical Passion to
the Flatulent and thinner Blood, with a certain increasing Heat, impetuously
rushing into the Vessels of the Lungs and Heart, and thence does produce all
the fore-recited Symptoms.

CHAP. XXII. The Jaundise.
THe Greek Word (...) so called, a Viverra a Ferret, because his Eyes are
tincted with a Yellow Color, vel ab Ictero ave, God speed the person that has
the Jaundise, and it is so called Galgulus, which if it be beheld by a person
that has the Jaundise, the Bird presently dies, but the Sick is healed, in
Latin it is called Aurigo, the King's Evil, Regins Morbus Arquatus, the Kings
Disease, or the King's Evil, it is the Effusion of Choler through the whole
body, the Cause is attributed to an obstruction of the passages of the Bladder
of Gaul and biliary Pores; and hence the Choler of the Bladder of Gaul,
destinated to the Intestines, the Ductus being abstructed is rejected, and is
for that Cause disgorged into the Blood, from whence it is sent forth every
where into the Blood, and from thence it is thrust forth every way into the
Skin, one is called the Yellow, and the other the Black, and both is produced
from one and the same Cause, they differ in this, that in the Black the Gauley
Bladder being longer obstructed; so that the particles of the Gaul is so
Copiously heaped up; being not Concocted, they produce a Black Color, not a
perfect Yellow to the Blood and Serum, the Stools in the Jaundise are whitened;
but not always the Jaundise thickens the Urine, and from thence it looks
blackish, it suddenly invades a Man, and for the most part without a Fever, and
without any great decays of strength; also the Jaundise is produced by reason
of the ill Disposition of the Liver, from the hot intemperature of the same,
either with or without an Inflammation.

It comes in Fevers in manner of a Crisis, and also by drinking of Poison, or
biting of venomous Beasts, by which the whole Mass of Blood looses its former
purity, and is corrupted into a Citron Colored Humor, by which means at
length the whole Skin is infected, and tincted with a Yellow Color; for the
Jaundise is known by the Yellow Color of the whole Body, but chiefly perceived
in the Whites of the Eyes, as also by the dullness and Itching of the Body,
bitterness of the Tongue, Chollerick Vomitings and Sighings.

CHAP. XXIII. The Chollick.
THis Disease the Chollick takes its Name from the Gut called Colon, because it
is in that Gut wherein it does exercise its cruelty, and the Torment of it is
oftentimes so much, that many are most miserably handled by it. There is a sad
sense of Pain of the Bowels, and chiefly of the Colon, with the Retention of
the Stools arising from a Solution of Continuity. The nearest Cause is Solution
of Continuity; for so great a Pain can scarce draw its original from any
intemperature, only, the material Causes are Winds, indurating Excrements
stopped in the Intestines, especially Chollerick and F^gmatick Humors, and
sometimes an Inflammation, and also Worms, and any other matter whether cold or
hot, and whatsoever can obstruct, corode, and press the Intestines, or much
alter them, because they are not able to refuse the maliguant matter, and these
things can stir up the Pain of the Chollick; but the matter causing this Pain
is sometimes contained in the Cavety, and sometimes between the Tunicles or
Wrinkles, and Folds of the Intestines.

Among Physicians there is mention made of a Three Fold Chollick, of a Windy,
secondly a Phlegmatic and Chollerick.

That which arises from Winds has mostly a wandering Pain which does not stay
long in the same place, but one while upward, another while downward, and anon
wanders into the other side, and there Torments by distending the part. The
Chollerick Humors being the Cause, they produce the Colic with the sense of
a gnawing Pain, and oftentimes it has accompanying it a thirst and bitter(...)
Mouth.

That which takes its Rise from vitriated Phlegm, if stiffly adhering to the
Intestines, produces as it were a sense of perforating the Intestines with an
All or Stake, and is frequently accompanied with a Nauseousness and Vomiting, a
Retention of Excrements, so that sometimes the Wind can neither break upward
nor downward, and oftentimes a Pain, now in this part, and anon vehimently
infesting another, by which the Pains of the Chollick may be distinguished from
the Pains of the Gravel and Stone; but it is much more manifest if the Pain be
in the higher parts of the Reins, and vitriated Phlegm be ejected by Stool, or
the Pain has been quieted either with the Ejection of the indurated Stools, or
with other matter; for these do sufficiently manifest the Chollick other ways,
as chiefly the place and a stability, but otherwise dull pain of the Legs
straight upward, and the Exclusion of Sand, Gravel and Stone, does show that
the pain is the pain from the Stone.

CHAP. XXIV. The Disseases of the Liver.
THe Liver, (whose Office it is to receive the Blood from the Vena Portae)
being separated from the Gaulish Humor, and depurated, and to lead it into the
Vena Cava, it lies open to many and various Diseases, such as be hot and cold
Intemperatures, Obstruction, Scirrhus, Inflammation and Pain; an Obstruction is
very familiar to the Liver, and it is assaulted with no distemper more than
this, which is easily done by reason of the small Branches of the Vena Portae
dispersed every where into the substance of the Liver, the Causes be these.

First the more obstructed Pores of the part, binding things, a Contusion,
Compression and Ligature.

The second is by reason of the unaptness of the Blood to pass the Pores,
because of its great Viscidity and Thickness.

The Third is the Oppression from the plenitude of the part, because of a
fuller Diet, Exercises omitted, and suppression of wonted Evacuations,
Heaviness and Distention, with a Dull Pain, does show this Affect, and chiefly
if it be in the right Hypochondria, and it is chiefly manifest when any one
will sustain an Exercise after Meals.

A Scirrhus of the Liver is a preternatural Tumor in that part, hard and
resisting the Touch, and without pain, unless it be strongly pressed, and it
draws its original from a stubborn and inveterate Obstruction, for the most
part, but sometimes, though rarely, from an Inflammation, and this is not done
suddenly, but step by step; for in the first place the Humor, the Author of
the Obstruction does fill and stuff the small Veins of the Liver; this being
done, from thence it does rebound into all the substance of the Viscera, and
obstructing it, and from thence the Veins hence being heaped up much fuller,
the Liver distendeth into a large heap, that it appears swelled, and then being
dried, and the thinner part by the force of heat is dissipated, so all the rest
waxes hard, and by the mixtion of it the substance of the Liver does wast; and
at length there is produced a true Scirrhus more easily perceptable, especially
by the Touch, if the Party be tender, and the Belly be not fat, and the Sick
lying straight upon his Face, either in the left side, for it cannot be
discerned without the Touch, for it is circumscribed in the Place and Figure of
the Liver. Moreover it is perceptable easily lying upon the right side, but the
left lies heavyer; for that certainly a heap as it were weightily pressing,
into the Stomach and Praecordia.

The Inflammation of the Liver, which the Greks call (...), is a hot Tumor of
the Liver, with a continual Fever, stirred up from an impetuous affluxion of
Matter accompanied with a sad Pain, afflicting with the sense of weight the
Signs of this grief is a weight in the right side of the Praecordiums stretched
out from the Jugulum to the Bastard Ribs, a small Cough, and that dry,
difficulty of Breathing, an accute Fever, a Queasiness of Stomach, a great
thirst, the Color of the whole Body inclining to a Yellow; this Tumor easily
passes into an Abscesses, which if that happens it pronounces certain death,
and when it becomes an Imposthume, Pain, Fever, and other Symptoms wax strong;
the Fits invade many times without order, which being over, an Exacerbation of
heat follows, the Puss being made, all these things are remitted; but the
strength remaining is much weaker, the Pulse frequent, small and languid, a
frequent fainting of the Spirit; the Abscessus being broke, there breaks forth
much filth from the Puss, the Sick is detained with sometimes a hot sometimes a
cold Intemperature; there is a great loathing of Flesh, nevertheless hunger
does much hurt, the thirst is vehiment, the whole Body, and specially the Palms
of the Hands, and the Souls of the Feet are hot, the Face white, soft habit of
Body, and raw and crude dejections.

CHAP. XXV. A Cachexia.
A Cachexia is an evil habit of Body, and as it were a Dropsy, it is a more
soft and loose Constitution of the fleshy and skinny parts of the whole Body,
and as it were a puffing up with an ill favored Color of the whole Skin,
either Pale, Livid, or Leadish; this evil is wont to come from impure, naughty,
and corrupt Aliments; but if these be not the cause it is charged upon the
Imbecility or Impurity of the Stomach and Viscera, for Imbecility produces a
weak and crude Concoction; for the parts of the more pure Aliments being
carried into the habit of the Body, notwithstanding it is sent to, and as it
were agglutinated to the parts, yet it is not perfectly assimilated; and from
hence is made not true and legitimate nutrition, but a viscious and
unprofitable; the Impurity of the Viscera makes an evil and corrupt Blood,
which at length is brought into all the parts, and being unuseful to be
dissipated into the Substance of the Body, thence follow an unmeet nourishment,
the external Causes are Meats of evil Juice, frequent gorging of the Belly,
studying too late at night, over much watching, suppressae evacuationes
mensium, suppression of the Hemorrhoides, frequent bleeding at the Nose, or
stopping of other Matter, which were wont to flow as a Diarraea, and Dysenteria
longa. Long being in Prison, and Subterranian places, Venom being drunk, or the
Bite of venomous Beasts; that also which makes much to this Disease is
continual Fevers, stubborn obstructions of the Liver or Spleen, hard and
Scirrhous Tumors; old people are also corrupted with this Disease, by reason of
the Imbecility of the Native Heat; and Women (ob retensionem mensium) and
Children by Gluttany or excessive eating. And also a Cachexia sometimes has
its original from an Ulcer of the Reins, where there is Gravel, when the
perulent Matter, by reason of the Obstruction of the Ureters, flows back into
the Reins, and so infecting the Blood, the whole habit is defiled.

CHAP. XXVII. Of an Inflammation of the Lungs.
PEribneumonia is an Inflammation of the of the Lungs, with an accute Fever,
difficulty of Breathing, and a Cough, the part affected is the Lungs, either
the whole Lungs or part, either the right or the left side, the Cause is, Blood
breaking copioufly into the Lungs, and kindling an Inflammation? the External
Causes are vehiment Exercises, especially after long quiet and repletion of the
Body, overcrying and Extention of the Voice, anger, the Cold Northern Air,
especially following the Southern, the use of Stagnent Waters, as Lakes etc.
Venomous Diets, and sometimes mrlignant Humors, as when the Peribneumonia or
Inflammation of the Lungs are Epidemical.

The Signs are straightness of the Breast with a heavy and grievous pain,
reaching to the Spine of the Back, difficulty of Breathing, and truly a greater
than in the Pleurifie, an accute Fever, troublesome Cough, a Redness of the
Cheeks, in the beginning no Spittle, but in process of time there follow Crude,
Chollerick, or Frothy Spittle.

The Cure is to be begun with opening a Vein, a Glyster (if need be) being
first administered.

CHAP. XXVII. The Pleurisy.
A Pleurisy is a Disease of the Thorax or Breast, the most molesting and
accutest of all, and there is none that assaulteth the life of a Man more, it
is an Inflammation which extends it self under the Ribs, and the Membranes
thereto adjoining; and taking its Rise from a thin Chollerick Blood, with a
continual Fever and pricking pain of the side, vehiment Cough, difficulty of
Breathing, it is caused either from pure Blood, or hot and Chollerick Humors,
being mixed, flowing into the Membranes, the remote Causes are Cacohimia,
Plethora, wonted Evacuations of Blood, being suppressed, Flux of the Belly
unseasonably stirred, a Contusion of of the Breast from a fall, or a violent
stroke, vehiment Exercise, and after that Exercise a large draught of cold
Water, or the like, a large drinking of more pure Wine, too much hot, or over
much cold.

The Pathognomical Signs of a Pluresie are accute pains of the side, difficulty
of Respiration, as also frequent and little, a continual Fever, and often
observing the Fit of a Tertian, in the beginning a dry Cough, afterward moist,
with foul and colored Spittle, there is an Inflammation of the Intercostal,
External Muscles; this arises sometimes from Blood poured out into those
External Muscles, and sometimes from Winds, and sometimes from a Distillation;
the true Pluresie is known from a Bastard, that the sick cannot lie on that
part opposite to the pained side, because of the Membrane pained by the newly
conceived weight: But in the Bastard Plurisie it is difficult to lie down upon
the side affected.

CHAP. XXVIII. De Impyemate.
(...) Puss, and (...) Putrefaction, Suppuration, it is a Collection of Puss in
the Capacity of the Thorax or Breast, coming from the foulness and filth of the
whole Lungs, but it flows thither either from an Angina or Peribnenmonia, or
it happens more frequently from a Pleurisy; for these Coughs not being well
cleansed, there happens an Abscessus, from which at length being broke, there
flows a Puss into the whole Capacity of the Breast.

CAAP. XXIX. De Pthisis.
(...) tabes (...) Corrumpo, in Latin Tales, and in general it is taken for the
Extenuation of the whole Body, and it is accepted for any thing that flows from
the same Cause, and in that sense it is taken among Physicians, and so it is
taken frequently; for that Consumption of the whole Body, which flows from the
Ulcers of the Lungs, and so this Calamity may be defined, it is an Ulceration
of the Lungs from a sharp Matter coroding cum febre lenta, a Cough with a foul
and perulent Spittle, by which by little and little the whole Body is Consumed
aad Extenuated.

The Cause of the Phthisis is besides the viscions Constitution of the Lungs, a
sharp and salt Distillation from the Head, as also a sharp Humor from the
neighboring parts cast into the Lungs, as Inflammation, Suppuration of the
pleura mediastina Diaphragma, and aspera arteriae, which is converted into an
Epyema, and from those naughty depraved Humors which are generated, there is
produced a Phthisis, and moreover from the broken or eroded Vessels of the
Lungs* and putrefying there, this evil is contracted.

The Anticedent Causes be viscious Humors Collected in the whole Body, which
when they be moved or stirred, from External Causes, and transmitted to the
Brain, and thence flow into the Lungs, and if to this there happens a
suppression of other wonted Evacuations of the Hemorhoids vel Mensium.

The External Causes are Contagious Air very hot or cold, or the Autumn Air.

Those which are disposed to a Consumption are such who have narraw Breasts,
their Neck long and narrow, and their Shoulders standing up.

The Signs be these, a continual Cough, at first a Bloody Spittle, and
afterward perulent, a small and continual Fever, which afflicts most in the
might, an Extenuation of the whole Body, a difficult Respiration; the Disease
being confirmed, the Puss becomes stinking.

The Hair falls off, the Nails are bowed inwards, the Cheeks wax Livid, the
extreme part and the Feet sweat, and lastly there follows a Diarrhea.

CHAP. XXX. A Catarrh or Rheum.
THe Head may be said to be the fountain and root almost of all evils, and so
it is proclaimed to be, both from Hypocrates and the rest of the Ancients; for
when a Catarrh falls from the Head, it is the cause of many Diseases, for there
are few parts of the Body safe from the Incursion of this Enemy, the Ears, the
Eyes, the Nose, Jaws, Lungs, the Sides, Arms, Shoulders, Flancks, Glandula's,
Hips, Legs, and what part is there it does not Invade? for from hence follow
Apoplexies, Blindness, Pleurisies, Consumption of the Lungs, Palsies, Deafness,
Quinses, Orthopnoiae, Coughs, Horseness, Vomitings, Inappitency, Inflammation of
the Liver, Bladder and Reins, pains of Colic, Iliaca passio, Fluxes of the
Belly, and Gouts of all sorts, and all Rheumatism, and what a Number of
Diseases may proceed from a Catarrh, so that it deserves to be called the
Fountain of all Diseases and Complaints: It is by the Latins called
Distillatio; but from the Greek (...): The Name of a Catarrh taken in the
largest sense signifies a Defluction from the Head to the inferior parts; but
when it is taken more strictly, it is defined to be a Defluction of an
Excrementious Humor from the Head into the Palate, Mouth and Lungs, having its
Rise from the Expulsive faculty of the Brain being excited.

The Material Cause is a Phlegmatic Humor, sometimes insipid, and sometimes
acid, salt and sharp, and sometimes also corrupt and hurting, the substance,
such as is begotten and gathered in the Head in a contagious or malignant
Catarrh, or the faculty of the Brain it self being weak, chiefly by reason of a
moist and cold intemperature, for that cause the Head is not able to concoct
the Aliment destinated to the Brain, neither is it able to dissipate the
superfluities begotten there; for either by Vice of of the inferior parts,
(for oftentimes the exhale from below, and by studies and business, presently
after meat, are attracted to the Head; the Vapors and thick Fumes, which the
Brain, bccause it is not able to beat back the approaching, nor dissipate the
Fumes already received, must retain as in its proper Inn.

Thus the Head in this manner being repleated with much Phlegm or Vapors,
condensed into a waterish Humor, at length the Expulsive faculty of the Brain
being awakened, arises; which being desirous to unburden it self, thrusts
forth the burden with which it is over much pressed plentifully to the lower
parts.

The External Causes which do either multiply or press out this Excrementious
Humor, and excite it to a Defluction is the more cold Air, Northerly Wind,
cold Medicines applied to the Head, a sudden change or mutation out of a hot
Air into cold, and so on the contrary, the immoderate use of the more thin and
clear Winds, as also by the flowing of hot Humors; hence it is that Catarrhs
are more frequent in the Spring season, also hot Baths unseasonable, friction
of the Head, with hot clothes, vehiment Motions of Mind and Body, heat of the
Sun, long Sleep, over much Watching, night Studies; some Catarrhs are cold,
some hot, others sweet, some salt, and some are suffocating when they rush with
violence into the Lungs, so that they expose a person to the hazard of
suffocating; and lastly some are contagious.

CHAP. XXXI. A Dysenterie.
GAllen has stated four Differences of bloody Dejections.

The first is when the Blood is cast forth pure by Stool, by reason that there
is an Imposthume in some inward part, or from wonted or accustomed Evacuations
is intermitred, or from such like cause.

The second sort is, when the Matter Ejected is like Water in which raw flesh
has been washed, and this is called Hepatick, or Flux of the Liver.

But the third is an Excretion of Black and shining Blood, and this is Gold
Melancholy.

But the fourth and last is a Dysentery, in this the Intestines are primarily
affected, which does appear by the Torments and Gripings of the Belly, and it
is defined thus, it is a frequent, crude and perulent Dejection, with pain and
ulceration of the Belly and Intestines, from a sharp Matter Eroding, which is
peculiarly contrary to the Intestines. The next causes are certain sharp
Humors, obtaining a peculiar and an occult disposition with which the
Intestines are Infested and Exulcerated.

The remote causes are naughty and unsuitable Food, Musty Drinks, Water that
runs through Leaden and Old Pipes, the use of Autumnal Fruits, as of Grapes,
and other such like venomous and violent Medicines, the Air in the Spring being
hot and dry, after a rainy aed slabby Winter, accompanied with Southerly Winds;
for oftentimes this Disease is stirred up at the end of Summer and beginning of
Autumn, and in Countries very hot, for it does show forth very much Contagion
in those hot parts of the World in the production of this Affect.

The parts affected are the Intestines, sometimes the thick sometimes the thin,
and sometimes both; if this distemper be in the thiner Bowels, it bewrays it
self very much in these following Signs, The Torments do come by longer
intervails, the pain is more sharp, and shows it self to be about or above
the Navel, the Feces and Blood are very much confounded, and mixed together,
because before they are cast forth, they perform a long Journey.

When the thicker Bowels are affected, the pain is not so great; and the
Torments are not only felt in the lower Bowels, but also presently after the
Torments the Excrements are cast forth, upon which also there swimeth a Cruor,
which is in the other intimately united.

CHAP XXXII. A Diarrhea.
A Diarrhea (which as it is commonly taken, does note every flowing of the
Belly) but properly so called, it is an immoderate, frequent, or continual
dejection of the Belly, in which there flows not Crude Aliments as in a
Lienteria, neither bloody filths as in a Dissenteria, but Excrementious and
more unmixed Humors, more sincere in quantity and quality, without
Inflammation, Exulccration, or a vehement sense of Pain; the abundance and
pravity of the Humors procures this Disease by stirring up the Expulsive
faculty of the Stomach and Intestines; things furthering this Disease are
Errors committed in Diet, and Meats of evil Juice, venomous and easily
corrupted, and gorging themselves with excess of Food, new Beer or Ale,
intemperate Air, the omission of bodily Exercise, the constriction of the Pores
of the whole Body.

In a Diarrhea there be many Differences, by reason of the Matter which is
Billious, Phlegmatic, Melancholic and serous, by reason of the place from
whence the Matter flows; for in some it is from the whole Body, but in others
from some peculiar part, as from the Brain, the Stomach, Intestines,
Missentery, Liver, Spleen and Womb; and lastly with respect to the manner and
efficient Causes, for some are Critical; the appearing Signs of concoction in
Fevers being rightly done by Nature this way, others are Symptomatical;
breeding of Teeth in Children does produce a Flux of the Belly.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Caeliack and Lienterial Passions.
THese Affects are known more or less according to the difference agreeing or
disagreeing, which in both is an Excretion by the Belly of uncocted Foods; but
they are distinguished by this, that a Lienteria (laevitas Intestinorum) is an
over quick and sudden Excretion of unconcocted Food, being not changed or
altered, neither in substance, nor in the due Color; but in the Caeliacal is
the Food received or alter^d, passing from the Stomach into the Bowels, is in
some meaner manner concocted: The cause of both is the retentive faculty of the
Stomach and Bowels, being hurt in a Lienteria it is almost abolished, but in a
Caeliaca it is but diminished; the retentive faculty of the Stomach is
abolished or diminished from the same Causes, as they are more grievous or more
gentle; there is most frequently a cold and moist intemperature, joined with a
Phlegmatic Humor, relaxing the Ventricle, and smiring the wrinkled Superficies
thereof, that it cannot retain the Aliment, falls into the Bowels unconcocted:
This is done by reason the Expulsive faculty of the Stomach and Bowels is
irritated from gnowing Humors, which by pulling stirs up an untimely
Excretion; an Inflammation in like manner stirs up this faculty, and also an
Ulcer of the Stomach or poison taken, or things of a Malignant quality
besieging the Stomach.

In the Caeliacal Passion this is taken for a Cause, viz. the straining through
of the Chyl (being hurt by the spungeous scurf of the Intestines) in passing
into the Milky Veins; moreover the Lienteria does often succeed most grievous
and deadly Diseases, as it is seen in a Dyssentery and malignant Fever, because
of the great imbecility of the retentive faculty. These Evils are not to be
slighted, for that they draw the nutriment from the whole Body.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Asthma.
THe Asthma or short Breath, it is called in Latin Suspirium, it is defined
thus, it is a frequent, hard and and short breathing, or difficult Respiration,
and oftentimes without a Fever, joined with a great contention of the Lungs;
the cause consists in the straightness of the Lungs, which being stopped with a
gross viscid Humor, very stiffly sticking to the Pipes and Caverns of the
Lungs; and being stopped, it draws its original from thence thin and serous
Humor, and also copious is frequently the Efficient of this evil.

A Tubercules or Push, as also Gravel sticking in the Lungs do act their parts
vere often in producing this Affect. All these are wont to produce the Asthma
by obstructing, either by stopping the aspera Arteria, the smoother Arteries,
or subsisting in the substance of the Lungs; the Morbick Matter by pressing the
Lungs, or obstructing or pressing somewhat into the Lungs, by reason of the
debility of the Viscera it is gathered together by little and little, and
sometimes it flows from another place from the Head in the manner of a Catarrh,
which is rare, or from the Pulmonal Artery.

CHAP. XXXV. The Gout.
ARthritis or the Joynt-disease, Morbus articularis, which is also called Gutta
articulorum plurium, it is a pain running from thence, which is a defluction of
a serous and sharp Humor falling into the Joints has stirred up the parts
affected, the Membranes, Tendones and Ligaments, taking their original from the
Periostium, and from thence endued with sense; for the Joint is made firm from
these, the conjunct cause of the Gout is solution of unity; but the Antecedent
is a serous Humor, Salt and Tarterous, from Aliments impregnated with a
Tarter, from the imbecility of the parts appoin^ed to concoction, taking its
original from thence; those Foods being not well digested, by this means this
salt and subtle Humor comes to the Joints, the sensible parts being partly
distended, and partly tearing by its Acrimony, brings most cruel and sharp
Torments, which can scarcely be laid asleep again, although helps be
administered by the very hand of Apollo; and hence it is called medicorum
opprobrium.

CHAP. XXXVI. Angina or the Quinsie.
ANgina is called so ab strangulo to choke or be strangled the Symptoms are
properly of the Face and Larinx, and it is terrible and deadly, as well for the
sharpness of Pain, as for the interception of the Office necessary to maintain
Life, and the oppression of the part by whose Office life cannot be, for it
hinders the swallowing necessary to Life, it takes away the Respiration,
without which the Animals cannot live to the point of Life.

It is defined to be a Flegmonous Affect of the Jaws, all the parts of the Gula
or Throat, by which as the Meats and Drinks, and also the Spirits do enter, so
in this Affect it thrusts them forth.

But some are Legittimate and True, some be Bastard, there be four Species of
the True, one which Hypocrates does account the most dangerous of all, wherein
there is nothing appears neither in the Jaws nor Neck; but this kind of all
most obstruce, Inflammation does inflict most and grievous Symptoms, not without
fear of present strangling, by this Fernelius saw a sick person die in the
space of Eighteen Hours, being sound in his Mind and entire in his senses, this
kind is called Angina latens.

The other is, that interior La^ings of the Jaws and Muscles are assaulted
with a manifest Phlegmon, this is cruel, equal, and above the Symptoms, but yet
there there is less danger, in that which shows it self in a manifest Tumor.

The third does occupy the interior Jaws, together with the Neck, in which the
Tumor is without and the redness conspicuous with the heat and pain; the
Symptoms which are in the former is nothing to this, and yet here is better
hope of health, the Inflammation getting outward it may be digested.

The Fourth is the lightest of all, and is judged the safest, which does not
take the interior Jaws only, but also the Pole and the Muscles, and yet by a
Tumor of these the interior Muscles of the Laring is pressed together, and all
the entrance is stopped.

The Causes of all is Chollerick or Sanguine defluction which flows down into
these seats, and brings either an Erysipelus or a Phlegmon.

Or Angina is wont otherwise to be divided when the internal Muscles of the
Throat are inflamed with a great straitness of Respiration, but also when the
external are inflamed.

Again, when the internal Muscles of the Face are taken with a Phlegmon, and
does very much hinder the swallowing, and at length the external parts of the
Jaws and Chin are besieged with an Inflammation.

Nota, The Bastard is without a Fever, this is produced when there is a
petuitous distillation falling into the Jaws and Muscles of the Neck, and then
perchance there is a Tumor, but without redness, heat or a Fever.

Hitherto belongs that Species of an Angina, which is produced by no proper
Affect, but when the Vertebraes of the Neck loosened within the Jaws and
entrance of the swallow or Throat do swel, and is made more strait, it is known
by this that the Neck is hollowed within, the Sick grievously afflicted with
Pain; also a fall or a stroke went before, or the Humor has loosened the
bands of the Vertibraes.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Description of a Frenzy.
APhrensie is a perpetual or continual Delirium, taking its original from an
Inflammation of the Membranes of the Brain: The Causes of a Frenzy is
Chollerick Blood, fallen out of the Vessels transpiration; being intercepted it
putrifies in the Membranes of the Brain, external Causes increasing the
Distempers are hot Air, the rise of the Sun, Strong Drinks over heating and
inflaming the Brain, Anger, a Contusion or a Wound.

The Signs of a Frenzy are a perpetual Delirium or prattling, and talking
Idle, Watchings, a continual Fever, the Respiration is low and frequent, if it
comes from an Inflammation of the transverse partition of the Brain, but great
and rare in a true Frenzy; some are true, which we have here described;
others are Bastard Phrensies which are called Paraphrenities, and that is when
hot Intemtemperatures are communicated to the Brains, either from the whole
Body, or in burning Fevers, or from an Inflammation from some one part, viz. of
the Stomach, Liver, Lungs, and very often from the Diaphragma or Mid^iff, from
the Inflammation of which there is usually stirred up a Frenzy, resembling a
true Phrenitis: A Frenzy is a most accute Affect, which oftentimes kills in
seven days.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Melancholy Madness.
THe Melancholy is a Delirium joined with fear, sadness or sorrow without a
manifest Cause, and without a Fever, and it is either a deprivation of the
Imagination and Ratiocination, arising from from a Melanchollick Phantasm, by
which he is detained in his thought by one Cogitation without a furious anger
and a Fever, with sadness and fear; the original of this Disease depends upon
a certain disposition of the Animal Spirits produced from the mixtion of a
Melancholy Humor, to which there follows the sad dark Phantasms, which
afterward rouling the Objects to the Intellect, do stir up this doting and
anguish of Mind. They who have this evil Disease are sad and solitary, very
fearful and stubborn, which from certain Phantasms to themselves, which neither
are nor can be; they imagine many false things, they fear things not be feared,
they sudden and disquiet the Mind without a cause, they are silent, Morose and
suspicious, they have hunger above what is usual, they sigh often, the
Respiration is slow and seldom, and so is also the Pulse, they speak absurdly.

Some are primarily affected from the Brain. Some by consent of the whole Body.
Others again are called Hypocondriack, and do return by Circuits or Intervals.
And lastly others are thus by a Symhathy of the Womb.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Mania.
A Mania, ab insaniendo, by the Latins furor or insania, it is a Delirium
without intermission, and without a Fever, but joined with a certain fearce
rage, it arises from a hot and fiery disposition of the Spirit, and perchance
accompanied with a venomous and malignant quality. Authors will have this
Disposition arise from Atra-bilis. They which labor under this Disease are
searce and unruly, unless they be stopped with Chains they tear their Clothes,
and like unto great and fearce Beasts they do violence with Teeth, Nails and
Fists, neither do they spare themselves; moreover they sleep very little, they
have a stupendous strength of Body, a noise or sounding in the Ears, dullness
of the head, a shining splendour in the Eyes, sadness and long cares having
preceded, anger upon a light occasion, the Eyes set and flxed upon the Objects
they behold, much inclining to filthy and foolish laughter, a suppression of
the Months and Hemorhods: These do show the approach of this Disease. Sometimes
a Mania is produced from External Causes, such as these, Witchcrafts,
Nightshade, the bite of Mad-digs or Wolves, and sometimes it comes by consent
of the Womb, and then it is called furor uterinus.

CHAP. XL. The Palpitation of the Heart.
PAlpitatio Cordis, it is an immoderate and violent Concussion of the Heart,
which being troublesome to it, it endeavors to shake off; facultas motrix does
occasion this; some troublesome matter stirring of it up, which do stir or vex
the Heart, such as vapors and flatuousness in malignant Fevers, suppressio
mensium Hypochondriack Melancholy approaching the Heart, also putrid and sharp
Humors, and too copious, and so Gravel and Worms, for such as these be many
times generated in the Heart, and then it does necessarily induce a Palpitation
of the Heart, and also Tumors arising in the Praecordium, Blood effused from
Wounds to the Heart, and also a nefect of vital Spirits, and preternatural heat
in the Heart, as they stir up by a more vehement motion, so also a Palpitat^on
which is a depraved motion ensues.

The External Causes are a vehement Motion, and Exercises of Body, too much
heat and anger, over much craming, Poisons being taken, too hot Bathings, and
Passions of the Mind do oftentimes precipitate the Sick by swounding to death,
viz. the Motion of the heart being interrupted.

CHAP. XLI. Worms.
LVmbrici, or Worms are wont to be in all the parts of the Body, but chiefly in
the Intestines, from a gross and clammy Phlegm, which is corrupted and seated in
^he common Bowel, they are stirred up, and receive life from the abundance of
inbred heat, by the Example of other Animals, which have their Life from a
putrid Matter by the help a of Celestial Heat, according to the various Figure
of the putrefying Matter. So here are various Species of Worms, some long and
r^und, which are wont to be begotten in the superior and thinner Bowels, and
these be the most frequent of all, and sometimes they creep up into the
Stomach, and and thence by the Gula they ascend into the Mouth it self, from
whence, being open, they spring forth. Others again be shorter and broad, which
oftentimes do stick one unto another in a wonderful manner, and these are
called Cucurbites, and sometimes this broad Worm, with the mutual adhesion of
them, which for the similitude is called (...), which are as long and broad as
Women's Swaiths and Fill its; so that they extend themselves as long as the
thicker Intestines. And lastly others are exceeding small and thin, and are
called Ascarides, which for the most part are seated in the intestina recta.
Crudity and Gluttany, and the use of such things as do easily putrify, do
administer matter to all. Children a little grown are often afflicted with
these. Signs of Worms be these, a stinking of the Mouth, and such as is urging
toward a soureness; the Stools resemble Cow Dung, sometimes a Fever, which
returns often in the same day with trouble and fainting, nauseousness,
vomiting, and unquenchable thirst, the Cheeks are red by turns and pale again,
an Itching of the Nose, a Gnashing of the Teeth, a dull heaviness and pain of
the Head, talking idle, and Epileptical Convulsions, a dry Cough, and many
times afflicted with pain in the Belly, and it puffed up and distended, awaking
from sleep with fear and horror; as also a Dog-like Hunger, the Belly sometimes
decreased, the Pulse is unequal; Ascarides are known by the troublesome Itch of
the Fundament, and the Excrements oftentimes appears besprinkled with them, and
after they bring most cruel Symptoms, but the Ascarides are less hurtful.

CHAP. XLII. A continual Fever.
A Fever is described by some to be an inordinate Motion of the Blood, and its
over much rage with heat and thirst, and with many other Symptoms wherewith the
Aeconomia of it is troubled; some are continual, and some are intermitting; the
accession of a continual Fever extends to many days, unless it has its own
times of remission, and of Exarcerbation, but never of intermission; the
enraged Blood induces a continual Fever in a Three fold manner.

The First is, when the subtle and spiritual portion of the Blood waxes too
hot, and is affected with a certain kindling heat, which therefore does agitate
the rest of the Cruor, and does incite it into an Orgasmum. And so the kindling
fury and heat is stirred up more than before in the whole Body.

But because the Spirits are in the only fault, the b^^ning and inordinan^sie
is wont to dep^^t in a short time of its own accord: Hence it is that this
Fever is terminated within a day, and it is extended beyond Three days, and
therefore it is called Febris Ephemera.

The second manner of waxing hot is when the Sulphurous or Oily part of the
Blood being over heated begins to be hot, for then it waxes immoderately hot in
the Vessels, and oftentimes kindles in the Heart by its own Flame produces a
very intense heat in the whole Body; and so that kind of Fever is produced,
which is vulgarly called a putrid Symochus, which is Symtomatical or Essential;
that is called Symtomatical which draws its original from some other certain
Disease first stirred up in the Body; and that is a Fever of that sort which
has its dependence upon an an Angina Quinsie, Pleurifie, Perihneumonia, a
Wound-Ulcer or Imposthume, either in any principal ot neighboring part.

The Essential is wont to be divided into a Causus Quotidian, Terti^n and a
Quartan, according to the diverse Discrusia Sanguinis or intemperatur of the
Blood, the supply and kind of nourishing Juice so sooner or later arising to a
plenitude of swelling bulkiness.

But the Third Degree, and that (which does constitute the distinct Species of
a continual Fever) is stirred up from a certain malignant and venomous ferment,
with which the Mass of Blood is defiled, and the Spirit and Sulphurous parts
takes fire together, and their kindling heat not first alaid, which may be
either the malignant matter taken, is cast out of doors, or from the corrupt
venom of it, does induce a Coagulation, or as it were a certain putrefaction of
the Blood, and by which the circulation is hindered, and the vital Spirit
extinguished, and after this manner are made malignant Fevers, small Pox,
Measl^s* and also the Pestilens.

But the ^ot continual Fever differs from that which constitutes an
intermitting in this, that in that the disorders of the Spirit and Sulphur, or
both, and freely by their own accord without the mixture o^ any other thing, do
take Flame, and wonderfully Boil, but it is not so in an intermitting Fever.

That most Excellent Man Francis Sylvius thinks the Cause of all continual
F^v^rs to be the Bill or Water, (under which he comprehends the Pancreatical
Juice) and so that ^^^vil is brought with it to the Heart, (...) that exciting
such a viscious Effervesc^^^ia in the right Ventricle of the Heart, an^ thence
is produced continually a more frequent pulse.

Too great Exercises of Body, perturbation of Mind, the Ambient Air, the heart
of the Sun or Summer, drinking of Wine, the use of prepared meats, Watch, over
much Labor, a Bubo, a Wound, do all induce to the every days Fever, the plenty
of Milk to Women in Childbed, hot seasons of the Year, unaccustomed Exercise,
strong habit of Body do all dispose to it.

The forging Causes of a putrid Fever a^e hot seasons, a strong and moist habit
of Body, a youthful age, a high and rich Diet, the continual drinking of rich
Wine, a tempestuous Spring and Summer, a Cacochymial Body, Meats of evil Juice;
but above all this is worth your observation, that the frequent letting of
Blood renders Men more apt to a Fever, for this reason, tha^ the larger
quantity of Sulphur, which is ^^^^ied in the Blood, is subdued, but the Salt
ought to be stoped from its fearsenes^.

Those things (...) brings the lurking disposition of this Fever into act are
chiefly Transpiration, (...) Transpiratio, being hindered, and much gusling;
these do not only induce an exceeding fermitation of the Blood, but does also
administer a Nitrosulphurous Matter, apt to burning and kindling, as Food to
the flaming Blood, but because that Massy heap of the Blood, being increased,
it swells, and as i^ were inspired with a certain ferment (de novo) it
exceedingly boyls.

In this Fever there are Four Seasons to be observed, and by which staches as
it were the whole course of it is performed, and they be these, the beginning,
the increase, the state and declination, in which some sooner, some slower, and
in a longer time are wont to be dissolved, the beginning ought to be computed
from the time, the Blood begins to wax hot, and the Sulphurous part begins to
take heat, until the hotness and fury of the Blood has overspread the whole
Mass of the Cruor; and thence it is that oftentimes the Heat and Cold does
assault, viz. by reason of the admixtion of the Crude Juice with the Blood.

The augmentation shall be when the kindling of the Fever does occupy the
whole Mass of the Blood, Viz. The Sulphur or ^leaginous part of the Blood being
made hot, and waxing hot by parts, at length being like moist Hay laid up in a
Rick after a long heating breaks out altogether into a Flame, and the Mass with
the Excrements or adust particles, which increases the fermentation, is
aggravated, at this time the Sick complains of intolerable thirst; moreover
they are afflicted with pain of the Head, continual Watchings, and oftentimes
Delirium, a Frenzy, and a Convulsive Motion, there is a loathing of all
Aliments, or they are cast forth by Vomit, there is a bitterness of the Mouth,
an ungrateful Savor, a roughness of the Tongue, a vehement swift Pulse, the
Urine exceeding Red, and often^imes Muddy, and replenished with contents.

The State is another time of the Disease, by which Nature endeavors a Crises
or Expulsion of the ^dust Matter remaining of the burning of the Blood; for
after the deflagration of the Blood, and nourishing Juice, this adust Matter is
born in so great a quantity, it growing turgent, that it irritates Nature to an
Expulsion, which is called a Crises; the Cause of this is rather to be fetched
from thence, than from the ^fluence of the Moon.

The Declination follows the Crises, in which in the kindling of the Blood
(languishing) it is not so hot, and being very powerful with the Vital Spirit,
that now it subdueth the residue of this adust Matter, and by little and little
casts it out, until it be restored to the former Vigor, or with the same too
much depressed Spirit, more infected with the adust Excrements, and so it
passes away foul and impoverish^d; so that it does not assimilate the
Nutritive Juice; nor is it fit to circulation, nor to come to the Heart, nor to
sustain the Lamp of Life.

CHAP. XLIII. An intermitting Fever.
AN intermitting Fever is not less violent and intense, during the time of the
Fit there is in this a furious heat of Blood, as in a continual, yet this is
not peculiar to an intermitting, it has a certain time of intermission, and
for the most part every Fit from the time of the cold or shaking, and the Fits
return with certain States and Periods of time; so that it can hardly be
measured, more exactly by a Clock or Dial; but this furious heat of the Blood
constituting this Fever does depend upon the assimilation of the nutritive
Juice, the vice of the Blood it self being fettered; for whilst the nutritive
Juice is not assimilated with the Blood; for although the Particles do persist
in the Mass of Blood, as a Heterogeneus, and not of the same Stock or Lineage;
yet now it ^^ Circulated with it without tumult or trouble, and saturated with
it to a swelling up of the Mass of Cruor, and so that presently boyleth, and
catches a feverish heat, with which it is subdued or thrust out of doors, as a
Hetrogeneous thing, from the society of which when the Blood is freed the
intermission of the feverish heat follows at length afterward from a fresh
supply of this Juice a new Fit is induced; for the cause of this cold and
shivering in the Fit of this Fever is stirred up, seems to be the fluor and
sweling, or puffing up, Viz. of the nutritive Juice degenerated into a nitrous
and acetous Matter, wherewith the flowing Spirits and Heat are dulled and
blunted, from thence there is perceived in the whole body a sense of cold, and
the nervous Bodies irritated are stirred up into tremblings, but afterward
with these nitrous Particles being thrust forth from every part into the
Superficies of the Body; the Blood being now freed from the weight and
oppression of them, do gather it self together, and getting up again, do begin
to shine forth, and so that most intense heat succedeth, which persisteth till
that Fermitive Matter be well nigh burnt, brought under and subtillated, and
Evaporateth by sweat, and insensible transpiration; but why the Fits do return
often in the appointed intervals of times, such a reason as this may be given
for it, because an equal portion of the nutritious Juice is continually
administered to the Blood by flowing into the Vessels.

Franciscus Sylvius thinks the cause of all intermitting Fevers to be the
pancreatical Juice stagnant in some part of it or more: The leading Vessels of
the Pancreas being obstructed, and by its delay in that place is made sharper;
and that acid Acrimonia, and by the Phlegm more or less viscid is the cause of
the said obstruction, the way being prepared, penetrating by force, and being
poured out into the thin Intestine, and their stirring up with the Choler and
Phlegm the fury of the intermitting Fevers, are divided into Tertian, Quartan
and Quotidian, the Tertian repeats its Fit every Third day, and if it be
Exquisite, it begins with a vehement shivering, to which a sharp and a biting
heat succeeds, which is turned into a sweat, and the Fit is finished within
Twelve Hours.

The Causes disposing to this Fever are a Hot and Chollerick Temper, a youthful
Age, a heating Diet, the more hot constitution of the Air, Watchings, Cares,
Anger, Fasting, over much Exercise; sometimes the Jaundise comes upon a
Tertian, and then the Fever is discharged.

What Haley has written is taught for a very vulgar Experiment in persons
laboring with a Tertian, that if Ulcers and Pustles breaks out in the Lips and
Nose, it presages the termination of the Fevers; for indeed it is as it were a
Crises; also a Flux of the Belly coming upon a Tertian the Matter Concocted
there dissolves it.

Again a Quotidian is that wherein the Fit is wont to return every day, and
oftentimes it returns in the Hours within night, and without shivering, but
with Cold only, or with a light or easy shivering; from hence the Heat
transacted in the time of the Cold is gentle and very little burning; the Fit
is protracted longer, and oftentimes it is wont to endure Eighteen or Twenty
Hours.

Lastly, that is a Quartan returning every Fourth day, it begins with yauning
and gaping, and a Pain of the whole Body, then there follows a Cold, after that
a quivering and shivering, with which the Bones seem as if they were broke,
where there is perceived a ^^in, which from Quartan is named (...) the pain of
the Bones, the heat succeeding is very troublesome, but more remiss than in a
Tertian, and Sweat does oftentimes conclude the Fit: This Fever does wont to
continue longest, and the which begins in Autumn, and for the most part
continues the whole Winter, and departs not until the Spring, unless by
accident; and so some do continue from one Year to many Years; we have known
some has been extended to Seven Years, and more; but in Summer they be
shorter. Those things which dispose to this Fever are Autumn, the Seacoast,
the end of Summer, a Melancholy Temper, and such who by an evil manner of
Diet, obnoxious to a Hypochondriack affection.

But the cause of these constituted Periods seem to be ascribed to the diverse
constitutions of the Blood, Viz. by which from a due temper it is perverted,
one while into sharp, and anon into an acid or austere disposition; for which
cause the diverse intemperatures of it, the nourishable Juice newly brought does
more or less depart from a maturation, and degenerates sooner or later into a
matter apt to ferment.

CHAP. XLIV. A Hectic Fever.
FEbris Hectica, that is a Habitual Fever, or a Fever conversant in the Habit,
it is a preternatural Hcat in the substance of the Heart, sticking and burning
in the solid parts, drying and consuming, and brings the whole Body to extreme
leanness. There are Three Degrees of this Fever.

The first is, when the dewy moisture is dried and consumed.

The second is, when the fleshy and fatty Substance, is depopulated, and
perishes, and in this the Extenuation of the Body is evident.

The Third is, when the Febra's and Membranous Substance is wasted, and the
whole Body waxes lean, then follows Facies Hypocratica, the ghastly
Countenance, and the Bones only appear covered with the Skin: This is the true
wasting and Hectic, which of the Greeks is called Marasmodes, and which is
incurable.

The internal Causes of the Hectic are burning and continual Fevers, Ulcers,
and continual inflammations of the Liver, Stomach, Lungs, Reins and other
Bowels. Those things which refer to outward Causes are such things as can
generate other Fevers, such things as do very much either consume the humid
Substance in the solid Members, or very much stirs up a continual heat, or are
apt to perform both, to which the promptitute and disposition of the subject,
and the continual disposition of heating do make to the receiving of this
preternatural heat: Such are the heat of the Sun or fire, vehement Exercise,
heating Meats and Drinks, immoderate Excretions, as a Diarrhea, Dysenteria,
Animi Pathemata, or more vehement passion of the Mind. And lastly Hunger, a
more hot and dry Habit of Body is more apt to take this Fever. The beginning
Hectic is not easily known, the other kind is difficultly Cured. The Signs of
all Hecticks are common, the heat of the whole Body is equal, and of which they
do not complain, nor do they understand themselves to be Feverish; it first
appears weak, by reason of the fewness of the Vapors; but if thou will apply
thy hand longer there appears a sharpness and gnawing heat, by reason of the
dryness and solidity of the subject, and greater in the Arteries than in other
parts, by reason of the communion of the Heart; and this Heat increases one
Hour or two after Meat is received, no other ways waxing hot than Calx Vive, if
Water or any such thing be poured upon it, the Pulse small, frequent and swift,
the Urine oleaginous with a branny sedement.

CAAP. XLV. The Rickets.
RAchites, the Rickets, a Disease unknown to the Ancients, which yet at this
day no Disease is more frequent in this Kingdom; it is a cold and moist
intemperature of the whole Spinal Marrow entering the Skul, the arise of all the
Nerves, and of all the Membranous and Febrous parts of the whole Body, with the
defect and feebleness of the Spirits, and tone of the parts visciated; the
cause and parts primarily affected, do fetch their definition from this, whose
Signs and Symptoms are looseness and softness of the parts primarily affected,
debility and pining, or enervation of the parts serving to Motion, weakness and
feebleness of the Joints, the Head bigger than is meet, the Face fuller and
more florid, the Musculous parts wax lean, certain Protuberations and Nodes
about certain of the Joints, mostly in the Rist, and in the Extremity of the
Ribs, a bowing or incurvating of some of the Bones, which more frequently
happens to the Bones of the Cubit, Shins, Thighs and Shoulders, sharpness and
straitness of the Breast, Bunches and Tumors of the Abdomen, Repletion and
Tention of the Hypochondries, a frequent Cough, difficult Respiration, and many
other evils of the Lungs, as the stuffing of them, hard Tumors, Imposthumes,
Inflammations growing or sticking to the Pleura, a weak and a feeble Pulse; the
common Cause of which seems to be an unequal and unprofitable Nutrition; the
Antecedent Causes are beside the falt in the Seed of the Parents defiled with
the like disposition, redundant viscious Humors in the Body, Phlegm, Choler,
and chiefly Melancholy; but the Procatarctical Errors committed in the use of
res non naturales: Infants are taken with this Disease till they are Two Years
and a half old, and sometimes after.

CHAP. XLVI. Of a Convulsion.
A Convulsion in Greek called (...), according to the Celsus is a distention of
the Nerves: Or thus, a Convulsion is a continual and involuntary contraction of
the Nerves and Muscles toward their original, upon which there follows a
stiffness, a deprivation of the Figure and Form of the Part, with a most cruel
Pain, the Part affected is the Muscle, which is the proper Instrument of
voluntary Motion.

The nearest Cause of this Convulsion is an Irritation of the Nervous Parts,
from any thing molesting and troubling the Muscle, the Animal Faculty,
performing the Motion, being drawn into consent.

The Material Causes are any Humors; (Phlegm only excepted) so that they have
acquired also a certain occult enemical disposition in the Nerve; as also the
Vapors and Humors in the N^rves, and Chollerick Disease, which can pull the
Nervous Parts, and become a true cause of Convulsion.

A Convulsion is either of the whole Body, or it is of more or fewer parts;
that which is of the whole Body does constitute Three Species or Sorts; the
first is called (...), when the Head, Neck, and upper parts of the Back is
pulled together. The second (...), is when those parts, or the lower parts of
the Spine are vexed. The third is (...), that wherein the Neck and whole Body
appears stiff and bowed into neither part; but these last Species of the Cramp
are very rare.

Moreover there are other Species of the Convulsion, which are wont to be
called Flatulent, which by the Italians is called Crampa, and vulgarly with us
Cramp; this happens oftentimes to the Muscles of the Shoulders, Shins,
Fingers, Hands and Feet; and this done with great Pain; that which is stirred
up from Flatulentsy is not so dangerous; for that is easily taken away by
frixion only.

CHAP. XLVII. Of a Rhumatism.
THe Rhumatick Affect is near of Kin to the Gout, in which not only the Joints,
(as in the Gout) but in the whole Body, viz. in the middle spaces between the
Joints, the Muscles, Membranes, and the whole Habit of the Body is tormented
the Body is tormented with most cruel pains; this rises from a serous Humor,
accompanied with a great Acrimonia, and sometimes there is joined with it a
Flatus; also the Internal parts of the Body, as the Stomach, Intestines, Womb,
Lungs etc. do sometimes sadly Experience the Rhumatick Affect.

The Medicines proper for every Disease* and first for the Scurvie.
^ most Excellent Distilled Water.
TAke the Bark of the Root of Cappers, Bark of the Root of the Ash-tree, Tops
of Tammarise, Roots of Polypodium, of the Oak of each Two Ounces, Scurvy Grass,
Watercresses, the tops of Balm, Agremony, Ceterach, Germander, Chamapyteos, of
each Two handfulls, the Seeds of Fennel, Anis, Carduus Benedictus, of each Two
Drams and a half, Elder-flowers and Epithymi of each Two Pugils, the Flowers of
Broom, Centaury the less, St. John's wort, of each Two Pugils, Oxymel,
Scilliticum One Pound, White Generous Wine Four Pound; mix these together in a
convenient Vessel for the space of 24 Hours, then let them be strained and
pressed, and the Liquor Distilled in Ashes to a dryness. The Dose of this Water
is Six Ounces every day Three Hours before Dinner.

Or, Take the Juice of Garden Scurvygrass, Brooklime, of each Two Pound, the
best Sugar Two Pound: Let it be well depurated with the White of an Egg, and
boiled together to the consistance of a Syrup. Take of this Syrup Two or Three
Spoonfulls every Morning and Evening.

For a Gonorrhea.
TAke Liquorish Six Drams, the Seeds of Myrtle, Coriander Prepared, Plantin,
Agnus Castus, of each One Dram, the Seeds of White Poppies Two Scruples, French
Barley One Handful. Let all these be boiled in steeled Water, and of this take
half a Pint every Morning.

For a Dropsy.
TAke choice Rhubarb One Dram, Soldanella Two Drams: Let this be administered in
Four Ounces of Wormwood Water.

For the Hypochondriack Affection.
TAke the Roots of Cichory, Fennel, Smallage, Flower-de-luce of Florence, of
each One Ounce, Enulacampain Six Drams, Asarabecca Two Drams, Liquorish One
Ounce and a half, the Bark of Tamarise, Roots of Cappers, Elder and dwarf
Elder, of each One Dram, Chamaepyteos, Chamaedryos Veronica, Maidenhair,
Ceterach Bugloss of both sorts, Fumitory, tops of Sparagus, of each One
Handful, Flowers of Bugloss, Broom, Tamarise, of each one Pugil, the Seeds of
Anis, Fennel, of each Two Drams, Seeds of Caraway, Parsley, of each one Dram,
Red Cicers One Pugil, Raisons of the Sun stoned One Ounce and a half, Prunes
Five in No; Boil these in a sufficient quantity of Water, adding toward the end
a third part of Wine in Eight Pound of the strained Liquor, put in the Leaves
of the best Senna, Roots of Polypodium, of the Oak of each Two Ounces, Turbith
half an Ounce, the Seeds of Carthamus beaten One Ounce and a half, Cittrin
Mirabalans and Cheps, of each Three Drams* blind the Rhubarb up in a Rag, and
with Schananth one Dram, and Cinnamon two Drams, after a light decoction add the
Syrup of Apples four Ounces, Sugar a sufficient quantity, boil it to the
consistance of a Syrup. Of this take one Ounce and a half in the decoction of
Red Cicers every other or every third Morning.

The Histerick Passion.
TAke Cinnamon Water, the Water of Orange Flowers, of each four Ounces, Castor
four Grains; mix these together, and add to it three drops of the Oil of Amber,
and take two Spoonfuls before, or in the Fit, and it will dissolve the Fit.

For the Jaundise.
TAke dried Horehound one handful, the best Rhubarh slicid one Dram, Schananth
cut small five Grains, the best Saffron three Grains, Species Diarrhodon
Abbatis one Scruple. Let these be all tied in a Rag, and infuse a sufficient
quantity of Beer for a night, and drink a draught of it every Morning and
Evening.

For the Chollick.
TAke the Conserve of Rosemary-flowers two Ounces, Conserve of Roses, Species
Diacumi and Diagalanga, of eaeh two Drams, Syrup of Mints a sufficient
quantity, to make it into the form of an Electuary, of which let the Sick take
the quantity of two Nutmegs three or four times in a day*

For the Inflammation of the Liver.
TAke Cassia newly Extracted one Ounce, Rhubarb one Scruple: Of this make a
Bolus by mixing it together. Take this in the Morning, and the next day open a
Vein in the right Arm according to the strength of the Sick.

Then take the Leaves of Agrimony, Ver^nica, Dodor, Scabias, Endive, Cichory,
D^ndelion, Wood Sorrel, Violet Leaves, Fumatory, Chamaepyteos, of each one
handful, Wormwood half a handful. Boil these in a sufficient quantity of Water,
and then strain and sweete^ it as you please to drink a draught three ^^ four
times in a day.

For the Green Sickness
TAke the Roots of Peo^^y, and also the Seeds hulled, of each one Dram, Red
Roses half a Dram, a Nutmeg tosted two Scruples, Bay Berries half a Dram, the
Powder of Schaenanth and of Saffron, ^f each one Scruple* the inward ^kin of
the Gizard of a Cock one Dram, Crocus Marti^ Aperitive one Dram and a half,
Cinnamon one Scruple; make of it all a fine Powde^, of which as much as will lie
upon a six Pence may be taken every Morning, and Exercise upon it to the
warming of the whole Body.

For the Peribneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs.
TAke Julip of Violets three Ounces, Syrup of Jujubes one Ounce, Violet Water
half an O^nce, Manus Christi half an Ounce. ^ak^ this three times in a day.

Take Unguent Resumptivum spread upon a (...), and apply it the pained side.

For a Pleurifie.
TAke the Syrup of Violets two Ounces, Penids one Ounce, Syrup of Liquorish
half an Ounce; mix these together, and lick of this often with a
Liquorish-stick.

Or, take Scabious Water and Enulacampain Water, of each two Ounces, Syrup of
Violet and Coltsfoot, of each one Ounce; mix it, and of this let the Sick take
twice or thri^e in a day.

For an Impyemate or Ulcerated Lungs.
TAke Sanicle, Bugle, Scabious, Bittony, St. John's wort, Carduus Benedictus,
Mouse-ear, Burnet, Peruwincle, Agrimony, Plantin, of each one handful, the Seed
of St. John's wort, and Carduus Benedictus, of each half a Dram, the Flowers of
Roses, Burrage, Bugloss, Violets, of each one Pugil; boil it in a Hydromel, of
which, being strained, let the Sick take Six Ounces every day.

For a Catarrh or Defluction of Rheum.
TAke the Powder of Amber, Mastick, of each two Drams, of the Whitest Agarick
one Dram, round Birthwort Roots half a Dram, with the Syrup of the Juice of
Betony make a Mass for Pills, and take a Dram made into Pills in the Morning.

For a Dyssentery.
TAke the Seeds of Plantin dried and powdered, Troches of Carabe or Amber,
Troches of Spidum, of each half an Ounce, Hartshorn burnt one Scruple and a
half, Red Coral one Scruple. Let these be subtly powdered and divided into
three parts, and one part given with Red Wine, and the other with a Decoction
of the Seeds of Plantain twice in a day.

For a Dyarrhea.
TAke Mastick two Ounces, dissolve it in Oil of Roses and Wax half an Ounce:
Let them be well mixed into the form of a Liniment; let this be spread upon a
Linen Cloth, and applied to the Belly.

Take Rhubarb one Dram, Citrin Mirabalans half a Dram, Yellow Sanders half a
Scruple: Let them be put into Plantain Water, and when it has stood one night,
let it be strained, put to it of Rhubarb Elect half, a Dram, Syrup of Roses one
Ounce; mix it and let the Sick take it twice a day.

For the Celiack and Lienteria or Flux from the Spleen.
TAke two Spoonfulls of the Syrup of Quinces thrice in a day.

For the Asthma.
^^ke the Spirit of Aniseeds two parts, Mel Scilliticum one part, Cinnamon Water
half a part; mix it, and of this take half a Spoonful at a time.

Or, take Roots of Liquorish four Ounces, the Roots of Flower-de-luce two
Ounces, Enulacompain one Ounce, of Angelica half an Ounce, a prepared Squil one
Ounce, the Seeds of Fennel, Anis, of each one Ounce, Nettle S^^ds, Angelica
Seeds, of each one Dram, Seeds of Watercresses one Dram, Spirits of Aniseed
half an Ounce, Honey half a Poun^^ Sug^r one Pound, Cinnamon six Dr^ms good
generous White Wind a Gallon. Let (...) ^e put into a convenient Vessel or
Runlet to be preserved for use; the Asthmatick may drink a draught of it every
day twice.

For the Joynt-Gout.
TAke Cariocostinum two Drams, Syrup of purging Thorn two Drams, Elder Water
two Ounces; mix these and take it in the Morning, and keep your Chamber, and
drink some Posset between your Stools.

Take the Oil of Whelps, Oil of Lint-seeds, Oil of Bays, the Marrow of a Heart,
of each half an Ounce; mix it together, and it will become a Liniment, with
which anoint the pained side every Morning and Evening.

For the Quinsie.
TAke the Leaves of Plantain, Daises, of each one handful, Red Roses; let these
be boiled in three pound of common Water, to which add one pound of Plantain
Water, three Ounces of Scabious Water, Lint-seeds, Fenegreek-seeds, and the
Seeds of Mallows, of each one Dram; boil these altogether to the consumption of
the third part, and then being strained, add to it the Syrup of Mulberries, and
Honey of Roses of each two Ounces, and with this let the Sick Gargle often.

Take Oil of sweet Almonds one Ounce, Capon-grease, new Butter washed in Violet
Water, of each half an Ounce, the Musalig of Lint-seed, and Fenegreek-seed,
Seeds of Mallows, Marshmallows Extracted with Camomil Water, of each two
Drams, a a little Yellow Wax, let a piece of Lauud moistened in it be applied
to the pained place.

For the Palpitation or beating of the Heart.
TAke the Heart of a Heart or a Goat, the Heart of a tame or wild Hog, wash them
in Malligo Wine, then cut them into little pieces, then add the Leaves of Balm
and Marjoram, of each one handful, Bugloss, Burrage, Bugloss, Violet, Red
Roses, Eazil-seeds one Dram, Citrin-seeds half a Dram, Cloves two Drams,
Cinnamon six Drams, Mace, Yellow Sanders, and Wood of Alloes, of each one Dram,
the things to be cut, let them be Cut, and the things to be beaten, let them be
beaten, add to this two Pound of Malligo Wine, the Juice of Lemon one Ounce;
and let these be distilled in Balneo, until the Water sends forth no more
odor; and of this let the Sick take three or four Spoonfulls when they please.

For the Worms.
T^ke Worm-seed, Corallina, Hartshorn; of eacb equal parts, (...) being finely
powdered, let the Child take as much as will lie upon a Groat.

For the Rickets.
TAke the Leaves of Osmond Royal, Hartstongue, Liver-wort, Ceterach, the
Flowers of Tamarise, of each one handful, Raisons two Ounces, White Sanders,
and Red Sassafras, of each two Drams, Coriander Seeds one Dram, Mace one
Scruple, the tops of Sage half a handful; boil it in a sufficient quantity of
Water to three pounds, and let it be sweetened with honey for its common drink.

THe Medicines which follow are those with which we have performed great and
stupendous Cures upon Diseases of long standing, occasioned from great and
intricate Obstructions in plethorick Bodies, weakened and infeebled in Body and
Mind, and out of all hope in themselves, and after they have passed long and
various courses in Physic, and these not one or two, as by chance, but upon
very ^any, and failing none, (where Gods decree did not prohibit) and indeed
such En^^miums were due to one only Medici^e of Paracelsus, and that which no
doubt was far short of other of his Arcana's, as indeed we are able to affirm
the like, having Experience of the very same, and this Encomium given by a
person who set himself to throw as much dirt as he could upon his Master; yet
his desert extorted this Commendation from him, that his little Pills he
administered as a Divine Medicine, he scrupled not to affirm, that by that
Medicine he could put life into those that were as good as dead, and that while
this Servant was with him, he made good in some Experiments.

What then (if this be so) may be said not only of the same, but many far more
excellent than that, and which have not only a power to revive, but also to
enter into the inmost parts of Man's Body, and there in a friendly ^anner
appease the enraged Archeus or innate Spirit of a tenuate incide Cut, dissolves
all tarterous and Coagulated Filths, opens stubborn and long Obstructions,
cleanses and purifies the Blood, the Chariot of Life and Vital Spirits,
seperates between good and bad, summons them from all quarters to appear at the
general Randisvous, and when fitted by preparing these alienated Humors, or
Torterous Filths (call them what you please) to cast them out by the appointed
passage as foreign Guests, not Homogenies to our Nature, and consequently not
fit to inmate themselves there, by which means Obstructions are opened, Nature
unburned, the Faculties set at liberty to perforn their respective Offices, the
Blood Circulated, Nature revived, strength restored, the whole Body returned to
its pristine vigor, and in some Disease Cured, so the Man repreved from the
approaching Execution for a time, from that more certain Sentence; (it is
appointed for all men once to die, and after death the Judgmenr) and though you
have before Medicines proper to these Diseases; yet for the public good we
propound what we before promised.

Of those Medicines which performs the things mentioned, mowing down the most
stubborn and truculent Disease, rooting out their Seeds, that by good Diet, and
the due use of res non naturales before mentioned, for that end that new and
better fruit may grow in the room.

The first is our Pillulae Solares, or our Solar Pills, which are so called,
because they are of the Nature and Operation of the Sun; for as the Sun is
among the Stars, so is this Pill to other Medicines; the Son has Light in it
self, and being the Fountain of Light, communicates Light to others, and
radiates the whole Universe with its Beams, attenuates and rarifies the thick,
dissipates the thin, it Worms the Earth, the Womb of Vegitables and Minerals,
it excites the whole Universe to perform its Office to which it is destinated.
So to be short, these Pills of ours in like manner sheds forth their power in
our Bodies, they open stubborn Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancra's
Missentery, Midriff, purges the Head, cleanses the whole Body of Phlegm and
Melancholy, takes away Obstructions of the Viscera and Vriters, excites Nature
into act, by which means these Pills Cure the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundies, Agues,
Fevers, King's Evil, Rick^ts, Melancholy, Frenzy, Madness, Stinking-Breath,
Vomiting, stopping of the Stomach, Green Sickness, want of Appetite, kills
Worms; it Cures shortness of Breath, barrenness in Women, Fits of the Mother,
stoppages of their Months, they dispose all filthy stinking Sores, Ulcers and
Fistula's to healing, by mundifying and cleansing the Blood above all other
remedies by altering and taking away thc acidity thereof, and seperating its
Hetrogeneous parts; they resist corruption and putrefaction of Humors; and
these Pills are easy to take being few in number, small in Dose, gentle in
operation, certain in success, being a certain remedy in most Diseases. And
such as have been famous for doing good, and in some, as it was said of the
Sun, they Eradiate the whole Microcosm with their solar Rays, shaving off the
occasional Causes of Disease, and enlivening the Archeus or innate Spirit, and
inabling it to put forth all its power into Acts, by which means the Functions
are set at liberty to perform their respective Offices. Besides these Pills
Cure the Scurvy and Pox above all other Remedies, causing the filthy Scabs to
vanish, and in short time to fall off like Leaves in Autumn; restoring the Body
in statu quo prius, clearing the Skin of all morphewous filths, and reducing it
to its former floridity. They that have this Remedy will want few others, and
for all men's use because cheap in price, and excellent in their Effects.

The next Remedy is our Cordial Wine, which Cures the Scur^y, Leaves Venerea,
Dropsy and Gonorrhea; this Cordial Wine purges the Blood, and frees it from
all watrishness, it opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, purifies the
Blood, promotes its Circulation, comforts the Heart, revives the Spirits, opens
the Pores, causes gentle breathings, and by gentle transpiration frees the Body
from burdensome offending Humors and Filths cast to the Habit, by which means
the Body becomes quick, nimble and sprightly, fit for the performance of its
Offices with agility and pleasure; and as this Wine is of great Virtue, so it
is of small price, and therefore a Remedy for the Poor.

The third Remedy is our Anodyn, which puts forth superlative Effects in the
Gout, Stone, and almost in all Diseases, and especially in the most deplorable,
it is a most Rich high Cordial, comforting and reviving the Spirit in the most
languishing Disease, seewtens the Blood, thickens Rheums, stops and totally
takes away Catarrhs, strengthens the Brain, opens the Pores, causes gentle
transpiration, an Effectual Remedy in all Rheumatisms, giving sweet, delightful
and safe ease in all manner of pain, even in the Stone and Gout, in Excoriation
of the Lungs, and Aspira Arteria, it is a good Remedy by which Consumption and
Vlceration of the Lungs are prevented, and consequently many delivered (to our
Knowledge) from inevitable death.

In Vapors and Fits of the Mother, where all Remedies have failed this has
never. This Remedy dulls and takes away the Orgasmus Sanguinis, which puts the
Womb into such a fury, that no other Remedy will so certainly, safely and
speedily appease it.

This being a Disease so general almost to all the Female Sex, of what
Condition or Degree soever, and that which so miserably afflicts so many,
making their Lives so uncomfortable, and by which means have cause to believe
many are dispatched to the Grave alive, under a bare suspicion that they are
dead, when they are only in a Fit through the ignorance of relation and tender,
these things considered, what a value would this put upon such Remedies as that
has been found to be, in truth time would fail us if we should tell the Times,
Cases and Persons wherein we have put a stop to the most Impetuous Carrear of
the most truculent Disease, Acute, Peracute and Chronical, we could instance in
Fevers, Consumption, and sometimes where according to the Indicium of Diseases,
we have had good reason to believe a beginning Consumption of the Lungs, by
means of this Remedy the Rheums have been thickened, the Brain comforted, the
Blood sweetened, the taste, whether Salt or Acid, of the Catarrh or Snivil
altered and sweetened, the Hectic appeased, the Feverish Morbifick Matter cast
through the Pores, they being gently opened, the Archeus quieted, the Lungs
eased, and a respit being procured to them from violents, occasioned from
perpetual Coughing and Labor to pump up the offending Matter, and this not by
stopping the proper passages of Expectoration and weakening of Nature,
stupifying the senses, but by altering the dsposition of this foreign Guest,
strengthening of Nature, com^orting and reviving of the Spirits, fortifying of
the parts, and especially them most concerned, the Brain and Lungs, cooling the
Fever: This and much more is done, if the Testimony of the Sick may be
believed, by this means as is said we have Cured Beginning Consumption, and
never could perceive the least Vestigium or Footstep of any inconveniensie
arising thence, and therefore this may be called Divine Anodynum for its
apparent and superlative Effects that it puts forth in the most dolorous and
afflicting Distempers, and as in these so in many others.

Our next Remedy is our Laudanum without Opium, which appeases the Archeus,
Eradiates the whole Microcosm with its solar Rays, the Remedy is a true
restorer and preserver of Health, being given four times in a Month, a
preservative, and commonly three times in a week for a Curative; for this
Medicine Eradiates its Virtue through the whole Body, and Expels from it all
Impurites, either sensibly by Sweat or Urine, or insensibly by gentle or
amicable transpiration.

The Fourth is our famous Antidote or Remedy against Convulsions and
Falling Sickness, with two or three Spoonfulls of of which, according to age
and strength we have snatched many from the Jaws of Death, where the Distemper
has baffled the mosr powerful and prevailing Remedies against those Diseases,
Instances of which we shall give you herafter at the latter end of this Book;
and though we have used them for may years, yet to our Knowledge have not
failed where instructions have been observed; this Remedy has no apparent
Operation by either Vomit or Stool, and suitable to any Age or Condition.

Fifthly our sure Balsom for the Asthma, shortness of Bre^th and Consumption;
where this does not good none will, which we have Experienced for many Years as
a sure Remedy easy to take for all Ages or Sexes, a Balsom which we believe
will never corrupt or decay.

The Sixth is our Vegetable Cordial Tincture, whose Virtue will commend it
self, bebeing a high Cordial, and of Volatile parts, friendly to our Microcosm,
next of Kin to our Animal and Vital Spirits, and therefore quickly and easily
assimilated and drawn into Unity with us, and Corroborates the Heart, revives
the Spirit, opens the Pores, and all Obstructions, is singular against
Lipothymia and Syncope, all Swounding and Faintings whatsoever flowing from a
debility of the Spirits, or Obstruction of the Nobler parts, or defis^entsie of
supply to the Lamp of Life, good in all Fevers whether malignant or pestilent
of what sort soever.

The Seventh is our Cordial or Cachexical Pill, so called because it is our
infallible Remedy against all Female Obstructions, Green Sickness, Feebleness,
shortness of Breath, pain in tha Head, sides proved so by many infallible
Experiments, and is highly Cordial, and without any manifest Operation, it
wonderfully strengthens the Heart, revives the Spirits, corroborates and
strengthens the Heart, by bringing in fresh supplies of Fuel to the Vital Fire,
it takes away the pain of the Head after a wonderful manner. In sum, its Dose
is whatsoever any Physician can in that Cose desire.

The Eighth is our Remedy against Consumption, and all Distempers of the Lungs
which is a precious Balsom next of Kin to our Humidum Radicale, it comforts all
the Natural powers of the whole Body, it purifies the Blood from all
Impurities, from whence various and cruel Diseases are wont to arise, it
preserves from the Apoplexy, Convulsion of the Nerves, Leprosy, Leaves
Venerea, it is the only Specificum of the Lungs: It preserves from, and Cures
the Asthma, it takes away both old and new Coughs, it consumes and drys up
defluction flowing from the Head, it comforts the Brain, it hinders the
ventasitie of the Stomach and Chollick, it is an admirable remedy for the
Hectic, comforting and strengthening of Nature, it is a secret help for
Consumptions, increasing the radical moisture, it wonderfully conduces in the
Gout, whether in the Joints or Feet, as also in the Sciatica. Like an occult
Fire it consumes Diseases as Fire consumes Wood.

The next is our Pill Hydragogum, which opens Obstructions of the Viscera,
Liver, Missentery, Spleen, and all other parts, cleansing the Stomach of all
Clammy and Phlegmatic Matter, sticking to the Tunicle thereof, Curing the
Dropsy, and all waterish Distempers, cleansing and strengthening the Liver, and
the Tone of all the parts, destinated to Concoction, washing and shaving off
all slimy Matter adhering to the Viscera, the refuse of imperfect Concoction.

The Tenth is our Remedium Melangogum, which we have Experienced in all
Melancholy Affects, and in which we have failed none, and that these may
appear to be more than words, we will give you Instances of Persons by Name,
and Place of abode that we have Cured, and such as have been despicably
afflicted with this Black and sad Disease even to despair of Cure, and despair
in Mind, and some that have come to a Mania, the highest Degree of Madness.

And this Remedy does by a very gentle opening of Obstructions, by inciding,
cutting, and dissolving of the Tarterous Clammy Filths that obstruct the
Viscera, Missentery. Liver, Spleen and Stomach, wonderfully altering the temper
of the Humors and Parts, and by consequence takes away all Instamation and
Dyscrasia Sanguinis in the Parts where these Filths are used to stick; so that
the Tarterous Clammy Matters are washed away, the Stomach gently cleansed, the
Flatus Hypochoudraicus repeled, and strangely allayed, the Hypochondriack pains
vanish, and the Mind quieted, and Health restored, the Mind, and so the Body
Capacitated to put forth all its wonted Offices, for the welfare of its own
Being.

The Eleventh is our Febrisiga, which Cures Fevers, and all Quartan Agues by a
gentle Operation in opening Obstructions of the Spleen, and all the harberers
of Melancholy Filths, taking away the ferment of Fevers and Agues, and that in
a short time.

Our Specisicum for the Rickets, which Cures in a short time by opening
Obstructions of the Vessels destinated to Concoction, and takes away the
occasion of that sad Symptom the Atrophia, the wasting and consuming of one
Part, by an Erroneous distribution of the Aliment, which ought to be sent to
it, and assimilated by it, and the monstrous growth of some one Part by
altering the Aliment due unto it. These and all other grievous Symptoms
attending this Disease are taken away, in a wonderful manner in a short time.

And there is yet another, viz. our Remedy most peculiar to all Women against
all Vapors, whether Histerick, viz. from the Womb, or from the Hypochondriack,
which marvellously suppresses all Melancholy Fumes from the Womb, Spleen,
Stomach, or any other parts, by which means it Cures Fits of the Mother,
Palpitation of the Heart, Pains in the Stomach, with those Pains that so much
afflict Women at the upper part of the Oesophagus, or in the Throat, which
makes them fear they shall be suddenly Choked Fits, Heart-qualmnes, all
manner of Effects rising from Fumes below the Head, Pains of the Head,
Swoundings, Faintings rising from any cause, of which we have had many Hundred
Experiments.

And lastly our Remedium Faetisicum, which is a singular Medicine against
barrenness, it cleanses the Womb from all things that hinder Conception, it
worms, strengthens, and disposes it to bear Fruit, it takes away the
Impediments proceeding from what Cause soever; it is easy to take, being very
pleasant, and without any manifest Operation, and that of which we have had
Experience.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page, 35, Line 13, for, gingi pepicnm r, gingipedium, p, 40, l, 16, dele in, p,
51, l, 14, r, Exanthemata, p. 61, (...) r, (...) p, 59, l, 15, r,
Hypochondries, p. 61, l, 3, r, Hypochodrais, p, 105, l, 4, r, verulentsy, p,
113, l, 15, for thousand r, hundreds, p, 120, l, 9, dele second is, p, 121, l,
3, r, thin, l, 5, r, being, l. 17, r, Siccus, p, 128, l, 18, dele not, p, 140,
l, 10, r, perceptable, p, 148, l, 1, for tales r, tabes, p, 154 l, 2, r,
called, p, 160, l, 8, r, very, p, 162, l, 11, for by r, without, p, 18, l, 1,
r, sadden, p, 177, l, 1, r, peppered, l, 7, r, foregoing, 178, l, 24, r,
Oleaginous, ^, ^70, r, indeed if.


