THE SAINTS SECURITY, AGAINST Seducing Spirits OR, The Anointing from the Holy
one The best Teaching.

Delivered in a Sermon at Paul's before the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commonalty
of the City of London, upon the Fifth of November, 1651.

BY WILLIAM AMES. M. A.

Sonus verborum aures percutit, Magister intus est
Cathedram in Caelo habet qui corda docet.
Aug. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for William Adderton, and are to be sold
at his Shop at the three Golden Falcons in Duck-lane, 1652.

TO The RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN KENDRICK, Lord MAJOR, and the Right Worshipful
the Aldermen of the City of LONDON.
Honorable and Beloved.
SOme who have been judicious Spectators of those uncharitable quarrels, which
have broken forth in these Latter days, amongst Professors, have been ready to
conclude, That either Men have not understood that thing which Religion
signifies, or else they have abused the Name of Religion, making it serve to
advance themselves, and promote some worldly design: And if they shall
consider the power of unmortified lusts in the hearts of wicked men emboldened
by the Advantage of such general dissentions, it will not be so great a wonder
to see many cast off God and Holiness, as to see any keeping the Faith, and
cleaving unto Christ in such an hour of Temptation. One great snare, that the
Devil has laid to entangle souls, has been, To put them upon it to call
every thing into Question; which has been the more dangerous, because such
inquiry does pretend to Ingenuity, and is like that Tree of knowledge, a Tree
to be desired to make one Wise, and certainly it is far better to be humbly
and modestly inquisitive, then Popishly and Sottishly ignorant, for the Wise
man's eyes are in his head, but the Fool destroys himself by a strange
implicit faith, and blind obedience: But when a Proud and Deboyst Spirit shall
become one of those (...) those haesitating Questionists, how will he Vaunt and
Triumph in his conceits, as if he had Posed and Non-plust Truth it self: When
such a one is gotten into this strong hold, what will not his bold confidence
dare to Question? And although he might consider that a Fool may ask more
questions then ten Wise men can answer, yet still he persisteth in vain
Interrogatories; And such is the disturbance of his mind occasioned by the
pride and wickedness of his heart, that let the most clear and pertinent
Reply be made to his Demands; yet is He wholly indisposed to receive
satisfaction. Thus is the poor, but proud and insulting Sceptick, at once
Really the Devils Bondslave, and conceitedly his own freeman.

When I was, by your Order, called to this public service, many things of
this kind did press in upon me, And the greatest impression that I could
perceive (...) my spirit was, To speak something, that (...), by the blessing
of God, tend to the Vindication of the Truth of Religion, from the Malicious,
but Frivolous affronts of Profane, yet Cunning men; and I could not find out
a more Direct means to this end, then by an appeal to the Common sense of all
Regenerate souls, which I have done in the following discourse, according to
the measure of the gift received, the effects whereof I heartily desire may be
these two,

First, For ever to silence that Machiavilian Blasphemy, that Religion is
nothing but a Politic Engine, and that there is no such thing indeed any
where to be found. There are those in the world, who in a true spiritual sense,
have heard with their ears, and seen with their eyes, and handled with their
hands of the word of Life; And it is to be feared, that those souls, which
deny, that there is any Religion abroad, are wholly devoid of it within
themselves. Religion is not a Chimaera or Notion, but a real thing in the
hearts and lives of good men.

Secondly, To stir up and awaken Professors, that they rest not satisfied in
any Outward form, without the inward life and power of Religion. Oh! Be not
contented to serve in the Oldnesse of the Letter, but in the Newness of the
spirit. We have raised such a Dust by our Disputes in lesser matters, and by
our espousing such trivial quarrels, that we have almost lost our Christ, and
alienated our affections from our first Husband. It is time for us now to call
forth that Primitive spirit of Love and Purity, if by any means we might
remove the Scandal of our contentions, and exhort one another so much the more,
as we see the day approaching.

After you had patiently given this Sermon the Hearing, you were pleased to
importune the Publication thereof, whereby your selves and others might the
better Perpend, and truly examine what is therein contained; which request of
your Honors I could not easily deny, but have accordingly performed, and do
here tender it to your Christian Acceptance, with hopeful confidence, that
seeing for the Truths sake, it found such unexpected entertainment at your
ear, it shall not be despised at the more severe Tribunal of your Eye. Now,
that good spirit of Jesus Christ open the eyes of your minds, that you may see
and approve things that are excellent, and persuade your hearts to receive the
Truth in the Love of it, and direct your steps to walk in the paths of Mercy
and Truth, that you may be Saved.

So prays, Yours and the Churches Servant in the Gospel. William Ames.

Imprimatur

December 4. 1651. JOSEPH CARYL.

1 John 2. 20. But ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all
things.
THere has been of old an irreconcilable feud between light and darkness,
between good and evil, Truth and Error at enmity.
and wheresoever truth has had it is dwelling there error and falsehood have
endeavored to intrude themselves; so that no sooner was truth incarnate in the
Person of our Lord Jesus, but Antichrist, yea many Antichrists did arise and
set themselves against it; sed magna fuit Veritas and praevalebat, Truth was
great and did prevail. But when error and falsehood did perceive that Truth
remained invulnerable in the Person of Christ, they betake themselves to his
posterity, and the seed of the Serpent does conflict and try it out with the
seed of the Woman; yet still the victory has been given on the Saints side.
But such was the malice of Truths great Adversary, the Prince of darkness, that
he would not only not lay down the Tucklers, but that he might appear to
deserve the name of Apollyon and Abaddon, He has left no means unattempted,
and has more curiously sought out and invented how He might yet (if possible)
carry the day against the Truth; and to carry on his undertaking has projected
two ways eminently, whereby either to Bannish Truth wholly out of the world, or
to stop her growth and progress in the world. The one has been by open force
and violence, Antichrists double design.
to persecute the persons of those who have professed themselves to be Truth's
subjects; whereby he might at once make them weary of their profession, and
deter and affright others from entertaining that Truth which was thus
persecuted in those that did profess it.

The other way has been by secret subtilty and cunning Sophistry to undermine
and imbase the Truth, to mix his poison with Gods wine, whereby He might with
less difficulty either cheat the Professors, and owners of it, or at least
hinder the Genuine and natural effect which pure Truth should have upon the
minds of men. But upon all the glory there has been a protection and defense,
and this defense has been the munition of Rocks.

First, 1 Open violence.
That there have been violent assaults upon the persons of the Saints for the
Truths sake, I need not fetch an argument from far to demonstrate unto you:
Every one that we meet withal is able to tell us of those primitive
persecutions, and to relate unto us ruefull stories of the bloody Massacres
that have been abroad. Who amongst us is ignorant of those Smith-field
Butcheries, and those whole-burnt-offerings of holy men, which the bloody
Priests of Rome did offer to their great Idol? What shall we say to this days
rehearsal of those not invincible Armadoes, those Powder-plots and
conspiracies, those armies and insurrections, those wars and tumults, which
have threatened as with open mouth, to swallow up and devour whole Nations, and
Commonwealths, where Jesus Christ has had his worshippers? Certainly nothing
herein is so wonderful as this, that Christ has yet a Name in the world, that
He has yet a Name in England. And that which has secured Truth and her
subjects from the mischief of these designs has been the powerful providence
of the Almighty. He that holds the Reins of Government in his hand, who is
the great and supteam Moderator of this world has taken to himself his great
power, and has reigned. Behold, God has been to his Churches, and holy ones
as a Refuge from the storm, and as a shadow from the heat of their persecuting
Adversaries, whilst the blast of the terrible ones has been as a storm
against the wall; so that, as we have cause this day, in our Anniversary
Commemoration of these never to be forgotten deliverances, we may take up that
Angelical Doxologie, and say, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be given to
him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever, amen, Hallelujah.

Secondly, 2 Secret craft.
That there has been deceit and Sophistry used to steal away Truth from the
professors of it, nothing is more clear and manifest. The Scripture speaks
expressly, that there were false Prophets amongst the people, and there shall
false Teachers creep in, who shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them. And these Agents or Factors for Truths Adversary, are
either those Tenebriones and Lucifugae, those Owls and Night birds, who do
secretly blaspheam the Truth, but dare not come into the Light, lest their
works of darkness should be revealed and made manifest. Or else they are those
whom the Father calls Meridiani Daemones, those noonday Devils, who with an
impudent forehead dare set themselves to cry down, and with most Devilish
confidence to oppose that Truth which must prevail and conquer. And these may
be those white Devils that would appear in the shape of Angels of Light, whilst
indeed secretly and inwardly they are nothing else but Feinds of Darkness. But
against all these has our Lord Jesus secured his Church and people; and has
brought off his Truth without loss or prejudice; and that by the powerful
working of his own Spirit living in the hearts of holy men. Now as we have
cause every way to bless God for Truths safety, so from a godly jealousy and
holy fear we may admonish and call upon the Professors of Truth, that they be
not led away with the error of the wicked, or ensnared with the craft and
subtilty of Antichristian seducers; And this was the occasion of that discourse
which the Apostle falls upon in this Chapter, as may be gathered from the 26.
Verse, These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you.

The aged Apostle in the beginning of his discourse The Context.
does well consult the condition of Believers to whom this Epistle should come,
and writes unto them as unto little Children. In Verse. 18. Little children,
you, whose attainment it is to know the Father, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and in him your God and Father. My little Children, It is Hora
novissima, the last hour, and therefore you had need to stir up your selves,
and seriously to consider, how to save your selves from that great inundation
of the mystery of iniquity, which will endeavor to suppress the mystery of
Godliness. My little Children, It is the last hour, and as you have heard
formerly by those who instructed you in the Truth, that Antichrist should come,
so now already there be many Antichrists, for this is the last time: And the
danger is greater, forasmuch as those Antichrists who are abroad were sometimes
pretenders to the truth of the Gospel, sometimes they professed themselves
subject unto that Truth, which now they endeavor to oppose and vilify. Yet let
me inform you in this, That they went out from us, but they were not of us,
for if they had been of us, no doubt, they would have continued with us; but
they went out, that it might be made manifest they were not all of us. Now
after He had given this Alarm to Believers, concerning the approach of the
Antichristian Adversary; He gives himself and them a Cordial and encouragement
in the words which I have read, But ye have an unction from the Holy one, and
ye know all things. Which words you may please to look upon as the Saints
security in evil times, or the best protection of holy men against the
impudent assaults of Brazen-faced error, and Antichristian falsehood.

In these words be pleased to observe these three things. The Text opened.


First, 1 Christ the Holy one.
A glorious Title given to Jesus Christ, the King of Saints. He is called the
Holy one. You have an anointing from the Holy one. The spirits of Antichrist
they are unclean spirits, they are profane, debauched, polluted, and polluting
spirits, but the spirit of our Lord Jesus, which is in you, proceeds from one
that is holy, harmless, and separated from sinners. This is a Title often given
in the old Testament to the eternal Majesty, that increated Being, God
himself: And our Lord Jesus, as the eternal Son of the everlasting Father, is
dignified with the same Title, and called the Holy Child, the Holy thing, the
Holy one; yea in Dan. 9. 24. he is called the sanctum sanctorum, The great
Saint, or the most holy of all: There the Angel tells Daniel that after seventy
weeks there should be a reconciliation made for iniquity, and everlasting
righteousness brought in, and the most holy should be anointed: that is, our
Lord Jesus Christ, the true Messiah, should come in the flesh and be
inaugurated, and installed into that great office of an high Priest, which had
been for so many years past typified and shadowed out in their Priest that
served in the Temple. Now this is worth our consideration, That if our Lord
Jesus, who is the Fountain from whence we receive this spirit be so holy and
pure, then surely the effects and operations that this spirit does produce in
those who receive it, must be holy and pure also. Impurity, uncleanness, and
sinful defilements cannot possibly proceed from so pure a spirit as the spirit
of Jesus Christ is, whose Name is, The Holy one.

Secondly, Christ's spirit (...) anointing.
Another thing considerable in the words is, An effusion of the Holy Ghost from
Jesus Christ upon his people. Ye have an unction, or ye have received the
anointing. The custom of anointing was anciently used either to separate and
consecrate to an holy use, or to install and inaugurate to some office and
service, or to endow with gifts suitable to some notable and eminent
employment. And we find in the Scriptures, That the anointing past upon some
of their Prophets, their Priests, and their Kings. It is also further observed,
That in the second Temple, the anointing, or the holy ointment was wanting,
which might signify to the Jews that then were, that their Ceremonial Rites
were beginning to waste, they should therefore long for, and earnestly desire
the Messiahs coming, by whom that anointing and other things should be
supplied and restored in a more singular and eminent way. Our Lord Jesus as our
high Priest was anointed; and from him do all his people as so many inferior
Priests, receive and participate of that anointing: for as it is observed, the
High Priest of old had most oil poured upon his head, and the other Priests
were but sprinkled with that holy oil. So then the meaning of this anointing
which is poured out from Christ upon his people must needs signify a
communication of the same spirit, of the same life, of the same grace and
nature, that Jesus Christ, as the chief Priest, was anointed withal from the
Father: so that the same disposition and goodness of mind does flow out from
Christ to a gracious soul.

Thirdly, 3 Knowledge the benefit of anointing.
Here is the great benefit that Believers do Receive by this holy anointing,
which they have from the holy one, and that is, That they know all things. You
have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things. There is some
difference in the reading of these words; The Syriack Translator reads them
thus, ye know all men; and in that sense they may refer to that which the
Apostle Paul speaks of in 1 Corint. 12. 10. where, amongst the gifts of the
spirit, which he reckons up, this is one, namely (...), the discerning of
spirits. And the truth is, this great gift of discerning men's spirits was more
especially given to some then unto others in the primitive times, and they were
able not only probably to conjecture, but also to give a judgment concerning
many with whom they conversed, and did thereby discover diverse hollow and
false-hearted Hypocrites: which gift may, peradventure, though in a smaller
measure and lower degree, live even to this day in the hearts of holy men; for
verily, they many times do give a very shrewd conjecture, not to say judgment,
concerning Professors amongst whom they live; but this they do with a sober,
modest and compassionate spirit. As for profane monsters, and notorious
sinners, their condition is obvious, and easily to be discerned, by men whose
eyes are in their heads, who are not blinded with a Bride of favor, or
prejudiced with some fond and passionate affection. But all the Greek Copies,
as is observed, do read the words as we translate them. Ye know all things;
that is, all those maine, necessary, and fundamental Truths, which Jesus
Christ came to declare, as from the Father to the World; or ye know all
things, that is, All those Truths of the Gospel which those Antichrists that
now are, or that great Antichrist which shall come, will set themselves to
oppose and contradict. You, who have this anointing do most certainly and
assuredly know, and are well established in these principal and capital
Truths which you have received by virtue of this anointing. Thus we have a
brief account of these words presented to us: And the point that I shall
discourse upon, with your Christian patience is this.

That the most certain and assured knowledge of Christian doctrine is attained
unto by a participation of the anointing of Jesus Christ. Doct. The Anointing
best teaches the Doctrine of Christ.
Ye have received such an unction, and thereby it is that ye know all things.
Every man almost, in these days, thinks himself well instructed in his
Profession that he makes, and in the Articles of Faith whereunto he declares
himself to be a servant: who is there, that does not judge himself to be as a
Master of Israel; well understood in all points of Theology, who yet, like
Nicodemus, remains in the very darkness of ignorance, as not knowing what
Regeneration and the new birth might signify: for we shall find that there is
no such certain and infallible way to come to the knowledge of heavenly
Truths, as by Receving an unction from Jesus Christ.

When Job's three Friends had spent much time in arguing and redarguing the
case with Job, Elihu stands up and speaks after this manner. I did expect
that days should have taught wisdom, and that I should have found
understanding in the multitude of years, but now I find, there is a spirit in
man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding; great men
are not always wise, neither do the Aged understand judgment; I find a great
difference between the judgment that these men, though grave seniors, give
concerning Job's case, and the judgment that the spirit of God gives: The
Censure of these men proceeds from the peevish, angry spirits of men, but the
judgment of the divine spirit in this case is according to Truth.

But that notable Scripture which I shall briefly speak unto is in 1 Corinthians.
2. 13, 14. etc. where the Apostle speaking of this very subject, tells us of
many things: That which is the substratum, the maine business of his discourse,
are (...), the things of the spirit; then he tells us of a natural man and a
spiritual man; then he speaks of the spirit of the World, the spirit of God,
and the mind of Christ; and then He compares all these together, and brings
forth thus much, namely, That the spirit of the world, the spirit of a natural
man, which is a mundane, worldly spirit, cannot receive the things of the
spirit of God, for they are spiritually discerned, and only they can know
them, who have the same spirit living and dwelling in their souls, which Jesus
Christ had dwelling in him having received it from the Father; We have the
mind, and spirit of God, and hereby do we know the things of the Spirit.

That I may the more clearly manifest, Four Propositions preventive.
to this great Assembly, what my understanding is in this weighty matter, give
me leave to preface four particulars, which may prevent mistakes, as if any
private or particular design were aimed at in such a Doctrine as this.

First, 1 Rational man the subject of Christ's Doctrine.
Man as a reasonable Creature is the subject of Christian Doctrine. Man does
not throw away his mind and understanding when he comes to be proselited into
the Truths of Christ. When God undertaketh to inform a man with heavenly
doctrine, he does not deal with him as he would deal with a stone which he
would raise up to be a child to Abraham, for he finds man already endowed
with a mind and will, upon which account He is capable to hear further from
his God. Man's understanding is of very good use in Christian Religion; for by
that is man able to communicate much of his sense in heavenly things unto
others, as also to plead for, and by argument to back the Truth received,
against the Cavils and contradictions of such as oppose themselves. I must
confess freely what I apprehend, That, in the moment of a man's conversion, when
the grace of God powerfully ceizeth upon his spirit to turn him from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, those acts that he does then
perform, are the most rational acts that ever he did perform in all his
life. The acts of Repentance, Faith and Selfe-denyall, the act of turning from
sin unto God, which are the acts that appear in the first motion of the soul
unto God, these are in themselves and to the soul, most reasonable, equitable,
just and right; yea, in the further progress of the grace of God in man's mind,
when it grows up into sanctification and holiness, the understanding of a man
does act and acts understandingly. The truth is, This mind and understanding
of a man is (...), as the great Philosopher calls it, the very flower of a man's
soul, which is not blasted and withered by the Truths of the Gospel, but it
is thereby reformed, rectified, repaired and restored to its primaeve
perfection, with great advantage. So that I think, in a sober sense, what the
Apostle speaks of the Law, That it is (...), a Schoolmaster to Christ, may be
said of man's natural knowledge, and understanding: In which sense one of the
Ancients calls true Philosophy (...), an inferior School, or a
fore-teaching to Christ, as it is that which renders a man capable and fit to
receive the impressions of a divine spirit: For certainly a man in his wits,
and not a mad, distracted man, is the subject of Gods grace, of his converting
and sanctifying grace.

Secondly, 2 The written word the outward Rule.
The written word of God, in the Scriptures of Truth, is the only outward rule
of faith and manners. This is the norma fidei and morum; According to this rule
must every man order his conversation, Isai. 8. 20. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because they have
not so much as morning-light in them. This is the royal Standard of Truth,
unto which we must bring all men's dogmata, their assertions, and opinions,
which are vended for Truth in the world: Hereby may we examine, and judge of
all that, which men would obtrude upon us. I recommend, to evry one that
hearts me, the constant studying of the holy Scriptures, as being the Oracles
of God. It was that, for which, the Holy Ghost does so highly commend the
Beraean Christians, That they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so; and upon this
account they were called (...), more noble, as being better borne, better bred;
better educated then those of Thessalonica. I will only add this, That the
Letter of the Scriptures is but dead without a divine power joined with it, and
a spirit, moving man's mind, without a word, is very questionable and dangerous.

Thirdly, 3 The Unction of the spirit a universal sense.
The Holy Spirit, which is understood by this anointing, is no private spirit,
or particular impulse, no singular persuasion or extraordinary inspiration, but
a general and universal sense in all regenerate minds. Holy men do all
agree, by common consent, in those Truths, which the New Creature does chiefly
resent and relish. The Apostle to this purpose uses two expressions, 1 Cor.
12. 13. and 2 Cor. 4. 13. By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, and
have been all made to drink into one spirit: and we have the same spirit of
Faith. Where the Apostle considers the community of Christians, under the
notion of a body made up of several members, which must have a soul and
spirit to inform, animate, quicken and enliven it: This is that spirit of
Jesus Christ which does live in the souls of holy men; and distinguish them
from the common Herd of Infidels and Beastly sinners. Although we may be
ignorant of that which the Philosophers meant by their Anima mundi; the soul
of the world, yet me thinks every gracious heart should easily apprehend what
is that spirit and soul of the regenerate world. But here I must acknowledge
also, That the eternal spirit of God does sometimes come down as from Heaven,
and particularly move upon a regenerate mind, whereby it does (...), blow off
the ashes and stir up those heavenly sparks, which lay in the soul as buried
under some clouds of sadness, and hereby the frozen and benumined spirit of a
precious saint does find it self thawed into a vivacious fitness for any
service. This is that which the spouse calls for in Song 4. 16. Awake O North
wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out. This discourse, I conceive, may show us the difference between the
good spirit of God, which sober minds converse withal, and that fanatic and
exstatick spirit, which vain men pretend unto, and are deluded with. This
spirit, in both the senses that we have spoken of, may not be condemned as a
groundless Enthusiasme, for as the learned Cameron observes, Enthusiasmus est,
ubi quis est merum organum, sine omni usurationis and judicij. Then is a man
acted by such a spirit, when he utters Revelations without the use of his
understanding and reason, as sometimes the Prophets of old did, who were but as
a trunk or instrument through which the spirit conveyed those secrets, which
God would declare unto the world.

Fourthly, 4 The spirit of Christ lives in his Ordinances.
The spirit of Christ signified by this anointing, is first received in the way
of his Ordinances, and is thereby maintained and carried on, and does live with
great delight in the use of those Ordinances where it was first received. He
who has received the anointing from the Holy one, knows where he has received
it, and he knows also, that the same spirit can breath no where so freely, as
in such holy air. The new Creature was borne under the Ordinances of the
Gospel, and is nursed and brought up under them. Faith came first by hearing,
and Faith grows and receives strength, being nourished by the same Doctrine,
by which it was at first planted. They who have heard and learned of the Father
come unto Christ, and know not whether to go from him, because he has the
words of eternal life. The Apostle in 2 Cor. 3. 8. calls the ministration of
the Gospel the ministration of the spirit, as being that by which the soul does
receive, and grow up in this divine and heavenly life. Therefore the Author of
this Epistle writing to anointed ones, tells them that as they had heard so it
should be that Antichrist would come, and that they should abide in the Truth;
whereby he does commend them and their Teachers for their great care and
diligence in searching out and receiving the Truth. I need not spend time in
showing the lawfulness, convenience, and necessity of Gospel Ordinances, such
as are, Hearing the word, prayer, breaking of bread, to show forth the Lords
death, and the rest which are of the like institution. Only this I would speak
by way of admonition, as it is a serious and general observation which holy
men have made, That no sooner do men cast off the use of the Ordinances and
appointments of Jesus Christ, but at the same time they do cast off God and
godliness, and laying the Reins upon their own necks, they set the foot upon
the holy Law, running desperately upon further mischief. Thus has divine
Justice branded those who would not humbly submit to such sacred Institutions.
Such is the Majesty and Authority of these things, that almost every man in the
use of them does find an awe upon his conscience, and feel himself commanded
into a moderate and sober modesty, a modest sobriety and moderation.

Having thus laid down these four particulars by way of prevention, The
Doctrine (...)ened in 7 pro(...)sitions.
give me leave to explain the sense of the Doctrine in these seven following
propositions.

First, Christ as (...)ead first anoin(...)d.
The Lord Jesus as head of his Church was first anointed with the divine
spirit. Here began this holy Unction; Jesus Christ was the first Receiver of
the Spirit. The eternal spirit powered forth an abundance of this ointment upon
the person of our Lord Jesus, He was anointed with the oil of gladness above
his Fellows. In the ancient anointings, God had appointed certain measures of
this oil to be spent upon the persons anointed: Saul was anointed with a Cruise
of oil, as not like to continue in the throne long; David was anointed with a
horn of oil, his Kingdom being to remain longer; but it pleased the Father
that in Jesus Christ should all fullness dwell, so that in Isai. 10. he is
called The anointing; and such is the savor of his good ointments that his
Name is as ointment powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love him. The Lord
Jesus did Receive this fullness for our sakes, that from it we might receive,
and grace for grace. He was to be the head of his Church, propter eminentiam
and influentiam, not only for superiority, but also for influence and
conveyance, so that upon this account He was first considered in the business
of anointing, that he might be useful for conveyance of this spirit to his
people. The ointment poured upon the head of the high Priest, ran down upon
his beard, and to the skirts of his clothing, leaving a sweet fragrancie and
savor behind it: so does this spirit of our Lord Jesus, flow from him, down
to all his saints, and perfumes them with his own sweetness. And as the
Prophet Elijah, when he went to heaven, let his mantle and spirit fall upon
Elisha: so did our blessed Lord and Savior, after his ascension, send forth
his own spirit to dwell with his Disciples, as their solace, and comfort, in
his necessary absence.

Secondly, 2 Christ as a second Adam has his offspring.
Jesus Christ as a second Adam does begett Children after his own Image. The
first Adam brought forth children in his own likeness, deriving to them the
same natural spirit which was in himself: so does the second Adam propagate
his posterity, and give unto them his own spirit which is supernatural and
heavenly; The Picture does not so exactly resemble the face, as the regenerate
soul does resemble her everlasting Father. This Notion lies very obvious in
the 5. of the Romans. Where the Apostle discourses of the two Adams and their
two posterities, with their several advantages, or prejudices that they
received from their head: As by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin, and death passed upon all, for as much as all have sinned: which words
refer to the whole posterity of the first Adam: so by one man came life, by
one came forgiveness, by one came such a universal reparation; that as in Adam
all dyed, so in Christ all are made alive; all the posterity of the second Adam
are as much, yea more advantaged by their Head Jesus Christ; then all the
posterity of the first Adam were damnified by his Apostasy, and the influence
that it had upon them. The Lord Jesus finds the children of the first Adam in
their natural capacity, and makes them the subjects of his grace, but He
brings forth upon their minds and spirits a new creation, which he did not
find in them, no not in semine, not in the seeds or root of it: He comes by
his spirit to do some thing in man, which could not be done by the sublimation
or improvement of those Rudera naturae, those relics and remainders of
Shipwrackt nature, for if so, then what means that bitter Cup, what meant
that pomp of bloody sufferings, which Jesus Christ did undergo? What need was
there that he should come endowed with so much spirit? If Natural principles,
which yet remain in the broken posterity of the first Adam, could have brought
forth that which now is the great design and undertaking of Christ in the
world; He seems to have come in the flesh, and to have suffered such
contradction of sinners, and so shameful, accursed death upon the Cross upon
too small and too inferior account. Does Jesus Christ, after all this, effect
no more upon men, then what the scattered pieces of decayed nature being
gathered together, could effect upon them? Surely, Brethren, He does more then
so, for he begetts children unto himself as a Father, and uniteth members
unto himself as an Head, He transplanteth souls into an other soil, and
they live in him, deriving sap and spirit from him as from their better soil,
their new Root. The Apostle in Gal. 4. does thus exprese it, My little
children, with whom I travail in birth, (...), until Christ be formed in you;
that is, until the spirit of our Lord Jesus comes to be that to your souls,
which your souls are unto your bodies; The reasonable soul in man is the
principle of life, and that by which he is denominated to be a man, and
distinguished from a beast; so does the spirit of Christ working it self into
the soul of man, transform him into his own image, and this new Creature
has the same spirit, nature and disposition with Jesus Christ, whereby he is
denominated a Christian, and distinguished from other men. The person of Jesus
Christ was that original copy, according to which all his posterity should be
made conformable. This is that which the Apostle speaks to in 1 Cor. 15. where
He says, As we have born the image of the earthly, so must we bear the
image of the Heavenly Adam; which is not only to be understood in a corporeal
sense, That our bodies in the Resurrection shall be called out of their dust
into the likeness of Christ's glorified body, but in a spiritual sense also,
for our minds and souls having received the first fruits of the Resurrection
within themselves already, they also shall in union with their bodies rise up
in a complete similitude and likeness to our Lord Jesus, having limb for
limb, grace for grace.

Thirdly, 3 Christ's spirit fitteth the soul to know his Truth.
The spirit and life of Christ communicated to his people, does make them
capable and able to understand his will. When the spirit of Regeneration is
past upon the soul, then does a man become fit to understand heavenly Truths.
It is true, There is a kind of rational assent to heavenly Truths before
conversion, and the natural man does understand the letter of the spirit, but
not the spirit of the letter; yet no man has so clear, so full and undoubted
understanding of those things as he whose mind is defecated and purged from
the dreggs of worldly lusts, which are like a fogg and mist upon the face of
the soul. The souls of men are like so many glasses, which reflect the image
of things presented before them, now if there be a steame breathed upon the
glass, the Reflection is very little, or none at all; or if the light, which
should convey the species from the object to the glass, be but a dim
twilight, a weak and insufficient light, there is no reflection neither; so
it is with the souls of men, whilst our worldly affections, and adulterate
love to sin and wickedness, do boil and bubble up within us, sending up
their steames into our minds, the things of God cannot be seen, according to
the greatness of that beauty and excellency which is upon them; He that caused
the light to shine out of darkness, must shine in our hearts, to give that
(...), that light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ; for as the Psalmist speaks In tuo lumine lumen videbimus, in thy light
we shall see light. The holy nature of Jesus Christ is the true Collyrium, the
true eye salve, whereby the soul must be cured of its blindness; and the Apostle
speaks in Col. 3. 10 of putting on the new man (...), which is renewed into
knowledge, according to the image of him that created him: Until we be renewed
in the spirit of our minds, and taken off from the love of this world, and the
things thereof, we cannot attain to a right new Testament knowledge of those
things, which Christ has revealed from the bosom of the Father. There is a
praeputium cordis, a foreskin of the heart, a pride and insolency of the
natural spirit, which must be circumcised and destroyed, before the soul can
attain unto a full view of that excellent and glorious Truth, which Jesus
Christ does present us withal.

Fourthly, Argumentative knowledge doubtful and (...)certain.
The knowledge of Christian Doctrine grounded only upon Argument is but
doubtful and uncertain knowledge. I conceive, that Syllogismes and arguments
are only for this world, and the things of this world, but not for the things
of God and of the other world. The natural Philosopher attains to his natural
knowledge by observations and experiments in several particulars, by
Antecedents and consequents, and most of his knowledge in those things is very
feeble, crazy and questionable, which made that great Philosopher after all his
inquiry for knowledge, profess, That he only attained to this, that he knew
himself to be ignorant, Hoc tantum scio quod nihil scio, This only do I know,
that I know nothing. But God has ordained a better way to convey his Truth
into our hearts, and that is by a renovation of our minds, and by the
communication of a divine nature. God has not left his people at uncertainties
in those things which are material and necessary, but has given them more
then the certainty of a demonstration. Whatsoever I do receive for Truth upon
the account of argumentative conclusions, that I am bound to lay aside and
disowne for Error upon the like account, when a more probable argument comes:
And truly Friends, if all the ground of our entertaining Christ and Truth, or
Christian Doctrine, be, because such an argument conveyed it unto us, what
shall become of us and the Truth, when we meet with a subtle sophister and
Antichristian Head, who shall frame an argument against the Truth, unanswerable
by our Logic? Where shall a man ever consist, if he must live upon these
terms in the world? Besides, every one to whom the Gospel of Christ is
preached, has not an head strong enough to grapple with the bigness and depth
of some kind of arguments, who yet may have their hearts truly mortified to
this world, and carried out in love to the person and nature of our Lord Jesus.
The ground of that ancient scepticisme, and that (...), of the Academicks,
whereby they did assert that nothing could be comprehended, might be this; All
their knowledge was derived unto them by probable conclusions, so that no thing
was certainly and eternally true and infallible, but conjecturall and probable
only, and to be entertained according to the retinue and pomp of well dressed
arguments. He that is but an Argumentative Christian, is rather a sceptick,
then a true Christian: He is a Christian at the greatest uncertainty in the
world: I must confess, many Notions which are obtruded upon men as Orthodoxal,
and contended for by others as principal pieces of Theology, must be soberly
examined by Scripture and reason, for they are not per senota, they are not
seen by their own light, and in such opinions, modesty and sobriety are highly
commendable. Yea, I confess further, That the heavenly principles of the New
Creature may be Backed and strengthened by rational arguments, and many times,
the soul is constrained by a practical Syllogism to be less disquieted
within it self; but yet, The most clear evidence, and assurance of the Truth
and goodness in these holy things of Christ and the new Creature, arises out
of themselves, as light flows from the body of the Sun, without the contusion
or compulsion of an harsh argument; yea, and a regenerate heart does by an holy
Sympathy, entertain with infinite delight these precious and holy Truths.
Arguments and Syllogismes do make a great noise in the world; me think, they
are not unlike to that appearance in Horeb unto the Prophet Elijah, when the
great and strong wind rept the mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks, but
it is said, the Lord was not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the
fire, but he was in the still, small voice. Lux spiritus sancti est lenis lux,
perfundens se mentibus. The Holy spirit does gently hover over the soul, and
brood upon it; Heavenly Doctrine falls down upon the spirits of men, not
like a mighty violent rain, but like a shower of oil, like a sweet honey-dew.

Fifthly, 5 Inward sense judges between Christ and Antichrist.
The inward sense of a regenerate mind, does easily judge between Christ and
Antichrist. Such holy souls are well resolved about the things of God, they do
not halt between God and Baal, arguing themselves out of all Religion and
modesty; but they have a natural tendency toward these things, and they feel
a magnetic virtue secretly overpower them: This is the natural working of
the new Creature, whereby the soul does inwardly savor and relish,
difference and distinguish between the Doctrines of Christ, and the Impostures
of Antichrist. Jesus Christ tells us in John 10. That his Sheep do hear his
voice; but they will not follow a stranger, for they know not the voice of
strangers. Whereby he would have us to understand, That all his Disciples, who
are truly taught of him, do carry within themselves the Lapis Lydius, the
Touchstone of Truth, and such is the present Touch or Taste that some things
do make upon their spirits, that they do easily discern from whence they
come, although they do not bring them to an external Judicatory. The Divine
nature whereof we are made partakers, does put a difference between that which
is really and truly heavenly, and that which is only counterfeit stuff, as
the Touchstone does between Gold and Copper. It is worthy of our observation,
That every life does attract and concoct that which is suitable to its nature,
and the most inferior life has such a faculty. The Plants of the earth do
draw unto themselves that sap and juice which is proper for them, and do digest
it into nourishment; The Beasts of the field do naturally move toward those
things which will maintain their lives, and turn aside from that which is
poisonous and destructive to them, and what is by them received, they turn, in
succum and sanguinem, into food and nourishment, and do grow thereby. The
rational life in a natural man does by observation, argument, and dispute,
gather up natural Truths, whereby the man becomes well polished in his
understanding, and may deserve the name of an instructed Philosopher; so does
that spiritual and heavenly life, which we call the new Creature, and Divine
nature in a Christian, it, being endued with such an attractive and digestive
faculty, does know what is suitable or unsuitable to it self, and does
accordingly affect or dis-rellish it. The Needle touched with a Loadstone does
not more naturally move toward the Pole, then a soul touched with a Divine
Spirit, does move toward and freely embrace the truths of Christ; it cannot
rest at any point in the compass until it be centered there. Men in whom the
spirit of this world lives, and is praedominant, do naturally affect worldly
things, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life. He
that loves profit, is wholly taken up in getting wealth; He that loves honor
and popular applause, does set himself to please men; He that loves
pleasures, studieth excess, riot, wantonness, and dalliance; and all these do
find their spirits move with a kind of naturalness toward such things, and
take wonderful contentment in them; so that as the Apostle speaks, These men
are (...), Lovers of pleasure, lovers of money, rather then lovers of God. The
spirit of Jesus Christ, in the hearts of holy men, does, with savor and
relish, entertain the things of God, whilst other men that have but common
spirits, cannot take any delight or complacency in them. Such was the hearty
and sincere affection of Timothy toward the Philippians, that Saint Paul
says, there was none like him, who did (...), naturally take care of their
affairs. And it is much more true of a regenerate heart; for none attain to
such a discretion in heavenly Truths as it self attaineth unto, for unto a man
void of such a life, those precious truths are like the white of an egg,
without any savor.

Sixthly, 6 Heavenly knowledge proportionable to Sanctification.
The true knowledge of heavenly things increases according to the measure of
Sanctification. I do not speak of knowledge falsely so called, as the Apostle
some where terms it, but of true knowledge, that is, inward, experimental
understanding, and this grows up as holiness does enlarge it self in the soul.
The clearer the Glass, the more perfect is the Reflection that it makes; The
more pure and spotless the soul is, the better does it receive and judge of
heavenly things. If it be but Daybreak, or a dim and duskie twilight, we have
a more doubtful appearance of things that are before us: but if it grows to a
morning-light, and once increases into a noonday brightness, then have we a
more exact and judicious vision of them. When the soul begins at first to turn
unto God, it has some taste or smattering of these spiritual dainties, and it
is like that taste, which newborn babes have of the milk which they suck from
the Breasts; but when the Christian follows on to know the Lord, whose going
forth is prepared as the morning, and when he does resolvedly, and strongly
carry on the work of sanctification in his heart and life, then does he come to
a more mature and ripened judgment of these things; He was a child before,
but now he is grown up to a strong man in Christ. The great Apostle tells us,
When he was a child, he thought as a child, He understood as a child, but when
he became a man, he put away childish things, His apprehensions of truth were
but low and weak, because his capacity was not great, but now he looks upon the
brighter face of truth with greater complacency then he did before. Our Lord
Jesus tells us in John 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of
the Doctrine whether it be of God. The best way to know assuredly and
impregnably the truth of those things which God speaks in his word, is to
observe and obey those things which God enjoynes. The Holy Ghost, which is the
best witness of Jesus Christ and his Doctrine, is given to them that obey him,
Act. 5. 32. and these men do sweetly rest in an assurance of the truth, whilst
others who are of impure spirits do quarrel and snarle against it. He that
would grow in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, let him grow
in grace, as the Apostle exhorts in 2 Pet. 3. 18. One that is newly entered
into the School of Christ, does find it a hard and difficult task, to subdue
every corruption: The sins of education, custom, and natural tendency, are
not easily mastered; Hence it comes to pass, that upon any laps, or fall into
any particular sin, the soul begins to be haunted with scrupulosities, doubts,
and fears, yea, it does upon such occasions fall to question the truth of
grace, and the certainty of the Gospel, whereas, in case of a constant and
close walking with God, there be no such clouds arising, but a constant
serenity upon the face of the soul. The truth is, all those secret suspicions,
and jealousies concerning the certainty of the ways of Christ, or of the work
of his grace upon our hearts, do proceed from some guilt contracted by acts of
violence against the light and principles of the new Creature. Would you then
be perfect in, and assured of the truths of the Gospel, take the Apostles
counsel, Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ and make no provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Seventhly, knowledge by (...)e anointing (...)maineth.
The holy anointing in a regenerate soul will remain without pollution by
Antichristian falsehood. This anointing which ye have received abides in you,
and as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him; so says our Apostle, in 1
Ioh. 2. 27. and Paul in 2 Cor. 1. 21. shows the ground of a souls establishment
in the truth to be this holy unction, this participation of the divine nature
from God, He that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is
God. Such a soul can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. They who
are persuaded into an Orthodox opinion, or article of faith, by an humane
argument, may again be easily cheated of that opinion by that (...), that
dice-play of men, when some cunning Antagonist shall cogg an argument which may
seem to import a fairer probability. But he, that has this inward light of the
life of Christ, as his guide into the knowledge of holy things, is not easily
removed from the Truth, or much affrighted with the terror of arguments, but
shall hold his own for ever. Children and fools may exchange their Gold for
Counters, but the wise man's eyes are in his head, and he will not part with his
most precious Faith upon such easy terms. This true knowledge of God, and
spirit of Christ in the soul, is that immortal seed, that eternal life, which
shall never die; he that has said, Touch not mine anointed, will suffer none
to lay violent hands upon his tender offspring; and in case of any impudent
assault or bold affront offered to his sacred image, it shall appear, That He
who is in a renewed mind is greater then he that is in the world. This holy
anointing, this new creation in the soul, is a Principle of recovery in case
of some particular Apostasy, and may be signified by that voice behind one,
which the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, which shall say, this is the way, walk in
it, when he turns to the right hand, and when he turns to the left. Suppose
a man having received this anointing, should, at any time, by a sudden
temptation, defile himself with sin, whereby his glory is stained, his spirit
disquieted, his conscience wounded, and his peace interrupted, he shall find
such secret struglings and strivings within himself, that he is never quiet
until his filthiness be washed off, and the new Creature within him restored to
former freedom. Upon this account the spirit of Christ is an holy unction; for
as oil will not easily mix with other liquors, or incorporate with other
bodies, so this divine spirit will preserve it self pure, and hate the very
garment spotted with the flesh. An holy soul is like a fountain, or well
spring of water, into which there may be thrown dirt and trash, but the
fountain will still be cleansing it self, and purging out that filth which was
cast into it; the spirit of Jesus Christ dwelling thus in the soul, will
continually be working out of all darkness, and leading it on from light to
light.

Thus have we opened the Doctrine unto you, and made it manifest, That the most
certain knowledge of heavenly truths, arises from the anointing of Christ's
spirit within the soul, and not from outward arguments. The spirit of God does
convey these truths into the soul, The new Creature does resent them, and this
anointing does establish the soul in a certain assurance of them. Now by way
of application, give me leave to speak briefly to some few Corollaries or
deductions which flow naturally from this notion which has been thus explained.

First, 1 Use. The promises of the spirit expounded.
If the new Creature brought forth in the soul, by the spirit of regeneration,
be that which teaches the certain knowledge of Christian Doctrine, Then here
we may see what is the true meaning of that spirit of Christ, which he has so
universally promised to bestow upon his people. The Old and New Testament is
full of promises in this kind. All thy people shall be (...), taught of God; a
new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, I will put
my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes; I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel, I will put my laws into their mind, and
write them upon their hearts, and they shall not teach every man his Neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, as if they were ignorant of
him, or unacquainted with him, for they shall all know me, from the least to
the greatest, and this spirit, which I will pour out upon my servants, and
mine handmaids, shall lead them into all Truth. Now all these, and the like
glorious promises, do signify unto us that experimental knowledge of God and
Truth, which is the proper effect of this Renovation of mind which has been
set before us. When the soul is borne again of that incorruptible seed, and
transplanted into our Lord Jesus, as into a new root, partaking of his sap and
spirit, then does it attain to a more clear understanding of the will of God,
and has a more perfect savor, and relish of Christ and his ways. This holy
Spirit is that true Shechenah, that indwelling of God in the soul, which was
anciently shadowed out by that cloud of presence, which sat between the
Cherubims wings, in Solomon's Temple. Then are we indeed taught of God, when
this spirit dwells within us; then are we under the fulfilling of these
promises, when we have received the truth, not as it comes from Paul, or as it
is delivered by Apollo, but the Truth as it is in Jesus: when the spirit of
Truth does make us to know not the word but the power of it, implanting the
mind of Christ in our minds, and turning of us from the ways of sin, into the
love of God. I do not here determine what those larger measures, or higher
degrees of this teaching may be, in the latter days, when the knowledge of the
Lord shall cover the earth, as the waters do the Sea.

Secondly, 2 Use. Proud man must be humbled.
If the best way to a certainty of knowledge in heavenly things be by a
spiritual anointing, Then proud man must be humbled and be willing to be
taught by a divine spirit. Flesh and blood cannot reveal unto man the things of
the spirit, neither can any man call Jesus the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, for
the flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth, and these things
they are spirit, and they are life. All things that Jesus Christ spoke, and
did, they were spoken in parables, and done in parables to those that are
without; that hearing they might hear and not understand, and seeing they might
see and not perceive: but to his Disciples he says, Unto you it is given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom, unto you, these things are revealed from
the Father. The Apostle tells us in 2 Cor. 10. 5 That the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of those
(...), those strong holds, and reasonings, those insulting notions that lift up
themselves against Jesus Christ. After all the Inquisition that our carnal
reason can make into the Scriptures of truth, to find out articles of faith:
we shall still remain unsatisfied, and may perceive that we are still ready
secretly to ask the same question that Pilate did, What is Truth? Many men do
sometimes think that they thoroughly understand spiritual Truths, when, alas!
all their knowledge amounts to nothing more, then a zealous or passionate
arguing for them. The whole Bible to a reasonable man, not regenerated, will
be, as that book was which the Prophet speaks of when it was delivered to the
learned to read it, he returns it, and says, I cannot, for it is sealed; and
when it was delivered into the hands of the unlearned to read it, he says, I
am not learned. We carry Bibles in our hands; and say, we study the word of
God, we do well, but until we have a spirit from God teaching of us inwardly,
and reforming us according to the Tenor of that word, we shall be no great
Proficients in that knowledge. Hence it is that in the 19. Verse of the Epistle
of Jude, one that has not the spirit, and one that is sensual, are accounted
to be the same person, sensual, not having the spirit. The truth is, vain man
would be wise, though he be like a wild asses colt: Men would not only be
Masters of reason, and natural knowledge, but would also have dominion over
other men's faith, and would subdue the spiritual sense of the new Creature to
the Sovereignty and supremacy of humane arguments. But as the Apostle speaks
(...), where is the wise? where is the Disputer of this world? has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world? These men indeed, be those (...), that
would seem to be wise; but is it not with them as the Apostle speaks in Romans 1.
21. (...), are they not become dark, and vain in their imaginations; yea, do
they not cum ratione insanire, even run madd with that, which they call their
reason, though it be nothing better then a corrupt enmity against the honesty
and simplicity of Christ. Give me leave to speak freely in this point; when the
great mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, such are Self-denial, reliance upon
the grace of God revealed by the Messiah, living by Faith in another, and
deriving strength from Christ through a promise; I say, when these things and
the like are propounded to a natural understanding, and un unmortified heart,
will it not say, that you do lapides loqui, speak stones unto it, and offer
that which is too hard to be received? Me thinks, when I offer such spiritual
Truths to be judged at the Tribunal of natural understanding, which I call
argumentative knowledge, it is as when that which belongs to one sense, is
presented to an other, which cannot give a perfect judgment of it. He that
would make me to understand what Music is, and the excellency of it, must not
bring me to one that can with eloquence relate a story thereof, and tell me in
words, what ravishing Harmony, and rare delights it does entertain one
withal, and then bid me imagine how every note exceeded the other; for this is
not to touch upon the right string, but he must bring me to a Consort, where
mine ear may receive a true impression from such musical delights. It is not
enough to paint out the beauty of a Rose in the most lively colors, and set it
before mine eyes, but I must smell to the rose it self, and thereby come to
know the sweetness of it. We may think to make our selves great Doctors of
the Law by a (...), a form of knowledge, but thereby we deceive our selves,
attaining only to a poor and beggarly understanding of the truths therein
contained; for the best way to know them, is to obey and practice them. He that
has his heart truly mortified to this world, and is crucified with Christ,
being made alive again by that spirit of regeneration, He alone, does attain
to the most quick and lively apprehensions of those Truths, that are revealed
by Christ in his Gospel.

Thirdly, 3 Use. (...)cked men not judge a(...) of hea(...)ly Truth.
If they alone do truly know the things of Christ, who have received his
anointing, then certainly, wicked men are no competent Judges of Christian
Doctrine. Whatsoever their parts are, or their acquired learing in arts and
sciences, yet, as to heavenly things, they are very dark and ignorant.
Perhaps, this inference, may provoke the great wits of the world, to say as
those Pharisees did to Christ, Are we blind also? But I am sure the Apostle
tells us, He that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, and he that is
not one of Christ's flock, I do not know how he should understand Christ's
voice. The prophaner Jews had the magnalia legis, the great things of the Law
delivered to them, and they accounted them as a strange thing, for, as the
Apostle speaks, Moses has a veil lying upon his face, and when that people
shall be converted unto the Lord, this veil shall be taken away. There is the
flesh of Christ covering his spirit, there is the letter and shell of the word
of Christ as it is printed in our Bibles, which does, like a Masque, cloud and
hide the beautiful face of Truth, so that a carnal heart cannot discern the
beauty, or judge aright of the excellency thereof, so that the preaching of
Christ crucified, is, (...), an offense to the Jew, and to the Greeks
foolishness; but unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, it is the
power of God, and the wisdom of God. Great men are not always wise men, and
the men of the world are not fit to advise withal in the things of God. Some
there be whom God has given up (...), to a Reprobate mind, to an injudicious
mind, which has no true judgment in heavenly things. Would any one make a
madd man his Counselor? No, He would choose one that is compos mentis, one that
is of a sober and discreet reason and advise with him in a matter of
difficulty. He that is of a ranting spirit, and given to the love of fleshly
pleasures, may verba conari, may, like a Parrot, speak words which he
understands not, but he is crazed in his intellectualls, and knows not the way
of the spirit in the soul. Let me hear one speak concerning the work of
Grace, the actings of Faith, the drawings of the spirit; whose eyes have been
opened, as Baalam said of himself, in another case, one who has had an
internal sense and feeling of these things within himself, for He is best
able to unfold such hidden mysteries. But let us cease from man, for wherein is
he to be accounted of? The Day-dawning and the day star arising in our hearts,
will give us better light into that more sure word, of the Prophets and
Apostles, then all the learned Schoolmen, or voluminous Commentators, who have
not plowed with Gods Heifer.

Fourthly, 4 Use. Litterall knowledge does not make a Christian.
If knowledge of Christian Doctrine must be received by spiritual anointing,
then to be instructed in the Letter of the Scriptures, is not enough to make a
Christian. A man may by natural understanding, exercised upon the Letter of
the Bible, attain to very great Orthodoxie in Articles of Faith, and several
points of Religion, for that which is true in Divinity, is true also in Reason;
but notwithstanding all this litterall knowledge, his soul may be like
Pharaohs lean kine, a starved and ill-favored soul. The generality of men in
the world are exceedingly mistaken in this business; for they have thought it
to be Reformation enough, if they might but purge their Articles of Faith, and
set forth in print that which might vindicate the truth of their opinions, and
ways, from the prejudice that they lie under in the World, whereas in the
midst of such reformation, men shall be as carnal and devilish as they were
before, they shall inwardly be as full of pride, and covetousness, of envy and
malice, of hatred and revenge as ever; and they shall have leave to study
mischief, and conceive evil will against their neighbor, notwithstanding all
the elaborate niceness of a reformed System. Brethren, We must not only
reform our Books, though that be very good, but we must reform our hearts,
and our lives; the power of this anointing must eat out the proud flesh of our
distempered hearts, and quicken us also into a more pure and refined spirit.
Professors do think they attain to a great measure of heavenly skill, if they
are but so well read in the Bible, as to turn from one Scripture to anoother,
and compare one place with another, whereby they may more strongly back that
opinion which they would defend, whereas all this while, The Scripture is a
thing without them, and the mind of God is in their Bibles, not in their
hearts, but the true Christian has the word of God transcribed into himself,
and can say in his measure, as Jesus Christ did, I delight to do thy will, O my
God, Yea, thy Law is within my heart. Eunapius in the life of Porphyrie,
speaking of his Master Longinus says, He was such an excellent Scholar, That
he was (...), a living Library, a walking Study; all his books were so well
digested, and their notions concocted in his mind, that he did (as it were)
give life and motion to his Books, in a requital for that learning which he
had received from them. He is a Christian to purpose, who has the Bible
transpirited into his mind, who has digested the sense of Scripture into
practice and vital blood. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is
that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew who is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, whose praise is
not of men but of God.

Fifthly. 5 Use. Want of anointing the ground of Apostasy.
Does the Apostle bring in this anointing of the spirit, as that which secures
holy men from Antichristian impostures, then here may we see the ground of
those great Apostacies that are abroad. Do we at any time see some eminent
professor come tumbling down like Lucifer from the height of his profession,
and immerd himself in the dung of worldly wickedness, let us know, the reason
is, because he had no root in himself. They went out from us; says our
Apostle, for they were not of us, They were leviter tincti, sed non penitus
imbuti, they have had perhaps some sudden and transient tastes of sweetness in
the ways of God, but never did feed upon them with savor, nor digest them.
They went out from us, that it might be manifest that they were not all of us;
There be some men in the world, who have much of that which we call light in
their understandings, but have no grace nor honesty in their hearts, and it is
no wonder if they turn away from the Truth in a time of Temptation, and day of
Trial; it is the good ground that brings forth fruit, and it is the honest
heart that stands in a tempest, being well bottomed and grounded upon a Rock.
He that is hurryed into any profession, by the impulse of his worldly
affections, can not be settled and established in that profession, but must turn
about when those affections give the word; He is like a ship whose sails are
open to every gale of wind, but has neither Ballast nor Rudder to keep it
steady in its motion. Many people think themselves so good Protestants, that
they should never turn Papists; who yet, I fear, would fall from their own
steadfastness into the error of the wicked; and casting off the Protestant
Articles, would easily entertain for Faith the dogmata of Rome; the reason
whereof is, Their souls are not converted to that Faith which they profess. To
an unregenerate man who gives up himself to licentiousness, All Religion is
alike, for Religion does oblige and command the soul into a diligent obedience
to some Rule, but such an unmortified heart cannot endure the beautiful bands
of a Religious Law. But where the Gospel of Christ comes, as it did to the
Thessalonians, not in word only, but (...), in power and much full assurance,
where the word of Truth is made manifest, in men's consciences, and becomes an
engrafted word, there we may be persuaded with the Apostle, that he who has
begun a good work, will perfect it unto the coming of Christ. This I must
confess, That men by the improvement of their natural understandings, and by
observing the Dictates of natural conscience, may reform some external
enormities and scandalous vices of their lives, and proceed further in
profession upon account of some worldly considerations, but from all this
reformation, though improved and carried on very high, they may again revolt,
and apostatize, because the principles thereof were external and political,
not internal and genuine: Such men as these are not like Timothy, whom Paul
calls his natural son in the Faith, they are not natural, but artificial
Christians. But he that is, not in appearance only, but in Truth also
transformed into the image of Christ, has the seed of God remaining in him.
and eternal life implanted, which shall never wither; He shall never drown
himself in sensuality, or fall away from the holiness of a godly life, into
the filth and baseness of a degenerate spirit. The Apostle says, Oportet esse
haereses, There must be haeresies, That they which are approved may be made
manifest. The understanding Merchant knows which is the Pearl of price, when
one that is ignorant may be cheated with a counterfeit. This is the excellency
and glory of a spirit taught of God, That when others fall away from the Truth
of Doctrine and integrity of life, that will still adhere and cleave unto him;
when the whole world shall lie in wickedness, that will preserve it self
unspotted and blameless, unto the coming of Christ. Hence it was that the
Martyrs of old, though they could not dispute, yet they could dye for Christ.
He that is alive in God, shall not be religious only when he has the times
with him, for that is easy, the dead fish can swim down the stream; but
when the wickedness of the times, and places where he lives draws other men
into a dissolute looseness, He shall stand like mount Zion, and never be
removed.

Sixthly, 6 Use. Deal kindly with the spirit of Christ.
If the Spirit of Christ be such a teaching spirit, whereby we know him aright,
then it concerns every regenerate soul to deal kindly with that spirit. Oh!
Be very tender of the good spirit of Jesus Christ. I mean not only that
Gentle spirit, which sometimes breaths upon the Garden of our souls, and makes
the spices thereof flow out and give their sent, but that spirit of Christ also
which is united unto and implanted in our Spirits, that New Creature which is
formed within us. Oh! Take heed of grieving, tempting, or quenching this
spirit; Spiritus Sanctus est res delicata, The divine spirit is a very tender
thing, Let none dare to cast water upon it, whereby to cool or dampe it, but
let it act according to its own natural tendency. It was the great request of
David's heart in Psalm. 51. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not
thy Holy spirit from me. O Lord, whatsoever thou take away, do not take
this away: This spirit is that which puts me upon observance of thy will, and
does many times recover and bring me back again, when I have forgotten my self
and thee. Christians! would you know what you are most of all beholding to in
the world? It is the good spirit and life of Jesus Christ; This is the Life of
your lives, and the soul of your souls; without this spirit you were but as
other men, yea, you were unto God, but as dead carkases and stinking Carryons.
Now if this spirit be our life, and if by this men live, Oh! then be kind and
tender toward it; take heed least by any means you do offend it. Then does a
soul deal harshly and unkindly with this spirit, when it opposes, resists
and endeavors to stifle the motions of it, when the will of Christ in the
soul is gain-sayd. Take heed, Christians, that you be not so rude as to offer
violence, and to force this holy spirit; when that moves you toward God, do
not you turn away from God. What the Apostle beggs for patience, I would beg
for the spirit of Christ, let the Nature, Spirit, and Life of Christ have its
perfect work in you, let it act according to its own freedom and latitude.
The Holy Ghost that dwells in you, does advise you not only to be Christians,
pro hic and nunc, by fits and starts, so as may serve your own turns, but
also to be enduring, and universal Christians: This divine Spirit is not
satisfied if you be only moved by it in your public Assemblies, unless you
be moved by it also in your Closets, your Shops, and in all your Relations: for
the Sphere of the new Creature, is, a sober, righteous, and godly life. Where
this holy Spirit dwells, it will prompt the soul to something which is
transcendent, and above the strain of vulgar spirits. Now suppose I should
propound to this great Assembly the Question that Christ propounded to his
Disciples in Matthew. 5. (...), what singular thing do you more then others?
Yea, let me but propound it to those who are called the holy ones of the most
High, Wherein do you excel the Spirits of worldly men? What is there that may
speak you to be anointed with this Divine Spirit? Are you not as Proud, as
Covetous, as vain in your conversations, as other men? Oh! Then let me commend
this unto you, as seasonable and wholesome counsel, Take heed how you use the
spirit of Christ which dwells in you, and suffer it to act like it self.

Seventhly, 7 Use. A guess at heavenly glory.
and Lastly. If holy souls know heavenly things by virtue of the anointing
from the holy one, which teaches so sweetly and clearly, then from hence we
may guess at the glory of Heaven. We may stand upon this Truth as Moses did
upon the top of Pisgah, and from thence view the land of Promise. If the
dignity of Christian in this world, be such as to have his mind enlightened
with the pure spirit of Christ, whereby he knows the mind of God with
infallible certainty, then what shall his glory be in the world to come? The
Scriptures call that Spirit which Believers receive here, the Seal, the
earnest and first fruits of that which they shall receive hereafter. And
although this present knowledge which they have of heavenly Truths, does so
far exceed and transcend all the litterall knowledge of other men; yet the
Apostle accounts it dark and aenigmaticall in comparison of that knowledge
which he expects at the Revelation of Jesus Christ; for in this mixture of
flesh and spirit the soul does use glasses and perspectives, but then it shall
see (...), face to face, then shall it know even as it is known. Oh! What
infinite serenity and surpassing brightness shall then incompasse holy souls,
when they shall see all Truth in him who is Truth it self? Here we may often
meet with vexations disputes from contentious Spirits, but in Heaven there
shall be altum silentium, a deep silence and everlasting rest, where our
souls shall wade into a Sea of light and enter into a vast eternity of Truth.
There shall be no spots, nor blemishes, no doubts nor scruples arising in our
spirits, for it shall be all day, even a day without clouds. We shall never
more be troubled with the importunity of busy arguments, there shall be no
room for the Disputer of this world, but the immaculate Lamb our Lord Jesus
shall be the light of that new Jerusalem, and he shall enlighten our souls
with his own light and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

