The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Presbyterians, Presented to the KING
BY Mr. HVRST, Mr. CHESTER, Mr. SLATER, Mr. COX, Mr. ROSWELL, Mr. TVRNER, Mr.
FRANKLIN, Mr. DEAL, and Mr. REYNOLDS.
With His Majesty's GRACIOUS ANSWER.

Printed for I W. in the Year 16^^.

The Humble Address of the Presbyterians, Presented to the KING.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
TO believe the Thankfulness of our Hearts, beyond any Expressions of our Lips
or Pens, for Your most Gracious Declaration for Liberty for us, in the Worship
of God, which we trust we shall ever value above our Property, as that without
which we could enjoy nothing which we could call our own, without the greatest
uneasiness imaginable: But Your Majesty having in the same Declaration also
secured that unto us, both by Your Royal Word and Act: What could Your Majesty
have done more for us? Or what is left for us further to ask of the King? And
forasmuch as it has pleased Your most Excellent Majesty, to give this safe
Port to Your poor Subjects, so long tossed with Tempests, and justly to
believe, that Loyalty is not intailed to a Party, as we hope we shall ever
justify the Credit, which Your Majesty's Charity in that point has given us;
So we shall not cease to bow our Knees to the God whom we serve, and by whom
Kings Reign, beseech^ng him to recompense this Royal Favor to Your Majesty,
with length of days, uninterrupted Health, Felicity in Your Royal Relations,
Success in Your Great Councils and Affairs, and finally, with the most Glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God, heartily crying, as with one Voice, Let the King
live for ever.

Subscribed on the Behalf of our selves, and the rest of our Persuasion.

THE Kings Answer.
Gentlemen,
I Have already found two good Effects of my Declaration; the Easing and,
Pleasing My Subjects You spoke of, and My restoring to God the Empire over
Conscience: It has been my Judgment a long time, that none Has or ought to Have
any power over the Conscience but God. I understand there are some Iealousies
among my Subjects, That I have done this in a Design: But you look like
Gentlemen of too great Ingenuity to entertain any such Suspicion.

Gentlemen, I protest before God, and I desire you to tell all manner of People
of all Persuasions, as you have opportunity to Converse with them, that I have
no other Design than that I have spoke of.

And Gentlemen, I hope to live to see the Day when you shall as well have Magna
Charta for the Liberty of Conscience, as you have had for your Properties.

And now Gentlemen, do You so Preach to Your Hearers as they may be good
Christians, and then I do not question but they will be good Subjects.

FINIS.

