An ANALYTICALL EXPOSITION Of both the Epistles of the Apostle PETER,
Illustrated by Doctrines out of every Text. And applied by their Uses, for a
further progress in Holiness. By the Reverend and faithful Minister of God,
William Ames, D. D. and late of Christ's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell, at the (...) in Paul's Church^^^^
(...)

1 Peter 1, 2, etc. Verse 1. Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia;

Verse 2. Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace be multiplied.


The Analysis.
THe Scope of this Epistle is to exhort the faithful to continue steadfast in
that grace of God wherein they stood, as it is expressly set down, chap. 5.
verse. 12. But because that grace of God is considered in a twofold respect;
either as it does put a man into the state of grace, and so it equally belongs
unto all the faithful; or as it does direct the faithful in the performing of
their duties toward others, according to that special condition wherein they
are placed: therefore in the first place the Apostle exhorts them to hold fast
that grace, because it belongs to the state of the regenerate man: from the
beginning of the Epistle to the 13 verse of the 2 chap. and then he commends
and persuades them unto that special grace, which does in the first place
direct subjects in their obedience toward the Magistrates, to the 18 verse.
Servants in obedience toward their Masters, to the end of the chapter. Wives
in their subjection to their husbands, from the beginning of the third chapter
to the seventh verse. Husbands in their duty toward their wives, verse. 7.
Brethren in their duty toward their brethren, verse. 8. The afflicted toward
their persecutors, from the 9 verse. to the beginning of the 5 chap. The Elders
toward their Churches, from the beginning of the 5 chap. to the 5. verse. The
younger toward their elders, at the beginning of the 5. verse. and finally, all
both toward others and toward themselves, to the 10 verse. where the whole
foregoing exhortation is turned into a short prayer which serves for a forcible
conclusion of the whole Epistle.

To the Epistle it self there belong two common adjuncts. An Inscription,
verse. 1, 2. A Subscription, in the three last. In the Inscription there is
contained, according to the usual manner of Epistles, a holy salutation,
showing first, by whom this Epistle was written, secondly, to whom, thirdly,
with what mind or affection it was written unto them; which is set forth by
that pious wish, wherein he wishes unto them the greatest good, Grace and
Peace. In the person writing, and the good wished there are all things the same
with those that are spoken of in the second Epistle. But the description of the
persons to whom it was written, is something fuller here then there; now they
are described, first by their outward condition, strangers scattered throughout
Pontus, Asia, Galatia, Cappadocia. Secondly, by their inward spiritual
condition, which is set forth, 1. by the fundamental cause of it, Election, to
wit, of God, 2. by the final cause, Sanctification. 3. by the subservient
cause, Reconciliation, to wit, conferred in obedience and sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ: which three causes of our sanctification are set forth
by the three persons of the Deity, to whom as to the authors thereof they are
distinctly ascribed, Election to God the Father, Sanctification to the holy
Spirit, Reconciliation to Jesus Christ. By the strangers scattered, to whom
this Epistle is chiefly directed, we are to understand the Jews, together with
the other Israelites, who did embrace the faith. For James, John and Peter,
discharged their Apostleship amongst the circumcised Israelites, Gal. 2 8, 9.
Therefore as James does expressly direct his Epistle to the twelve Tribes
scattered, so here also by the same reason, by the strangers scattered we are
to understand the twelve Tribes scattered.

By the foreknowledge of God, according to which the faithful are here said to
be elect, we are to understand election it self, as it is in God, Romans 8. 29.
and by election the same act of God, as it is terminated in the faithful, and
put in execution by effectual vocation.

By sanctification of the Spirit, we are to understand the whole spiritual
change of our condition, even unto perfect holiness and glory, because
sanctification is the means of salvation unto which we are chosen, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
13.

By obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Christ we are to understand the
whole work of Redemption, together with the application thereof unto
justification and reconciliation with God, Ephesians. 1. 6. 7.

The Doctrines that we may draw from this are these.

Doct. 1. The beginning and fountain of all our happiness and consolation
consists in this, that we are the elect of God.

This is gathered from hence, that the Apostle purposing in this description to
make mention of those things that did most of all pertain to the consolation
of the faithful, puts election in the first place, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4.

Reason 1. Because all our happiness comes wholly from God, who is the author
and fountain of all good: now it comes from him not by the way of nature, but
of counsel and free election, and so it proceeds from election it self.

2. Because all his special blessings which belong unto our salvation, depend
upon election, Ephesians. 1. 3* 4.

Use. This may serve to exhort us to use all diligence to make our election
certain and sure. 2 Peter 1. 10.

Doct. 2. There is no other cause or reason to be given of our election unto
salvation, but only the good pleasure of God.

This is drawn from those words: Elect according to the foreknowledge of God:
for if there were any cause extra Deum, out of God, that could possibly be
discerned by the eye or sense of men, it is most likely that the Apostle would
have named that, as being more known and discernable, and so more properly
belonging to that consolation and congratulation which he proposed to himself.

Reason 1. Because the counsels and decrees of God do not depend upon those
things that are extra Deum, without God, but they depend upon Gods decrees: for
the decrees are first, and they last.

2. Because otherwise all the glory of our election and salvation should not
wholly be ascribed unto God, and consequently all praise and thanksgiving
should not be due unto him alone.

3. Because if our election did depend upon our selves, who are weak and
changeable every hour, our election also it self would be changeable and
uncertain, and so would afford us no sound consolation.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those, that make Gods election to depend upon
our faith and perseverance, as a cause or condition requisite.

2. To exhort us to acknowledge this wonderful grace of God toward us, and to
give him all the praise and glory of it, both in the inward desires of our
hearts, and the joyful profession of our tongues, and our lives answerable
thereunto.

Doct. 3. True sanctification is a certain fruit of election.

This is gathered from these words; Elect to sanctification, Ephesians. 1. 4.

Reason 1. Because sanctification is a certain effect and sign of the
singular love of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Now this singular love, which has
respect to spiritual blessings, does nothing differ from election, as touching
the thing it self.

2. Because sanctification is, as it were, actual election: for as by the
election of God, the heirs of salvation are distinguished from others in God
himself, or in his intention and counsel; so also by regeneration and
sanctification are they distinguished from others in themselves. For to
sanctify, according to the general signification of the word, is to set apart
to some use.

3. Because sanctification, although it be imperfect, yet it is that salvation
and life begun unto which we are elected.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those men that make sanctification the common
possession of those that are not elect.

2. To comfort all those that are partakers of true sanctification: because
thereby they may the more assured of their election.

3. To exhort us to be very careful to increase our sanctification.

Doct. 4. The mediation of Christ, and reconciliation made for us in him, is
the only means whereby the force of our election is derived unto us, and our
sanctification and salvation is propagated.

This is gathered from those words: by obedience and sprinkling.

Reason 1. Because God made Christ our Mediator, neither is there any other
name under heaven whereby we may be saved.

2. Because God made him the Mediator of our redemption by virtue of his
election: for those whom God elected, he gave unto Christ to be redeemed and
saved, John 17. 6. John 6. 37.

3. Because Christ is the second Adam, the Father, the head of all those that
are elected and to be saved: therefore as life natural was derived unto all
men first from Adam, so also from Christ, and in him is all life spiritual
communicated unto us.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Papists and others which have chosen to
themselves other means and mediators extra Christum, besides Christ, and have
departed from that way of salvation which the eternal election of God has
presc^ibed.

2. To exhort us to put our whole trust and confidence in Christ alone, and
daily to seek after a nearer and nearer union with him.

Doct. 5. In that chain of our salvatian, the beginning is from God the
Father, the dispensation of it is through his Son Jesus Christ, the
application of it is through the Holy Ghost.

This is intimated in that solemn benediction which the Church received from
the Apostle.

Reason. Because this order of operation does best agree with the order of
subsisting, which the Scripture attributes to the Divine persons.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, by no means to put a sunder those
operations which God has joined together: Now this they do, which do either
divide Christ from election, or election from Christ, or the election of the
Father and Christ from the sanctification of the holy Ghost, promising to
themselves salvation, either by virtue of election, or of Christ, when they
have not the least part of the sanctification of the holy Ghost.

2. To comfort all the true faithful, which do join these things together:
because they can want nothing to salvation, which is not abundantly provided
for them in that cooperation of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Verse 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Verse 4. To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for you.

Verse 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready
to be revealed in the last time.


The Analysis.
BEcause the Apostles scope in the general and former part of this Epistle,
was to commend unto the faithful that true grace of God wherein they stood,
therefore he does first describe that grace, verse. 3, 4, 5.

2. By the effect of it, to wit, joy, and rejoicing, which redounds unto all
the faithful from the partaking of this grace, from the 6 verse. to the 10.

3. He does illustrate it and confirm it by that testimony, which the Prophets
gave unto this grace, verse. 10, 11, 12.

4. From thence he draws and exhortation to holiness answerable to this
grace, from the 13 verse. to the end of the first chap. The means of which
holiness he shows to be the religious receiving of the word of God, verse. 1,
2, 3. of the second chapter. The chief object of which word he shows to be
Christ, from the 4 verse. to the 13. where is the general end of this
institution.

The description, verse. 3, 4 5. of the state of this grace is placed in
regeneration or effectual calling in these words: has begotten us again:
which regeneration is described, ^. by the principal efficient cause thereof,
which is set down to be, God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. By the
impulsive cause thereof, the mercy of God, which is described by the quantity
of it, abundant. 3. By the immediate effect thereof, a lively hope: the
singular cause whereof is showed to be the resurrection of Christ from the
dead. 4. By the remote and last effect thereof, which is laid hold on also, and
in some sort possessed by that hope, that is, salvation and life everlasting,
verse. 4. Betwixt which effect and its cause he affirms that there is a very
certain connection, when he says, that that inheritance is reserved in heaven
for all the regenerate; and he gives a most certain reason of his connection,
verse. 5. which he shows to consists in three things. 1. In the power of God,
whereby the regenerate are kept unto salvation. 2. In their faith, whereby they
adhere to this power of God. 3. in the eternal degree of God, whereby he has
both provided this salvation for all the regenerate, and appointed a certain
time, wherein to bestow it upon them.

But this description of Gods grace is not simply and barely proposed by the
Apostle, but after such a manner as is agreeable to the nature of the thing,
that is, with thanksgiving and glorifying of the name of God, in that he has
vouchsafed to bestow so great a grace upon miserable sinners, in that first
word, Blessed be God.

The Doctrines drawn from this.
Doct. 1. The state of grace depends upon and flows from effectual calling.

This is gathered from hence, that the Apostle speaking of the grace wherein
the faithful stood, begins with regeneration, by which is understood
effectual calling.

Reason 1. Because by our true calling we have union with Christ the fountain
of all grace.

2. Because in this regeneration there is begotten in us a principle of
spiritual life, which is nothing else but the grace of God, or the power and
gift of grace quickening our souls.

3. Because from this union which we have by being made partakers of spiritual
life, there does certainly and immediately follow a communion with the Father
in all spiritual blessings, and consequently a change of our condition from
that which before it was, to wit, sin and death, to that whereunto we are
called, grace and life.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us to use all diligence to make our calling
sure, because without it we have no entrance to the state of grace.

2. To comfort all those that endeavor to obey Gods call; f^r all of them have
(as it were) the door of Gods grace opened un^o them.

Doctr. 2. God regenerates us, as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Reason 1. Because in Christ our Redeemer, and in our redemption performed by
him, he laid the foundation of all our restoring to salvation.

2. Because he made Christ that great Shepherd, that should gather his sheep,
that is, the elect into his fold, by effectual calling and regeneration. Heb.
13. 20. John 10. 16.

3. Because through Christ and his name men are called and regenerated by God,
2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20.

Use. This may serve to inform us, that in all those things that belong unto
our salvation, we ought always to look upon God in Christ, and consequently
always to call upon and praise God in Christ. The solemn title, and as it
were style of God, that was used in the celebrating of his name, was not
always one and the same from the beginning of the world, but diverse: first,
he was called by Melchizedeck, the most high God, possessour of heaven and
earth, Genesis 14. 19. Afterward by reason of that singular covenant which he
made with Abraham and his posterity, he began to be called the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: then again, after that wonderful deliverance of his people
out of Egypt, for the memory of that thing there was added to his title, The
God which brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage: so also in the Prophet, after his deliverance of them from
the Babylonish captivity, he was called The Lord which brought up his people
out of the North country, Ier. 23. 7, 8. But now under the New Testament, and
the Sun being risen, all his other works and benefits being obscured by the
coming of Christ, this title is most congruous and solemn, God the Father of
our Lord Iesies Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Ephesians. 1, 3:

Doct. 3. A wonderful great mercy of God appears in our regeneration.

Reason 1. Because he frees us from the greatest misery, and makes us partakers
of the greatest good.

2. Because he does this of his mere goodness, not only without our deserts,
but even contrary to our deserts: when we did not so much as seek or wish for
any such benefits to our selves, but were altogether aliens from God, and
enemies to him.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us to attribute all to the mercy of God alone,
and to raise up our minds to the admiration of it.

2. To be heartily affected with these mercies of God, and to be stirred up to
glorify him, Romans 12. 1.

Doct. 4. Regeneration brings men a lively hope of eternal life.

Reason 1. Because we are called and regenerated to salvation and eternal
glory, 1 Pet. 5. 10.

2 Because we have the covenant and promise of this thing confirmed to us in
our very calling.

Because the Spirit wherewith we are quickened, lifts up our minds, and makes
that hope to be lively.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us, highly to prize our calling and
regeneration.

3 2. to endeavor by all means to cherish and increase this hope in our
selves, and to take heed that it be not dead or languishing, but lively, quick,
and operative.

Doct. 5. The liveliness of our hope depends upon the resursection of Jesus
Christ from the dead.

Reason 1. Because by the resurrection of Christ, it appears that death was
subdued and overcome by him, and God was appeased in him; for otherwise, had he
been overcome by death, he would have been perpetually kept under it.

2. Because Christ rose, as the first fruits of all the regenerate, 1 Cor. 15.
20. and the first borne from the dead, Col. l. 8. Apoc. 1. 5.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, for the confirmation and quickening of our
hope, to put before out eyes the resurrection of Christ.

Doct. 6. That salvation which we hope for, is a celestial and incorruptible
inheritance, Verse. 4.

Reason 1. It comes from God our Father to us his regenerate and adopted
sons, as worldly inheritances use to come from fathers to their children.

2. Because it is not obtained by buying or any other such like means of our
own, but it comes by the will and testament of our heavenly Father. Now as for
these reasons, it is rightly called an inheritance; so also in the nature of it
it has this excellency above all other inheritances, that it is celestial and
immortal: in which respect it does not only excel worldly possessions, but
also even that very condition of life which Adam had before the fall.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to suffer our hearts at any time to
cleave to the things of this world, or to depend upon them, because our
inheritance is not terrestrial, or of this world, but celestial and
incorruptible.

2. To exhort us to walk as it becomes those that are called to so great an
inheritance. For this is it which the Apostle means, when he usually
admonishes us to walk according to our calling, and when he prays, that God
would enlighten the eyes of our minds, and grant us to know what is the hope
of his calling, and what the riches, Ephesians. 1. 18. as if that they that did
clearly see this and meditate upon it, could not faulter or fail in any duty.

Doct. 7. The exceeding great power of God, his fidelity and constancy, does
make this inheritance firm and sure unto us.

This is gathered out of the 5. verse, and you may see it proved, Ephesians. 1. 19.

Reason 1. Because God does powerfully perform all things, whatsoever he has
decreed and promised. 2. Because all the whole business of our salvation
depends upon the omnipotency of God: for the enemies of our salvation, and the
difficulties of it are so great, that no other power is able to subdue them.

Use. 1. This may serve to refute those, that will have our salvation to depend
upon the frailty of our will: they deny that God does powerfully work in us to
salvation, when notwithstanding the Scripture does expressly affirm it. Ephesians.
1. 19. and 3. 16. 20. 2. For comfort; for when we have such a Keeper as is
omnipotent, we have no cause to fear that any thing present or to come should
ever frustrate our hope, or deprive us of our expected salvation. 3. To exhort
us, to depend upon that power of God by true faith, as it is in the text.

Doct. 8. These spiritual blessings of God, should never be mentioned or
thought upon by us, without a pious desire to bless God for them.

This is gathered from that word Blessed. So Ephesians. 1. 3. 12 2 Cor. 1. 3.

Use. This may serve to reprove that sluggishnesse and Luke-warmnesse of ours,
which is oftentimes so great, that we are no otherwise affected when we speak,
hear, or think of these things, then when we are talking of common things:
yea, we are scarce so much moved, as we use to be then, when we speak of any
worldly profit, which does delight us.

Verse 6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice: though now for a season (if need be) ye
are in heaviness through manifold temptations.

7. That the trial of your faith, being much more precious then of Gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

8. Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your Souls.


GRace is here set forth by the effect and adjunct thereof, which he makes to
consist in the greatest joy, in those words, wherein ye rejoice. Now this joy
is amplified by those manifold afflictions and temptations, which usually make
men sad rather then joyful, in the other part of the 6. verse, where the
amplification per discretum axioma, by a discret axiom, is to be conceived
after this manner. Although by reason of manifold afflictions and temptations
ye are exceeding heavy, yet so great is the excellency of this grace wherein
ye stand, that these afflictions are no hinderance to you, because ye rejoice
in that grace with great joy.

Now that afflictions should not take away spiritual joy from the faithful,
he shows, first, from the nature of those afflictions, wherewith the faithful
are wont to be vexed. 2. From the nature of that grace, which produces
spiritual joy. The heaviness of afflictions is diminished. 1. By the adjunct
of duration, that they are but for a season. 2. By the adjunct of profit, that
they bring fruit and utility; and for no other cause do they befall them, in
these words: if need be. 3. By the singular end and use of afflictions, by
which also their profit is showed, to wit, that they serve for the trial of
their faith; which trial of faith is set forth by a similie, and that of a
lesser, the trial of Gold. 4. By the effect of it, which is praise, honor and
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

The nature of grace he shows to be such, as that it can overcome all
afflictions: the reason whereof he makes to be this, because it joins us with
Christ, without the help of the outward senses, and so both against and above
sense, it lifts up the mind to the greatest joy verse 8. of which joy he
declares first the adjuncts of it, unspeakable and full of glory, and
afterward the cause or argument that moves or stirs up such joy in the
faithful, to wit, that by their faith they are made surer of the salvation of
their Souls; which is the end and scope of the 9 verse.

The Doctrines drawn hence.
Doct. 1. Joy and spiritual rejoicing arises from the sense and participation
of spiritual grace.

This is gathered from those words: Wherein ye rejoice. For exultatio,
rejoicing is a vehement act of joy, as it is intimated in the end of the 8. verse.

Reason. 1. Because it is the nature of joy, for the mind to delight it self
with the possession of some solid good: now there is noe good that can be
Compared cum Summo bono. with that chief good and eternal happiness; and this
we begin to have possession of in having possession of saving grace; and the
complete and full possession of it is laid hold on and made sure by faith and
hope; and hence it is that spiritual joy is properly the fruit of hope. Heb.
3. 6. Romans 5. 2. Yet notwithstanding this is so to be understood, as that we
must not exclude all those from the state of grace, which have not this joy
sometimes; because this joy d^pends upon the sense of grace; now sometimes they
have not the sense of grace, that are either hindered by ignorance, or some
grievous temptation, that they* cannot be sensible of that which they have.

Use. 1. This may serve to refute those carnal men, who suppose the practice
of religion to be full of sadness and heaviness, without any joy or delight;
when indeed the joy of these men is nothing else but madness, Eccles. 2. 2.
and is changed at length into the greatest sorrow: but true and solid joy is
the privilege of all the godly, because they alone have true cause of joy, and
that joy shall never be taken from them.

2. To exhort us to raise up our minds to the exercise of this joy, for
thereunto we are called, that we should always rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 4.
4. An example hereof we have in the Eunuch, who went forward in his way with
joy, after that by baptism he was made sure of the grace of God, Acts 8. 39.

Doct. 2. Manifold afflictions may well stand with this joy.

Reason 1. Because although afflictions may makes us somewhat heavy, yet that
heaviness is not in the highest degree, that it should wholly possess and
overwhelme our minds, but it is mitigated and overcome by spiritual joy.

2. Because the afflictions themselves are turned into matter of joy and
rejoicing, James 1. 2. Romans 5. 3.

Use. This may serve to admonish us not so much to fear the afflictions of
this world, or at any time so to lie down them, as to cast off all our joy.

Doct. 3. Afflictions are turned into matter of rejoicing, when there is such
use made of them, as that our faith and every grace is stirred up and increased
by them.

This is gathered from the seventh Verse.

Reason 1. Because we make great gain by the trial of our faith, much more
then can be gotten by the trial of gold, as it is in the Text.

2. Because faith by this trial becomes the stronger by reason of afflictions,
and does more firmly expect praise, honor and glory in Christ, as it is in
the Text.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to make it our primary and chiefest care
not to faint in our faith and other graces, when we are in the midst of
afflictions, as those that have but a temporary faith are wont to do, but to
labor to profit by them.

Doct. 4. This joy does not depend upon the sight or visible presence of Christ.

This is gathered from the eighth Verse.

Reason 1. Because faith and hope is properly of those things that are not
seen, Romans 8. 24. Heb. 11. 1. Now this joy arises from faith and hope, as it
is in the Text.

2. Because we rejoice either in the actual possession, or in the certainty of
the possession of the things we love. Now Christ having not yet seen we love,
as it is in the Text.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, while we live here by faith, so to walk,
rejoice, and live, as if we did behold Christ with our eyes: For blessed are
all they which have not seen and yet have believed, John 20. 29.

Doct. 5. This joy is unspeakable and full of glory.

Reason. Because both the thing it self wherein we rejoice, and the operation
of the Spirit in raising our minds unto it, is more divine, then can possibly
be conceived, much less expressed by us.

Use. 1. This may serve to admonish us not to be too curious in the searching
after and declaring of those things that are unutterable.

2. To exhort us to apply our souls to the sense and exercise of this grace,
because they have a divine and glorious nature.

Doct. 6. By this joy we begin to look for the end of our faith, even the
salvation of our souls.

Reason. Because this spiritual joy is a glorious beginning of our glory, and
so of our salvation through Christ.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, highly to prize this spiritual joy, and by
all means to be careful to stir up and cherish it in our selves.

Verse 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you,

Verse 11. Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which
was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of
Christ, and the glory that should follow.

Verse 12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister the things which are now reported unto you by them that have
preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven,
which things the Angels desire to look into.


TO confirm and illustrate the grace and salvation, that has hitherto been
spoken of, the Apostle in these verses brings the testimony of the Prophets;
which is set forth, 1. By the principal object thereof, which is nothing else
but this selfsame salvation and grace, wherein the faithful Christians now
stand, in these words: of which salvation that should come unto us they
prophesied. 2. By the manner how they were employed about this object; They did
it with great care and diligent heed, in these words, they enquired and
searched diligently. 3. By the singular description of that object whereabout
they were employed, verse. 11. and the manner how. The object, to wit, salvation
and grace before spoken of, is described by the efficient cause thereof,
namely, the mediation of Christ, consisting of two parts, his humiliation and
exaltation at the end of the verse. And the manner how the Prophets are said to
have been employed about this cause of our salvation, consisted in two things:
1. That they did not only desire to know the very thing it self, but also the
very moment of time wherein it should be revealed, in these words, what, or
what manner of time. 2. That it did not depend upon various and uncertain
conjectures, but they did religiously ask counsel of the Spirit of Christ,
that was present with them, as of one that did foreknow and could foretell of
all things that should happen, in these words, the Spirit of Christ which was
in them, that testified beforehand, did signify.

The testimony it self of the Prophets is proposed in the 12 verse, to wit,
that this grace and salvation was to be revealed at that very time wherein it
appeared, and no other: which testimony of the Prophets is also set forth by
the like testimonies of the Apostles and Angels. The similitude that is betwixt
the Apostles and the Prophets is showed herein; that as the Prophets prophesied
of these things by the Spirit of Christ, that was in them, that foretold it; so
the Apostles declared the same things by the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven.
The similitude that is betwixt the Angels and the Prophets is showed herein;
that as the Prophets enquired and searched diligently concerning this
salvation; so also the Angels did desire to look into it, all and each of which
make very much for the setting forth of this grace.

The Doctrines drawn from hence are these.

Doct. I. The chief part of the prophesies of all the true Prophets that have
been from the beginning of the world, was concerning the grace and salvation
that should come by Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

This is gathered from the tenth Verse. The like you may see, Acts 3. 18, 20.
and 7. 52.

Reason I. Because the salvation of the Church in all ages depended upon
Christ: Now it was the office of the Prophets to direct the Church in the
seeking of their salvation.

2. All the Prophets were Ministers of Christ, and were led by his Spirit,
Verse 11. and therefore ought to seek his honor.

3. Because after this manner were men's minds to be prepared by degrees for
the receiving of Christ that was to come: for what is said of John the Baptist,
does in some sort belong unto all the Prophets, that they did prepare the ways
of the Lord.

Use 1. This may serve for Information, to confirm and establish the true
faith, not only against the Heathens and Jews, but also against the Papists
themselves, who say that this true doctrine of the grace revealed in Jesus
Christ, is a new doctrine, and never heard of before these times; for we
acknowledge no other grace, but that which those Prophets always prophesied of
from the beginning of the world.

2. To exhort us, continually to meditate upon this grace our selves, and as
occasion shall serve, to show it forth unto others, with all freeness and
readiness of mind. for this does become us much rather then those, that lived
so long before the coming of Christ, and beheld him only afar off.

Doct. 2. Those ancient Prophets did not only prophecy of this grace, but they
did also enquire and search diligently into it.

This is gathered from the same words.

Reason 1. Because it seemed unto them, as indeed it is, a very great mystery
of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. therefore they saw that they must use the very
utmost of their endeavors, to come to some measure of the knowledge of that
which did lie hid therein, both for their own comfort and the edification of
the Church.

2 Because this truth was proposed unto them in a more obscure manner under
types and shadows so that they could not look into the thing it self without
great care and labor.

Use 1. This may serve for information, hereby we may understand what manner of
men the true Prophets of God were heretofore: they did not utter words without
sense, or understanding, or care-taking of those things that did lie before
them, as the diabolical Prophets of the Heathens were wont to do in their
fury: but they did wholly apply their minds to what they did.

2. To exhort us therefore to lay aside all sloth and sluggishnesse, and to use
all care and diligence in the enquiring and searching after these divine
things: for this industry is much more requisite for us, then it was for them,
to whom the holy Ghost did immediately dictate all things.

Doct 3. The foundation of all this gr^c^ and salvation, lies in the
humiliation and exaltation of our Lord Ie^us Christ.

This is gathered from the eleventh Verse.

Reason. Because the whole mediation of Christ, whereby our salvation is
procured, is contained in those two parts.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us, always to join those two things
together, in the seeking of our salvation: for they are in their own nature so
conjoined, that if they should be separated, our faith and hope would be made
altogether void. This is the rock of offense at which the Jews did, and to
this day do stumble, in that they look for outward glory and majesty in their
Messiah, even without any suffering or humiliation going before.

2. To exhort us always in all things to build upon this foundation.

Doct. 4. Not only the essence it self of this mystery is usually enquired
after by the godly, but even all the circumstances thereof, as far forth as
they may be comprehended.

This is gathered from those words: searching what or what manner of time.

Reason 1. Because in this mystery there is nothing of so small consequence,
as that it may be neglected without loss to our selves.

2. Because love is careful to enquire into al things that pertain to the
thing beloved, though otherwise they may seem to be very small.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to think it enough to have some
confused knowledge of the common principles of the Gospel, but to exercise our
selves to come to a more full and distinct knowledge of every grace of God.

Doct. 5. All these things were always declared only by the Spirit of Christ
that was in the Prophets.

This is gathered from the eleventh Verse.

Reason. Because as no man knows the things of man, but the Spirit of man, so
no man knows the things of Christ, but the Spirit of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 11.

Use 1. This may serve for information, hereby we may confirm our selves in
the truth of Christ's divine nature, because the Spirit of God which spoke in
the Prophets from the beginning, is here expressly called the Spirit of Christ.

2. To exhort us, to depend upon Christ, and from his Spirit to seek for all
light in searching the Scriptures, and inquiring after divine things.

Doct. 6. Although saving grace was the same, that was in the Church from the
beginning of the world, yet notwithstanding great is our prerogative in this
grace above the Prophets, and those to whom they prophesied before the coming
of Christ.

This is gathered from the twelfth Verse, Not unto themselves, but unto us they
did minister.

Reason 1. It is by reason of that clearer light which accompanied the coming
of the Sun, and continues from that time.

2. By reason of the greater efficacy of the holy Ghost, as it is in the text.

3. By reason of the larger communication of this grace, which is now extended
unto all Nations.

Use 1. This may serve for to comfort us, because we do abound in this grace,
our hearts ought to be strengthened against all terrors.

2. To exhort us, that as this grace does abound, so should our thankfulness
also abound in all practice of piety; for he that has received much, of him is
much required.

Doct. 7. So great is the excellency of the grace and salvation offered unto us
by Christ, that even the Angels themselves desire to look into it.

This is gathered out of those words, which things the Angels desire to look
into. So 1 Timothy 3. 16. you may see it proved.

Reason. Because there are some things in this mystery, which the Angels
themselves are yet ignorant of, Matthew. 24. 36. into those things they desire to
look, that they may know them: into other things that they do know they desire
also to look that they may delight themselves in beholding the glory of God,
as it were in a glass.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, never to be weary of searching into these
holy mysteries, whether it be in hearing the Word of God in public, or in
reading and meditating upon it in private.

Verse 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to
the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of
Jesus Christ:

Verse 14. As ob^dient children, not fashioning your selves according to the
former lusts in your ignorance:

Verse 15. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation;

Verse 16. Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Verse 17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges
according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear.

Verse 18. For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition
from your fathers.

Verse 19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot,

Verse 20. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but
was manifest in these last times for you.

Verse 21. Who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the dead and
gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God.

Verse 22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through
the Spirit, unto unfeined love of the brethren; see that ye love one another
with a pure heart, fervently,

Verse 23. Being borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible,
by the word of God, which lives and abides for ever.

Verse 24. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower
of grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away;

Verse 25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever: and this is the word
which by the Gospel is preached unto you.


IN this part of the chapter, there is contained an exhortation to persist and
go forward in the grace of God; which is the Scope of the whole Epistle, as
was showed before: Now this duty is described in general in the 13. verse, and
afterward is set forth, and pressed by diverse arguments in the verses
following. From the description of the grace before proposed, there is as it
were a conclusion drawn, which is inferred by a necessary connection and
consequence from the nature of that grace, as it was before described; which
evidently appears by the conjunction Wherefore; and that is the reason why in
all the parts of this exhortation, as they are distinctly propounded, there is
a singular respect had to some part of the description that went before,
wherein the nature of that grace was explained. The duty therefore to which the
Apostle does exhort, is described. First by the cause and principal part
thereof; which is a lively hope, of which there was mention made before in the
third verse. Secondly, By the singular object of this hope, in beholding
whereof it should be confirmed and strengthened; which is that grace? that is
now in some measure brought unto the faithful, but shall hereafter be
communicated more fully and perfectly; in these words: Hope for that Grace,
which is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; which part
of the description, is taken from the end of the 7. verse. 3. By the adjunct of
constancy and perseverance, which is especially aimed at in the whole Epistle,
as the chief scope thereof; in these words: hope to the end. 4. There is added
also the manner and means of performing this duty, when he tells us, that it
should be done courageously and readily, with sobriety and watchfulness, in
these words: Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober. This exhortation is set
forth and pressed by diverse arguments; the first of which is taken from
regeneration or effectual calling, whereby all the faithful are made the
Sons of God, which reason is taken from the 5. verse, where mention is made
of the regeneration of the faithful, by the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ: because by this regeneration or calling, the faithful are translated
from the state of sin, into the state of grace: therefore this reason is given
in both respects; both that they should renounce their former sins, verse 14.
and that they should conform themselves to the holiness of that calling,
wherewith they are called, verse 15. Which is urged and enforced by a double
argument: the first is taken from the likeness, that ought to be betwixt the
person calling and the persons called, as the Scripture it self in the old
Test. witnesses, verse 15. 16. The second is taken from the severity of Gods
judgment, which they can by no means escape, that call God their Father, and
yet dishonor his name, verse 17. The second argument of the exhortation, is
taken from redemption, and the means and end thereof, verse 18. 19. Of which
there was mention made before at the end of verse 3. and verse 11. Because the
consideration of this redemption obtained by Jesus Christ, and of Christ
himself, is very necessary and effectual to admonish, and stir up the
faithful, to take care of their duty: therefore the Apostle stays a while
upon the description of Christ, as he was from all eternity foreordained to
perform the office of a mediator, at the beginning of the 20. verse, and as
he was manifest in time, verse 20. 21. which is taken from verse 11. 12.

The third argument is taken from sanctification, as it flows from the
regeneration of the spirit, and from the word of God, which are the proper
causes thereof, verse 22. 3. 4. 5. whereby the way that part of Christian duty
is commended, that has respect to the mutual love of the faithful amongst
themselves, verse 22. because all the faithful by regeneration, are made
partakers of the same spiritual life; but yet the chiefest argument, whereby
we are exhorted to constancy in that and every other grace, is taken from the
incorruptible nature of the word, whereby we are regenerated, and consequently
of regeneration it self; which is set forth by a comparison of things that are
unlike it. Verse 23, 24, 25.

The DOCTRINES arising herence are these.

Doct. 1. The Consideration of the grace of God, that is brought unto us in
Christ, should stir us up to the practice of Piety.

This is gathered from the connection, which is intimated in that particle,
Wherefore, verse 13.

Reas. 1. Because the end of Grace is to free us from sin, and to make us
conformable to the image of God, Luc. 1. 74. 75. 2. Because by that means it
is very fitting for us, to teach and further us in that practice. Tit. 2. 11.
12. 3. Because it cannot be truly learned by us, unless it work this in us,
Ephesians. 4, 20. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Use 1. This may serve to condemme those that turn the grace of God into
wantonness Gal. 5. 13. 2. To exhort us to use all care to make this grace
effectual in our hearts, that it may bring forth great fruits of Piety.

Doct. 2. The foundation of sound holiness is firmly to hope for that grace
that shall be revealed at the coming of Jesus Christ our Lord.

This is gathered from the 13. verse. So Phil. 3. 20. Tit. 2. 13.

Reas. 1. Because this hope is the perfection of that wherein our spiritual
life does consist. 2. Because this expectation represents the reward unto us,
by contemplating, whereupon we are made unmovable and abounding in the work
of the Lord. 1. Cor. 15. 58. Heb. 6. 11. 3. Because this hope begets patience,
whereby with strong consolation it does overcome all the difficulties, that are
wont to befall men in the course of Godliness. Heb. 6. 12. 18. 19.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to have a care to lay this foundation very
sure in our hearts, and daily to confirm it more and more.

Doct. 3. To keep this hope firm and lively, we should courageously gird up
our selves that we might be prepared, and ready to perform all those things
that tend thereunto.

This is gathered from those words: gird up the loins of your mind; for this
is it, that is signified by the habit of a man, that has his loins girt in
Scripture, that he is prepared and ready to perform his duty. Luc. 12. 35.

Reas. 1. Because the difficulty to retain this hope is very great, in so
much, that it cannot be kept without earnest endeavor. 2. Because in
spiritual duties our loins are too slack, that is, the sloth of sin, and
infirmity has taken hold of all our faculties. Heb. 12. 12.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, by no means to yield to the sloth and
sluggishnesse of our corrupt nature, but to strive against it as much as we
can, and laying aside every weight, and the sloth that does beset us, to run
the race that is set before us, Heb. 12. 1.

Doct. 4. Sobriety in the use of the things of this life, does very much
conduce to the furtherance of this endeavor.

This is gathered from this word Be sober and hope.

Reas. Because the love and immoderate use of the things of this world, does so
burden the soul, and glue it to the earth, that it cannot lift up it self to
seek after heavenly things.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to addict our minds to any worldly
thing, but here to use this world, and not abuse it. 1 Cor. 7. 31.

Doct. V. The state of adoption, whereby we are made the sons of God, should
stir us up to the practice of holiness.

This is gathered from these words: As obedient Children.

Reas. 1. Because Children should bear the image of their Father: Now the
image of God consists in holiness and righteousness. 3. Because it is the
duty of Children, readily and of their own accord to apply themselves to the
will of their Father. Now the will of God is our sanctification. 1 These. 4. 3.
this is it that is intimated in that title, where the faithful are called
obedient Children.

Use. 1. This may serve to condemn those, that with the wicked Jews say, they
are the Children of Abraham and of God, when notwithstanding, they do the
works of the Devil, John 8. 41. 2. 4. 1 John 3. 8. 10. 2. To exhort us, in
all things to make it appear, that we are the true sons of God, by obedience
unto his will, and our practice of holiness: for unless we bear the
chastisements of the Lord, that by them we may be made partakers of his
holiness, hereby we show that we are bastards, and not true sons. Heb. 12.
8. 10.

Doct. 6. This filial obedience, and the fashioning of our selves a cording to
the former lusts of our sins, cannot stand together.

This is gathered from the opposition, that is made betwixt these two, verse
14. where the one being affirmed, that we are obedient Children, the other is
denied, that we should not fashion our selves according to our lusts.

Reas. 1. Because they, which by regeneration are made the Children of God, are
new creatures, have a new nature and new affections, so that they have wholly
renounced their former nature and affections: and for this very cause they are
called in the Text, Former lusts, or, which were before.

2. Because the former lusts of sin do wholly withdraw us from the will of
God, which we ought to obey.

3. Because the former lusts of sin are such, that all that are come to the
knowledge of the truth, may be ashamed of them; this is intimated in the Text,
where they are called lusts which were in our ignorance: because they cannot
endure the light.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that profess themselves the children
of God, and call upon God as their Father, and yet follow the same course of
life that the children of this world do.

2. To exhort us, not to conform our selves to this world, Romans 12. 2. where
there is a reason also given of this exhortation, in the 1 Verse, because if we
do this we cannot present our selves to God as a living sacrifice, acceptable
unto him. So 2 Timothy 2. 19.

Doct. 7. The calling of the faithful does necessarily require holiness in
them.

This is gathered from Verse 15, 16.

Reason 1. Because holiness is one of the chief ends of this ^^lling,
therefore it is usually called in the Scriptures a holy calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

2. Because God which calls us is most holy, and he calls us to have communion
with him in holiness, as it is in the Text.

3. Because the calling it self is in its own nature a setting of a man apart
from the common and corrupt use of the world to a sacred use; and therefore it
is a consecration or dedication of men unto holiness.

Use 1. This may serve to rebuke and condemn those, that seek for nothing by
their Christian calling, but justification and bliss, and in the mean time
altogether neglect the care to live holily.

2. To exhort us, in all our conversation to endeavor to be holy, as it is in
the Text; Be ye holy in all manner of conversation; that is, so walk, as it
becomes the calling, wherewith ye are called.

Doct. 8. The severity of Gods judgment should stir us up to the practice of
piety.

This is gathered from Verse 17.

Reason 1. Because God in executing his judgments is no respecter of persons,
as it is in the Text. Now the name and profession of the faith, is nothing
else, but the person of the Christian; as circumcision and the profession of
the law was the person of the Jew: Such a profession therefore without sound
holiness cannot stand before Gods Tribunal.

2. Because God does in some sort more severely require holiness of those that
by their calling draw near unto God, and call him Father, as it is in the
Text, then he does of others, Levit. 10. 3. I will be sanctified in them that
come nigh me.

Use. This may serve to admonish us not to cosen our selves in relying wholly
upon the outward profession of faith, but to appear before God always with
fear and reverence, as it is in the Text: because our God is a consuming fire,
Heb. 12. 29.

Doct. 9. The consideration of our redemption should be a strong argument to
stir up in our hearts a desire of holiness.

Reason 1. Because we are redeemed from all our vain conversation, although it
be commended unto us by the use and tradition of our Fathers, Verse. 18.
Therefore for a man to follow such fashions, after that he is come to the
knowledge of redemption, is nothing else, but to oppose himself against his
own redemption, and as much as in him lies, to make it void and of none effect.

2. Because by this redemption we are bought to be the servants of God, 1 Cor.
6. 20. and 7. 23. So that we ought no longer to serve (...), nor the world, nor
to live according to our own will and pleasure, but according to the will of
God and our Redeemer.

3. Because the price wherewith we are redeemed, is of so great worth, that it
does far surpass all the most precious things of this world: therefore there
ought to be ma^e an excellent use thereof; and yet notwithstanding only those
that endeavor to be holy, make any esteem of it. Verse. 18, 19.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those that by their life dishonor Christ,
and put their Redeemer to an open shame, Heb. 6. 6. they do as it were tread
under foot his blood, that was the price of our redemption, and count it an
unholy thing Heb. 10. 29.

2. To exhort us, as often as we think of our redemption, (which we ought to do
very often,) so often should we think that there are as it were coals of fire
heaped upon our heads, wherewith we should be inflamed to this holiness.

Doct. 10. That we may gain profit and benefit by the consideration of our
redemption, we should diligently meditate upon Christ's predestination, his
incarnation, humiliation, and glorification.

This is gathered from Verse 20, 21.

Reason 1. Because by this means alone is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height of Gods love in Christ made manifest, Ephesians. 3. 18.

2. Because by this means alone do we come to know, what a great work, and
of how great difficulty it was, to deliver men from their sins.

3. Because by this also we may easily gather, how fit and just it is, that we
should live unto God and Christ in all holiness, which is the scope of this
Text.

Use. This may serve to admonish us not to pass over this mystery slightly in
our thoughts and meditations, but to continue in contemplation thereupon, that
so we may, as it were, suck therehence the juice of true godliness.

Doct. 11. The proper and immediate use of all our contemplation upon Christ,
and our redemption obtained by him, is, to confirm our faith and hope in God.

This is gathered from Verse 21, at the end.

Reason 1. Because the end of Christ's mediation is, that through him we should
believe in God, as it is here affirmed.

2. Because Christ left us an example of putting our faith and hope in God; for
he in his way perfectly performed it, and by that means attained the highest
glory.

3. Because for our sakes and for our good was that glory given unto Christ,
which our faith and hope look and seek after.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, always to look unto Jesus Christ the author
and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. and by looking unto him to quicken our
faith and hope.

Doct. 12. The calling of the faithful has the purification of the soul
joined with it.

This is gathered from the beginning of the ^2 Verse. So 2 Pet. 2. 20. Hence it
is that the washing of baptism represents that grace which is given in their
calling: Now this purification and washing, which is communicated in their
calling, and signified by baptism, is not by justification only, which
consists in the imputing thereof unto remission of sins, but also by
sanctification and the real clensing of the soul, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 35. And
this sanctification is chiefly referred to the soul as to its proper object.

Reason 1. Because outward purification and sanctification is nothing worth at
all, if it be divided from the inward: for this was the hypocrisy of the
Scribes and Pharisees, that are said to have made clean the outside of the cup
and of the platter, when within they were full of extortion and excess, Matthew.
23. 15.

2. Because the operation of the Spirit begins at the soul, and from the soul
is derived to the outward man: for as all pollution proceeds first out of the
heart, Matthew. 15. 19. so also purification.

3. Because if the soul be once purified within, outward purity will follow of
its own accord, Matthew. 23. 26.

4. Because this purity does more properly consist in the affection and
intention of the soul, then in the outward practice; for the same outward
works may be done by impure men; but the faithull differ from all impure
hypocrites by their inward dispositions and affections.

5. Because the faithful themselves are oftentimes sustained and receive
comfort by the purity which they have within in their will and purpose, though
they cannot produce it into act according to their desire, Romans 7. 21, 25.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those that are whited over with the name of
Christians, but never look after the purity of their souls: and therefore they
may be rightly called whited walls, Acts, 23. 7. and whited Sepulchers, Mat. 23.
^7.

2. To exhort us to use the utmost of our endeavors to purify our souls, that
they may be made the temples of the holy Ghost.

Doct. 13. This purification is wrought by the hearing of the word, and the
effectual operation of the holy Ghost by the word.

This is gathered from these words: in obeying the truth through the Spirit.
Where the word of God, especially of the Gospel, is called the truth, partly
for that excellency of truth that it has above all other sayings or writings,
and partly because by virtue of the truth or faithfulness of those promises
which are contained in the word, this purification is wrought, together with
all those spiritual blessings that pertain to the consolation and salvation
of the faithful.

Reason 1. Because the word together with the Spirit does reveal unto us that
true purity which is pleasing and acceptable to God, whereof we are ignorant.

2. Because the word together with the Spirit is the oracle or power of God
unto salvation, and consequently is able to beget every grace in us.

3. Because faith purifies the hearts of the faithful, Acts 15. 9. and faith
comes by hearing of the word, Romans 10. 17.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the herefies of those, which either hold that
there is such power in the strength of nature, that men may sanctify
themselves at their own free will and pleasure, or, which comes all to one
maintain that the outward preaching of the word is sufficient without the
powerful operation of the Spirit.

2. To exhort us, first, to hearken diligently unto the word of God; secondly,
not to rest our selves satisfied in the bare letter of the word, but always to
crave the grace of God and the operation of his Spirit: thirdly, in the use of
the word through the Spirit to seek the purification of our souls.

Doct. 14. The effect and sign of a purified soul, is a pure, sincere, and
fervent love of the faithful, as of brethren.

This is gathered from these words: unto love of the brethren.

Reason 1. Because hatred, envy, wrath, strife, enmities, and such like
affections, especially, when they reflect upon the good, are some of those
fi^thy pollutions of the flesh, from which the soul of the faithful is
purified, Gal. 5. 19. 20.

2. Because the purification of our souls makes us to love purity in others,
and no man can take delight in the purity of others unless he be in some
measure purified himself.

3. Because in the mutual love of the faithful diverse operations are
exercised, to the performing whereof, their souls are in a special manner
purified and sanctified, as doing good, bearing with infirmities, edification
of the Church, and glorifying the name of the Lord.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that show themselves great enemies to
godly men: they may rightly be called Cainites, for they have gone in the way
of Cain, with those to whom the woe is denounced by Jude, Verse 12.

2. To exhort us by all means to endeavor to gain this brotherly love of the
godly: wherein there is required, First, sincerity, that it should be without
hypocrisy or simulation, so that it should not be in words or in show, as the
Apostle speaks, but in heart. Secondly, that it should be not only from the
heart, but from a pure heart; because there is a kind of love that is in some
sort sincere, but yet it is impure, whiles that it does either neglect the
chiefest good or else uses such means to procure some good as are contrary
thereunto: as if a man to deliver his brother from danger, should persuade him
to deny the truth, or to dissemble. Thirdly, That it should be fervent, because
the affection ought to be set in the highest degree upon those objects, where
there is found to be the chiefest reason to stir it up.

Doct. 15. Regeneration, that is common to all the faithful, is a strong
argument to provoke them to love one another.

This is gathered from the end of verse 22. and the beginning of the 23. where
this reason is given, why they should love one another, because they are borne
again.

Reas. Because by this regeneration all the faithful are brethren, begotten by
the same Father, of the same blood, and partakers of the same spirit.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to be mindful all this argument, and to
give it room and power in our hearts, so that we may upon occasion say as
Abraham did, Genesis 13. 8. Let there be no strife between me and thee; for we
are brethren: and to admonish others also in those words of Moses Act. 7. 26.
Sirs, Ye are brethren: Why do ye wrong one another?

Doct. 16. The word of God is the incorruptible seed or principle of this
regeneration.

This is gathered from the 23. verse,

Reas. 1. Because it is the word of God, (as it is in the Text;) which lives
and abides for ever; whose nature it resembles in this, that the operation
thereof is not momentany or temporary, but it abides for ever. 2. Because to
speak properly, it is the word of eternal life, John 6. 68. for the end and
use thereof is, to bring men to eternal life. 3. Because where it is once
truly received, it never fails. John 4. 14.

Use. 1. This may serve to refute the error of those, which hold that they
that are truly regenerated, usually fall away from the grace of God, and so are
borne again and again, after they have been regenerate: This is contrary,
not only to the promise and covenant of God, that he will keep the faithful,
that they shall not depart from him Ier. 32. 40. and to that comfort which
Christ gives his members, that no man shall pluck them out of his hand, John
10. 28. But also to the operation of the spirit in the hearts of the faithful,
and to the nature of the life it self, that is communicated unto them, which
is incorruptible and eternal, as it is in the Text.

2. To comfort us against all those fears and terrors, that may arise from
the consideration of our own infirmities; for although of our selves we are
continually falling to corruption, yet there is something borne in us, if we be
truly faithful, which is incorruptible and shall abide unto eternal life.

3. To exhort us to carry our selves answerable in all Christian duties, that
is, to be constant and incorruptible in performing them: and this is it at
which the Apostle does especially aim at in this place, when he stirs up the
faithful to a fervent and constant love one of another, by this argument,
because they are borne again by the incorruptible word.

Doct. 17. The condition wherein the faithful are put by this incorruptible
regeneration of the word, is far more excellent then all the glory of this
world.

This is gathered from verse 24, 25. where there is a comparison made betwixt
flesh, grass, the flower of grass, and the glory of man, on the one side, and
the word of God on the other; not as the word is considered in it self, but as
it is received by the faithful, and translates them into the kingdom of God.

Reason. Because as it is in the text, there is nothing in all the world but
vanity, that quickly falls away: whereas the word of God endures for ever.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us to make more precious account of the word
of God and of his kingdom, then of all the world, and that not only in respect
of our selves, but of others also; as the Apostle does in this place extol the
word of God and the condition of the regenerate above all the things of the
world, that by this confideration among others he might move the faithful to
esteem of others, that are regenerate more highly, and to love them more
fervently, then all the things of the world.

2. To comfort us, in that God of his bounty and grace has advanced us to such
a dignity.

Doct. 18. We ought to have a singular respect unto this dignity and excellency
in the word of God, as it is preached unto us by the Gospel.

This is gathered from the 22 verse at the end.

Reason 1. Because the same word of God is preached unto us, that is so much
commended by the Prophets, Apostles, and by Christ himself, as it is in the
Text, this is that word.

2. Because it makes much unto our salvation, as it is preached unto us.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to satisfy our selves with some
general esteem of the word, as many are wont to do, that are weary of the
word that is preached unto them, and loathing it do reject it; but religiously
and reverently to receive the word that is preached unto us, as the eternal
word of God.

Chapter II.
Verse 1. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, and evil speakings,

Verse 2. As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby.

Verse 3. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

Verse 4. To whom coming as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God, and precious,

Verse 5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Verse 6. Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded.

Verse 7. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious, but unto them which
be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the
head of the corner,

Verse 8. And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them which
stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they are appointed.

Verse 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation,
a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has
called you out of darkness into his mavelous light.

Verse 10. Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God;
which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.


THe same exhortation that the Apostle had before proposed, he does here again
repeat and press, and that not simply and barely, but by that principle and
means, whereof there may and ought to be very good use made. For by occasion
of those things, which he had lately spoken of the word of God, he stirs up
all the faithful to the right use of this word, by whose help they might
persist and grow in that grace, wherein they stood. The occasion and connection
of this exhortation with the words going before is intimated in that phrase or
particle, Wherefore. The exhortation it self is to a desire or love of the
word of God, which he had before commended, verse 2. Which exhortation he does
so lay down, that in the first place he shows, that the vices which are
contrary to this duty, must be laid aside, and taken heed of which a^e five:
malice, guile, hypocrisies, envies, evill-speakings, verse 1. And in the second
place he gives reasons agreeable thereunto, to stir us up unto this duty, (to
wit, a desire of the word.) The first reason is taken, from the use or effect
of this word in respect of them, that it makes much for the edification of the
faithful: and this Use is allegorically set forth, verse 2 where the
regenerate faithful are compared to infants newly borne, and the word to
sincere milk; and the edification which is made by the word, is compared to
that action, which infants obtain by the use of wholesome milk^. The second
reason is taken, by a continuation of the same allegory, from the object of the
word, which he proposed to be tasted, and that is God himself and our Savior
Jesus Christ: whose perfection and fitness for edification is declared. Verse
3 where he is said to be gracious: and is confirmed also by the experience and
testimony of all the faithful, who are said to have tasted this graciousnesse,
ibid. if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

In the explication of this affection that ought to be set upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, as the primary object of this word, the Apostle continues from Verse 4
to the 11. Where in the first place the affection and duty it self of coming
unto Christ, and adhe^ing unto him by faith, is proposed, verse 4. To whom
coming. And then the reason of this duty is allegorically declared to wit,
that Christ is the foundation of the spiritual building that lives for ever.
Ibid. as unto a living stone; and the faithful are the parts of the building,
or of the spiritual house that is to be built upon this foundation, at the
beginning of verse 5. And he does further illustrate both parts of this reason.
The first, concerning the foundation or subject, he does declare by diverse
arguments; when he says that it was disallowed of men, but yet chosen of God,
and precious, verse 4. The second, concerning the parts of the building that
are joined to it, he does illustrate and urge from the effects, which are
allegorically also set forth, to wit, that by this coming unto Christ, as unto
the foundation, the faithful are not only made a spiritual house, as the
temple wherein sacrifices acceptable to God are offered up, but they shall also
be the Priests that shall offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ, verse 5. This that has been spoken of the saving effect
of Christ, as our Savior; which redounds unto all the faithful, the Apostle
does confirm by the testimony of Scripture, verse 6. Which testimony he does
explain and apply by the contrary affections and manners, how contrary sorts
of men carry themselves toward Christ, that is, the believers, and the
unbelievers: To the believers Christ is said to be precious, verse 7. at the
beginning, because they put their whole trust and confidence in Christ, and
consequently give him the honor of the true Messiah and Savior: but to the
unbelievers he is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, verse 7, 8.
Because being offended at his humility they do not receive him as their
Savior: whose infidelity he does illustrate by the antecedent decree of God,
whereby it was ordained, verse 8. at the end. Whereunto also they are
appointed. As on the contrary the condition of the faithful is illustrated.
First, by the secret election of God, that was the cause thereof, verse 9. at
the beginning. Secondly, by the dignity which they obtain by faith by virtue
of this election, to wit, that they are a royal Priesthood, an holy nation,
Gods peculiar people. Thirdly, by the end and use of this dignity to which they
are called, which is, to show forth the praise of God, verse 9. at the end.
Fourthly, by comparing the state that is unlike it, wherein they were before
their calling, to this state of excellency and dignity whereinto they are now
put by their calling unto faith in Christ, verse 10.

The Doctrines arising from hence are these.

Doct. 1. The right use of the word of God is the proper means to increase
grace.

This is gathered from the connection of this exhortation with that which went
before. For when the Apostle had before exhorted to constancy in grace, and to
obedience, in holiness, and to brotherly love; by a reason also taken in the
last place from the word of God, whereby as of incorruptible seed all the
faithful are regenerated, here in the beginning of this Chapter. he commends
unto us the right use of that word, as the proper and only means to perfect
all those things.

Reas. 1. Because the word is the instrument chosen by God and sanctified to
that use. 1 Cor. 1. 21. 2. Because the word, especially of the Gospel, is the
ministration of the Spirit, who is the author and sinisher of every grace. 2
Cor. 3. 6. 8. 3. Because the word shows us the good and perfect will of God.
Romans 12. 2.

4. Because it furnishes a man unto every good work. 2. Tim. 3. 17.

Use. 1. This may serve to refute some fanatic heretics, that neglect the
word of God and look for immediate revelations, and dream of a greater
perfection then is contained in the word.

2. To exhort us, to give diligent heed unto the word of God in all things,
until we come to the end of perfection in heaven. 2. Pet. 1. 19.

Doct. 2. If we mean to use the word of God aright, we must have our minds
ready and willing to lay aside all those vices that are contrary to the power
of the word.

This is gathered from the 1. verse. Where five remarkable vices are
propounded, to be laid aside, denied, and mortified, before the word can have
its due effect in our hearts.

Reas. 1. Because as the matter, if it be not fitly prepared, cannot receive
the form; neither can the field, if it be not manured, cherish the seed to
bring forth fruit: So neither can the heart of man, if it be not subdued by
repentance, receive the word of God with profit. 2. Because such a purpose to
forsake all that is contrary to the word of God, is the first beginning of that
saving operation, which the word of God does make, wheresoever it begins to be
received, and whereby it makes way for it self, to perfect all operations.

Use. 1. This may serve to condemn those, that will be hearers of the word of
God, but so, that they will not forsake their accustomed sins. 2. To admonish
us, not to take this thought and purpose into our minds in the general, and
once only at our first conversion; but upon all occasions, seriously to renew
this purpose, especially when we prepare our selves to hear the word of God.

Doct. 3. We must lay aside these vices not in part only, but wholly.

This is gathered from the word, all.

Reas. 1. Because repentance is not true and unfeigned, unless it abhor the
very nature of sin; it must with one and the same kind of hatred hate all
kind of sin. 2. Because a man may easily deceive himself, whiles he thinks
that he has said aside some vice, if he does not detest all appearance of it,
what Specious show soever it may seem to have.

Use. This may serve to instruct us, seriously to examine our hearts, least
through some deceitfulness thereof, there should lurk some vice, whereof we
think our selves to be free.

Doct. 4. We should have a singular care to lay aside those vices, that are
contrary to those duties, to which we are in a special manner called; and to
that disposition, which is especially required in Christians, that they may
profit by the word of God.

This is gathered herence, that the Apostle, when in the last place, he had
exhorted unto unfeigned love of the brethren at the 21. verse of the former
Chapter, does here mark out those vices, that are most of all contrary to this
love; and when he would commend the simplicity of infants, as a disposition
requisite to receive the word of God with profit, he casts aside those vices
which are directly opposed to that simplicity.

Doct. 5. To make a good use of the word, besides the laying aside of those
evil affections, that we speak of before, it is required that we should
stir up that good affection in our hearts, which is called appetite or desire.

This is gathered from the 2. verse. Now this desire is expressed in other
places of the Scripture, by a spiritual hunger and thirst. Isai. 55. 1. Apoc.
21. 6. And the degree thereof is set down, that it should be the highest.
Psalm. 119. 20. 81. 82. Which contains in it, 1. a high esteem of Gods word.
Psalm. 119 2. 2. An earnest endeavor, answerable thereunto, to use it and enjoy
it. John 6. 27. 3. A delight, whereby we are well pleased in the sweetness
thereof, Psalm. 119. 103.

Reas. 1. Because the word is absolutely necessary for us; without it we cannot
live; for it is our milk or spiritual ^ood, as it is in the text, 2. Because
we always want something that may begotten: this is also signified in the
text, when we are called newborn babes; whereby it is intimated that our
imperfection is so great, that by reason o^ it, we should earnestly desire the
help of the word. 3. Because the excellency and perfection of the word is so
great, that it should of it self delight us, though we stood in no need of it
our selves; this is also intimated in the text* when there is mention made of
the sincerity of the word, and of the goodness of God that appears therein.

Use. 1. This may serve to condemn that satiety and loathing of the word, that
appears too evidently in too too many.

2. To admonish us, not to suffer our affections to be taken up with the things
of this world, thereby to lessen that desire, which we should have to the word
of God. 3. To exhort us, to use the utmost of our endeavors to stir up and
increase these pious affections in our selve.

Doct. 6. This affection and desire that we ought to have to Gods word, should
have respect to the sincerity thereof.

This is gathered from that, desire the sincere milk of the word: that is, the
nature it self of the word and of the things proposed therein, as they are
pure, and afford nourishment fit for our Souls.

Reas. 1. Because otherwise we do not desire the word, as it is the word of
life, or the bread of life, or the milk of life, as it is in the text, but as
we do apprehend it under some carnal show. 2. Because this desire alone
proceeds from spiritual life, which seeks after that in the word that tends
unto life, which is intimated also in the text by the similitude of infants,
that naturally desire their mothers milk.

Use. 1. This may serve to reprove those ministers that falsify the word of
God by their own mixtures and devices, and obtrude upon him an adulterate
word, in stead of the simple and sincere word. 2. To admonish the hearers not
to suffer their affections to be carried either toward the person of the
speaker, or toward the manner of his speaking, much less toward those
strange forgings which many use in their speaking, but sincerely to seek for
the sincerity of the word.

3. To exhort us, highly to prize this sincerity of the word, and to endeavor
all that we can to preserve it as well in our selves as in the Church.

Doct. 7. Then and not before, do we use the sincere word of God aright, when
we grow thereby.

This is gathered from these words: that ye may grow thereby.

This is signified in all those places of Scripture, where the end of the word
is made to be the edifica^ion of the faithful: for to edify is to promote the
structureof the edifice, to a greater perfection, after that the foundation is
already laid. This is expressed also Ephesians. 4. 16.

Reas. 1. Because we are imperfect, like as infants that are newly borne: now
we are perfected* when the word of God dwells richly in us, Col^ss. 3. 16. 2.
Because the word it self in its own nature always tends and leads to
perfection: for it is the perfect will of God, Romans 12. 2.

Use. 1. This may serve to reprove those, who, when for the time they ought to
be teachers do yet remain unskil^ull and infants, Hcb. 5. 12. 13. 2. To
admonish us, never so to rest satisfied with that which we have attained, as if
there were nothing more to be gotten; for although we have all other things,
yet it is required, that we should increase more and more in it, 1. Th^s. 4. 1.
10. 3. To i^form^ us, hereby we may understand, that the word of God is
necessarily to be used, not only by the ignorant and unskilful, but also by
all those that do yet want some thing, and do desire to increase that which
they have. 4. To instruct us, to examine our selves by this mark whether we
use the word of God aright or no?

Doct. 8. In the Gospel there appears such graciousnesse and goodness of
God, that it stirs up all the faithful, to an earnest desire thereof.

This is gathered from the 3. verse* that the Lord is gracious: Where by God we
are to understand Christ, as it appears by the following words: by
gratiousnesse we are to understand that grace which is revealed in the Gospel,
as it evidently appears by the connection of this verse, with that which went
before. So Tit. 3. 4.

Reas. 1. Because this glorious grace of God, whch brings salvation unto men by
Christ, is the subject matter and argument of the Gospel.

2. Because God bestows this grace upon us, being altogether unworthy of it,
enemies to him, and seeking no such thing of him: for after such a manner is
this grace bestowed upon us, as that from the beginning to the end, the whole
business depends upon the mere goodness of God.

Use. 1. This may serve to inform us, to judge of the quality and quantity of
the goodness and graciousnesse of Christ, no other way but by the word of the
Gospel; for we must not imagine, as many use to do, that through the
graciousnesse of God, it shall be well with us, though we continue in our
sins without repentance and turning ^o God: no such graciousnesse is revealed
in the Gospel. 2. To instruct us, always to admire the riches and bounty of
Christ's grace, that is revealed in the Gospel. 3. To exhort us, earnestly to
desire, to take delight, and to rejoice in hearing and meditating upon Gods
word. Psalm. 27. 4. and 65 4. and 119. 103. in this respect is the use of the
word of the Gospel compared to the banquet of a King, wherein all things are
full of Sweetness and delight. Luke 14. 16. 17.

Doct. 9. This goodness of Christ in the Gospel is proposed to us to be
tasted.

This is gathered from these words: If so be ye have tasted. So Psalm. 34. 8.
Taste and see. That is, we should so lay hold upon it by faith, that we may
have an inward sense, and experience of the virtue and power thereof.

Reas. 1. Because in the Gospel, we are called to such a near union and
communion with Christ, that he is made unto us our spiritual bread and food,
So to be tasted and eaten by faith, that he turns to our spiritual
nourishment. 2. Because our comfort depends upon this, if we perceive in our
selves the savor of Christ, as it were the savor of life unto life. 2 Cor. 2.
15. 16. 3. Because the power of Christ in drawing our souls unto himself, for
the most part consists in this, that we have his goodness and love, to be
tasted, as it were, Gal. 2. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 14.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that do not use the word of God, as
food to be tasted and eaten, but for custom and pro forma fashion-sake only,
or at least account it a thing to be understood and disputed of only; but not
to be tasted.

2. To exhort us, to use all care and diligence to preserve this taste of the
goodness of Christ in the Gospel; for this is proper to the regenerate, as it
appears in the text: and consequently it is a sign of salvation. Some indeed
that are not regenerate are said to taste of the heavenly gift, of the good
word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6. 4, 5. but this comes
to pass, first, by some special operation of Gods Spirit, whereby such men
are enlightened above the common sort of unregenerate men. Secondly, this is but
for a little while, it is not constantly. Thirdly, in the unregenerate it is
but a sudden motion of the mind, it is not a rooted affection. Fourthly, it is
either of grace only to come, which is apprehended also, but by a humane and
uncertain hope; or else it is a presumption without ground: but the taste of
the faithful is of grace, not only to come, but also present, with a divine
assurance wrought by the operation of the holy Ghost, and sound faith and
repentance.

Doct. 10. The regenerate in the beginning; although they be truly faithful,
yet they have but a little taste of Gods goodness, they do not fully
comprehend it.

This is gathered from the same words.

Reason. 1. Because they are newborn babes, and therefore weak.

2. Because God uses to bring his children by degrees unto perfection; so that
at first they do perceive but a part or the first fruits of his goodness, and
afterward they have the whole, as it were shed abroad in their hearts.

3. Because in the beginning they want that experience, whereby the goodness
of God afterward is made more perfectly known unto them.

4. Because oftentimes they are also somewhat negligent; whereby it comes to
pass, that they do not use the means of grace with that affection as they
ought, as it is intimated in the text, when they are stirred up to a more
fervent desire of the word of God.

Use 1. This may serve for consolation against those fears that arise
sometimes in the souls of the godly, for that they have but a little measure
of peace joy, and the like fruits of the Spirit, whereby men perceive the
goodness of God toward them: for they must understand that the faithful do
usually perceive but a little measure of this grace at the beginning.

2. For exhortation, so much the more to long for the state of perfection, and
not to rest in these small beginnings.

Doct. 11. That taste of the grace of God which we either now have, or formerly
had, should stir us up to desire and seek after the same more and more.

This is gathered from the connection of these words with those that went before.

Reason 1. Because to that end is there a taste of this grace given, to stir
up the appetite.

2. Because the goodness of God it self is in a manner contemned and
vili^ied, if it be neglected, after it has been once tasted: and therefore in
this respect they sin more grievously, who when they have tasted this grace
of God, do little esteem of it, then they, who out of ignorance make no
reckoning of it at all.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those that have left their first love, Apoc.
2. 4.

2. To exhort us, in meditating upon the goodness of God in Christ, and from
the sense and experience that God has given us of it heretofore, to inflame
our minds with an earnest desire to have a fuller measure of this grace, and
to that purpose religiously to use all means, whereby it is usually
communicated unto men.

Doct. 12. The primary duty of Christians, whereby it is also that they are
made Christians, is to come unto Christ.

This is gathered out of the fourth verse. Now to come unto Christ, is nothing
else but to believe in him. So John 6. 35. He that comes unto me, and he that
believes in me, are made all one. So John 5. 40. To come unto Christ, to
receive Christ, and to believe in him, are one and the same. And Heb. 10. 22.
We are said to draw near by an assurance of faith.

Reason 1. Because our salvation depends upon that union which we have with
Christ: whence it is also, that we are said to come unto Christ, that we may
have life, John 5. 40.

2. Because by nature we are strangers and far remote from Christ, and
salvation obtained by him, yea and after that we are called unto Christ, we are
not so perfectly conjoined.

3. Because all Christian piety is nothing else, but a continuation and
renovation of this access unto Christ, and by Christ unto God. In the hearing
of the word we come unto Christ, as our Teacher; in our prayers we come unto
him as our advocate; in the administration of the Lord Supper we come unto him
as the Author of a Kingly marriage feast, Mat. 22. And all other duties do so
depend upon these, that look how we approve our selves in these, such must we
needs be in the others also.

4. Because Christ calls and invites us especially unto this, to come unto him,
Matthew. 11. 28. John 7. 37.

Use 1. This may serve to convince all those of death and of sin, that have
either no knowledge of Christ at all, or do not endeavor according to that
knowledge which they have, to come unto him, and partake of his grace.

2. To refute the Papists and such like, that draw men away from Christ to the
holy Angels, to the Pope, and to themselves.

3. To exhort us, always to set Christ before us, as our mark and scope,
Phil. 3. 8. etc.

Doct. 13. We must come unto Christ as unto a living stone*

This is gathered from Verse 4. Now Christ is called a stone for that firm
power, whereby he does sustain and bear up the edifice of the whole Church
Zach. 4. 7. And he is called, a living stone, because that power whereby he
does bear up the Church is quickening, and communicates spiritual and eternal
life to the whole edifice, John 5. 26.

Reason 1. Because by sin we were bereft of all life both the principle and
foundation of life, nor can it be restored unto us any other way but in Christ.

2. Because unless we come unto Christ under this relation, we do not embrace
him as he was ordained by God, and is proposed unto us; and consequently we do
not hold the true Christ, but a feined and imaginary one.

3. Because our faith cannot rest satisfied but in him that has this strong
power to quicken, for faith seeks life from a firm and undeceiving principle.

Use 1. This may serve to refute that blasphemy of the Papists, who will have
the Pope, a dead stone, to be that rock or stone, whereupon the Church is
built. For Peter, under the pretense of whose name the Pope challenges this to
himself never exhorted the faithful to come to him as unto a living stone,
but unto Christ only. And therefore Peter himself in these words explaines
unto us, what was the mind of Christ, Mat. 16. 18. when he said: Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, that is, upon this living
stone whom Peter at that time confessed to be the Son of the living God, that
is, the living stone. Now Peter and the Apostles together with the Prophets may
be called the foundation of the Church by a Metonymy of the adjunct for the
subject; because they laid and preached Christ as the true foundation, Eph^s.
2. 20, 21. but the Popes can in no other respect challenge this unto
themselves, but as they are stones of offense and ruin.

2. To instruct us, wholly to depend upon Christ, and to put all our confidence
in him.

3. To exhort us, with all joy and rejoicing to help forward the building of
the Church upon Christ, shouting and crying out, as it is in the Prophet
Zachary, Grace, grace unto him.

Doct. 14. Christ is refused by men, when they will not come unto him as unto a
living stone.

This is gathered from the fourth Verse. So Psalm 118. 22. and Luke 2. 34.

Reason 1. Because he has not that outward Majesty and pomp wherewith
natural men are taken, Isay 53. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 22, 23.

2. Because men by nature are blind, so that they cannot perceive their own
misery extra Christum, out of Christ, nor that salvation which is offered in
Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

3. Because they too much love themselves, and put trust in themselves, so that
they cannot endure that doctrine of Christ, whereby they are called to deny and
forsake themselves, and to put their confidence in Christ alone.

Use 1. This may serve to inform us, that we should attribute nothing to the
world in those things which belong unto Christ.

2. To admonish us, not to trouble our minds, for that the world is averse
from Christ and true faith.

3. To exhort us, patiently to bear it, if we be refused and scorned by men;
for the servant is not greater then his Master.

4. To instruct us to beware that we do not communicate in the least respect
with the world in refusing of Christ.

Doct. 15. Christ was chosen and ordained by God, that he should be exceeding
precious unto us.

This is gathered from the fourth verse. Now we must understand this so, as
that we comprehend both the predestination of Christ, and the sending of him
into the world, and his unction, together with all those testimonies, which
were given by God unto this mystery.

Reason 1. Because the love and mercy of God is so great toward us: for so God
loved the world, that he gave his Son, etc. John 3. 16.

2. Because in the obedience of Christ God is well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17.

3. Because Christ has perfected and finished all those things, which belong
to our salvation and the glory of God.

Use 1. This may serve to inform us, that we ought to be assured of this, that
howsoever the world opposes it self against Christ, yet Christ shall prevail
and reign for ever, because he is chosen of God.

2. To comfort all the faithful, that believe and put their confidence in
Christ, because they believe in him that was chosen of God, to save them.

3. To exhort us, in all our practice throughout the whole course of our lives,
to make it appear, that Christ is more precious to us, then all the things in
the world, Phil. 3. 8. Prove. 8. 10, 11.

Doct. 16. The faithful are living members of the same building, whereof
Christ is the foundation.

This is gathered from the beginning of the 5. verse.

Reason 1. Because Christ together with all the faithful makes one mystical
body, 1 Cor. 12. 12.

2. Because being compacted in this body, they partake of the very life of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 16.

3. Because they show forth this life or power in bringing forth fruits
answerable thereunto, John 15. 5, 16.

Use 1. This may serve to comfort us, when we rightly esteem of the dignity of
this condition, it will strengthen our minds against all the troubles that can
befall us therein.

2. To exhort us, so to carry our selves as it becomes those* that are called
to partake of the life of Christ.

Doct. 17. By that union which all the faithful have with Christ, they are
made spiritual temples, Priests, and sacrifices acceptable to God.

This is gathered from the 5 verse.

Reason 1. Because God is in an especial manner present with them, and dwells
in them by his Spirit and grace, as in his Temple, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

2. Because By the same spirit he makes them fit and ready to perform those
duties, that are more acceptable unto him, then were ever any external
sacrifices, Psalm 51. 18, 19. Heb. 13. 16.

3. Because in performing these duties before God they do offer and dedicate
themselves wholly unto God.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to have a care accordingly not to defile
the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. that our Priesthood does not dishonor
God, and that our Sacrifices be not lame, and maimed, and such as are not
acceptable unto God.

2. To exhort us, to addict our selves wholly to Gods glory and his worship;
for God will be sanctified in those that draw near him, Levit. 10. 3.

3. To refute the Papists, that rob Christians of this honor, and obtrude
carnal Temples, priesthoods, and sacrifices upon God and men in stead of
spiritual.

Doct. 18. Those duties which we perform in Christ are acceptable unto God by
Christ.

This is gathered from the 5 verse, at the end. But they are acceptable not as
merits, but as sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, as it is intimated in the
Text.

Reason 1. Because by Christ our persons are reconciled unto God, and received
into the number of those whom God approves, and by whom he delights to be
worshipped.

2. Because Christ covers our infirmities.

3. Because by his intercession our duties are commended unto God.

Use 1. This may serve to comfort us, even when we look upon our own
infirmities, and the unworthiness of all our performances.

2. To exhort us, to go cheerfully about the duties of piety, because our
work shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

Doct. 19. The same Christ was after the same manner a Savior in the Old
Testament, as he is in the New.

This is gathered from the sixth Verse.

Reason 1. Because he was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world;
according to the decree, promise, and acceptance of God, and according to the
faith and hope of the godly, Apoc. 13. 8.

2. Because the Catholic Church is but one, consisting of all the faithful
from the beginning of the world, Heb. 12. 23.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those, that make the people of Israel either
to have been altogether carnal, or to have been saved by the observation of
the Law.

2. To exhort us to fly unto Christ, and to put our confidence in him, in whom
all the faithful from the creation of the world did put their trust, and by
whom they were saved.

Doct. 20. Christ is as it were the corner stone in the building of the Church.

That is, he does conjoyne, uphold and direct all the parts of the building, or
members of the Church.

Reason 1. Because he is the beginning or foundation of the Church.

2. Because he unites those people that were before far divided* the Jews
and Gentiles.

3. Because he is the rule or line of direction in all the building that tends
to salvation.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the blasphemy of the Papists, whereby they
make the Pope the head of the Church, and to that purpose wrest this very title
and words thereunto.

2. To instruct us, wholly to depend upon Christ for the direction of our
souls to everlasting life.

Doct. 21. There is nothing at all that can be compared with Christ our Savior
for dignity, use, and excellency.

This is gathered from these titles, el^ct and precious.

Reason 1. For the dignity of his person.

2. For the effectualnesse of his operation, in satisfaction, merit, and
application of those things which belong unto our salvation.

3. For the excellency of those benefits which redound unto the Church by him.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to have no common conceit of Christ, or to
rest in a vulgar esteem of him, but earnestly to endeavor to conceive of him
so, as his dignity and excellency does deserve.

Doct. 22. No man that truly believes in Christ, shall ever be confounded, his
expectation shall not be frustrated, his desire and confidence shall not be in
vain.

Reason 1. Because Christ was appointed by God by a certain and immutable
decree to be the Savior of all those that believe in him.

2. Because all power is given unto him both in heaven and earth.

Use. This may serve to comfort us against those fears and doubts that might
weaken our faith.

Doct. 23. The faithful are not only delivered from misery, but are also
highly honored by Christ.

This is gathered from the seventh verse at the beginning.

Reason. Because they are made partakers of Christ's honor, for in him they are
made sons of God, heirs of the everlasting kingdom, spiritual Priests and
Kings.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove our blindness and dullness, that cannot
discern and esteem of this honor as we ought, but are set upon the honors
of this world more then is fitting.

2. To exhort us, piously and seriously to glory in Christ and the honor which
we have in him, though for his sake the wicked world reproach us.

Doct. 24. As Christ is unto the unbeleevers honor and salvation, so he is
unto the unbeleevers confusion and perdition.

This is gathered out of the seventh Verse, Psalm. 118. 22. Isay 8. 14. Matthew.
21. 42.

But this similitude does not hold in all things. For first, the proper end of
Christ our Savior was to save man, not to destroy him. Secondly, Christ is the
cause of faith in the believers, but he is not the cause of unbelief in the
unbeleevers, though something of Christ may be the occasion of their unbelief;
like as his humiliation was both unto the Jews and many of the Gentiles.
Thirdly, Christ merited salvation for the believers, and not they themselves;
but the unbelievers merit their own perdition, and not Christ: but yet Christ
is truly said to be confusion and perdition to the unbelievers, 1 As they take
offense at him, and so run headlong into their own destruction. 2. As he
does justly punish their infidelity and impiety, as he is the just Judge of all
the world.

Reason 1. Because those unbelievers to whom Christ is offered, in contemning
his goodness, do directly as it were provoke him to use the greatest severity
upon them.

2. Because by this means alone is the glory of God and of Christ preserved,
when his enemies are put under his feet.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us to beware of all infidelity.

2. To exhort us, when we compare our belief with the misery of unbelievers,
to learn to be thankful unto God and to give him the glory of it in Jesus
Christ: for these ends is this amplification made in the text.

Doct. 25. Men come unto this confusion and perdition by stumbling at the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

This is gathered from the 8 Verse. Now men stumble at the word of the Gospel,
when they apprehend the Gospel to be such, that they owe no assent and subject
on thereunto: so the Jews were offended at the infirmity of Christ crucified,
1 Cor. 1. 23. and the Greeks at the foolishness of that word which brings
salvation, Ibid. For the Jews, like as the Papists, with many others, are
offended, for that the Gospel requires them to deny their own righteousness
and works, and to seek to be justified by Christ, Romans 9. 32.

Reason 1. Because this offense is the cause of their infidelity.

2. Because it does not produce a bare unbelief only, but unbelief with
contempt, so that they do infinitely wrong Christ.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to beware that we do not in any thing
stumble at the word of God, or conceive any thing in our minds, whereby we may
be in the least respect alienated from it.

Doct. 26. The infidelity and confusion of the wicked does not fall out by
chance, but according as God had most certainly foreordained it.

This is gathered from these words: whereunto also they are appointed.

Reason 1. Because God is both the King and Lord of all living creatures, so
that nothing can happen unto them contrary to his will.

2. Because there can be no cause of their infidelity imagined, which God did
not foresee, or which he could not have hindered.

3. Because we also which do believe, were aliens from the faith as well as
they; neither did we make that difference betwixt our selves and them, but God:

Use. This may serve to direct us, that the infidelity of any others
whatsoever, may not deface our faith, we must give God the glory in the
dispensation of his grace, and appointing of things according to his counsel,
whose ways are past finding out.

Doct. 27. We should often call to mind that dignity, whereunto we are called
in Christ, and that, by comparing of it to that misery wherein all unbelievers
are plunged.

This is gathered from that repetition, Verse 9. which is used comparatively by
the dissimilitude that is betwixt it and the condition of unbelievers, before
described, as it is intimated in that word But.

Reason 1. Because we are called to spiritual joy, which is chiefly increased
by this means.

2. Because it belongs to the thanks which we ought to give unto God.

3. Because it makes us cheerful in the performing of all duties, that we may
be worthy of so excellent a calling.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to make this contemplation familiar unto us.

Doct. 28. The end of our calling, is to show forth the praises of God, that
has called us.

This is gathered from the ninth verse, that is, that we should render unto God
the glory which he has showed unto us. 1. In the inward thoughts and
affections of our heart. 2. In the outward profession of words. 3. In our
actions throughout the whole conversation of our lives. This is to sanctify
God, Isay 8. 13.

Reason 1. Because this is that glory which may redound unto God from us, or
from our calling.

2. Because our calling it self tends thereunto, that we should turn unto
God, seek God, glorify God.

3. Because this is very profitable for us.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those, that take care of nothing less: they
show that they are not yet partakers of effectual calling.

2. To stir us up more and more to fulfill this duty.

Doct. 29. That state into which we are translated by our calling, is a state
of mavelous light.

This is gathered from the 9 Verse at the end, John 1. 8. Now it is called
light, both for the illumination of the mind, which it brings; and for the
comfort of heart, which we receive thereby: and it is called mavelous,
because it far surpasses all worldly knowledge, and whatsoever the natural
man can conceive.

Use. This may serve to us, to carry our selves answerable to this light, and
to walk in it, not according to the common fashion, but marvellously.

Doct. 30. It is very profitable for us always to compare our present happy
condition, with the misery that is past.

This is gathered from the tenth verse.

Reason 1. Because contraria juxta se positamagis elucescunt, contraries being
put one by another, make each other to appear more clearly.

2. Because it tends to our humiliation.

3. Because it makes us to commiserate others, and to show meekness toward
them. Tit. 3. 2. 3. 4.

4. Because it makes us to be the more thankful unto God. 1. Tim. 1. 12. 13.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, never to forget that misery which did hang
over our heads.

Verse. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul, Having your conversation
honest among the Gentiles.

Verse. 12. That whereas they speak against you, as evil doers, they may by
your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.


The Analysis.
HEre the Apostle does in general exhort to lead such a life as is answerable
to that happy condition, which was spoken of before: Now this life consists of
two parts: The one is abstinence from evil, abstain from fleshly lusts; the
other is, to follow that which is good, having your conversation honest. The
first of which he does persuade them unto by an argument taken 1. From the
disagreement that is betwixt the Godly, and the fleshly lusts of this world in
respect of their state and condition, because in this world, they are strangers
and Pilgrims, and therefore they ought not to set their hearts and desires upon
this world, but upon another. 2. From the danger that hangs over them, from the
desires of this world, because they tend to the destruction of their souls, in
these words, which war against the Soul. The second part together with the
former, he does persuade them unto, by an argument taken from those witnesses
which they ought to have regard of in their conversation; among the Gentiles,
by whose testimony he shows there will a twofold benefit arise from their
honest conversation.

1. That they will cease to speak against them as evil doers.

2. That in beholding their good works, they will not only give them an honest
testimony, but they will also glorify God for them; which benefit is showed by
the adjunct of time, wherein it should be expected, to wit, in the day of
visitation: Now this whole exhortation, that it might be the more effectual,
and the more acceptable unto them, is set forth with a double affection, in the
manner of proposing it; of love or charity, in that title which is given unto
them, Dearly beloved; and of humility, in that he does not so much command
these things, as entreat them, I beseech you.

The Doctrines arising herehence.
Doct. 1. All the faithful are strangers and pilgrims in this world.

Reas. 1. Because their father, and their country is not here, but in heaven.

2. Because they do not desire to stay long here.

3. Because their wealth and their friends are not in this world.

4. Because the world accounts them strangers, and that because their
conversation is not according to the fashion of the world.

Use. 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to place our inheritance or our
treasure in the things of this World.

2. To exhort us, to lift up our hearts always toward our heavenly country;
and to gain all those things, that may help us forward and further us in our
journey thereunto,

Doct. 2. All the faithful ought to abstain from the lusts of of the flesh.

But by this phrase are signified not only the inclinations of the body, but
all those that belong to the old man: for there is something to be sanctified
even in the very spirit of our minds, 1 These. 5. 23. and therefore some lust of
the flesh is seated in the spirit; but these lusts are in general said to be
of the ^lesh because they are most of all manifested in those things which
belong to the body and the flesh: for most men care for and look after nothing
else almost but those things that belong to this present life.

Reas. 1. Because the flesh together with the lusts thereof was crucified with
Christ.

2. Because all the faithful in their baptism and by their profession have
denied the flesh.

3. Because our lusts are deceitful. Ephesians. 4. 22.

Because they lead unto death. Galat. 6. 8. Romans 8. 6. 13.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, above all things to apply our selves unto
this study.

Doct. 3. The lusts of the flesh war against the soul.

Reas. 1. Because they spoil the perfection of the soul, which consists in
the image of God.

2. Because they do either quench or grieve the holy Spirit, upon whom the
comfort of the soul does depend. Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.

3. Because they cause the Death of the soul, and lead thereunto.

Use. 1. This may serve to direct us, always to think upon our spiritual
warfare, and accordingly in all things to carry our selves, as it becomes the
good Soldiers of Christ.

2. To admonish us, to take special heed of those enemies which we have within
our selves; those enemies that are without can do us no hurt, if those that
are within have not power over us, and so do as it were give us up into their
hands.

Doct. 4. To abstain from fleshly lusts, is the way to make our conversation
honest.

Reas. 1. Because all filthynesse proceeds from the lusts of the flesh.

2. Because the true honor and honesty of a man consists in that spiritual
victory which he has over himself.

3. Because by overcomming the lusts of the flesh, the way is made easy to all
virtues and good duties.

Use 1. This may serve to refute and reprove those men, that seek for honor
and dignity by pampering the flesh, and obeying the lusts thereof.

2. To exhort us, cheerfully to oppose our selves against the lusts of the
flesh, for this very cause, because it is a most honest thing.

Doct. 5. The faithful should have a care to live honestly, not only amongst
the faithful, but also amongst the unbeleeving Gentiles.

This is gathered from these words, among the Gentiles; Which notwithstanding
we must so understand, that we do not follow all those things that seem
honest unto them, nor omit those things that do displease them; but only that
we show forth a true evidence of our piety, love and righteousness in our
conversation.

Then again, that thereby their consciences may be convinced, that the way,
which we go, is in that respect at least praiseworthy, and to be approved.

Reas. This we ought to do. 1. For Gods sake and his glory.

2. For our own sakes and our own comfort.

3. For the unbeleevers sake, to draw them unto true piety.

Use. This may serve to refute and reprove those, that under color of
contemning fame, contemn virtue.

Doct. 6. It is the property of unbeleevers, to seek occasion to speak
against the faithful, as if they were wicked.

This is gathered from the 12. verse, at the beginning. Now there are two kinds
of such obloquies. 1. When they speak all manner of evil for Christ's sake,
for faith and righteousness sake, cap. 4. v. 14. Math. 5. 11. 2. When they
find some occasion in the defects of the faithful, and observe something in
their lives, which they may justly tax. This also admits of a two fold
difference; for sometimes such is the impiety of those that profess the true
faith, that it gives scandal to the unbeleevers, Romans 2. 24. and sometimes
they take occasion from the infirmities that are incident to the faithful, to
condemn their profession.

Reas. 1. Because there is an inveterate enmity betwixt the children of the
light, and the children of darkness.

2. Because in this respect men flatter themselves, and in some sort seem
better and happier, when they make others, that would seem better, either to
be like themselves, or worse then themselves.

3. Because by this means they seem to bring some prejudice against the very
doctrine of piety, which the wicked hate.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, 1. To take special heed, that we have no
communion with unbeleevers, in this maliciousness, that is, that we do not
willingly seek or take occasion to speak against the Godly; for this is a
certain mark of impiety.

2. To beware also, that we give no occasion to the wicked, either to speak
against our persons or our professions.

Doct, 7: Good works alone do stop the mouths of the wicked.

This is gathered from the 12. v: at the middle.

Reas. 1. Because men, especially unbeleevers, cannot judge of us, but by the
works which they see.

2. Because the sincerity of our religion properly appears in our works.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, always to endeavor to bring forth good
works.

Doct. 8. The good works of the faithful make others also to glorify God.

This is gathered from the 12. v. at the end. So M. 5. 16.

Reas. 1. Because by this means they are convinced of the truth of our
religion, whose author is God.

2. Because thereby they are drawn also to embrace the same religion, and to
cleave unto God.

3. Because they are moved and stirred up to give God thanks, for those things
that were the means of their conversion.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to use this argument to stir up our selves
to the practice of good works, because they make not only for our own
salvation, but for the glory of God also.

Doct. 9. We must look for a day of visitation, that men may glorify God
therein.

This is gathered from the 12. v. at the end. But the day of visitation may be
understood either in judgment, or in grace and mercy. Here it is to be
understood of the grace of God. So Luke 1. 68.

Reas. Because without grace there is no inclination in the heart of man to
glorify God. The tree must be good, that shall bring forth good fruit, Men do
not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles, Matthew. 7. 16. 17.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to use all patience and meekness toward
the wicked, always provided, that we do not fail in our duty to seek their
conversion. 2. Tim. 2. 25.

Verse. 13. Submit your selves therefore to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake; whether it be to the King, as supreme;

Verse. 14. Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him; for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

Verse. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men.

Verse. 16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servants of God.

Verse. 17. Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.


The Analysis.
IN these words the Apostle shows that particular part of obedience, which
did in a special manner pertain to the honesty of the faithful among the
Gentiles, that is, subjection to the Magistrates, which some at that time did
begin to cast off, as not agreeing with Christian liberty. Now this subjection
he does. 1. Generally command and direct us unto, to perform it for religion
sake toward God, v. 13. 2. By a distribution of the object, to wit, that we
ought to perform it, not only to the King and the supreme Magistrate, but also
to the governors that are sent by him. v. 13. 14. 3. He does persuade us
thereunto, 1. From the end of this ordinance, to wit, that it is to repress
and punish the evil doers, and to preserve and cherish the good v. 14. at the
end. 2. From the efficient cause, or command of God, v. 15. 3. From the end and
benefit of performing this subjection, to wit, to stop the mouths of the
enemies, who are described by their ignorance and their foolishness, v. 15. 4.
He removes an objection that might be made against it, about Christian liberty.
v. 16. Where he distinguishes betwixt feigned liberty, which is joined with
maliciousness; and true liberty, that makes men to be addicted unto the
service of God: Now that this subjection to superiors belongs to the service
of God, he shows v. 17. by a short repetition of those precepts, that belong
to this and the like duties.

Here a Question may be made.

Quest. Why is the Magistracy called an ordinance of man v. 13. seeing all
powers are ordained of God, and every power is the ordinance of God, Romans 13.
1. 2.

Answ. The superiority of power, or government it self is simply and
absolutely commanded by God, and in that respect is called the ordinance of
God; but this or that special manner of power or government is not determined
by God, but by men; and is therefore called an ordinance of men, which as
touching the nature of it, may also be called an ordinance of God: And this is
the difference betwixt an Ecclesiastical and a civil office. An
Ecclesiastical office is not legitimate, if it be not directly determined by
God himself, and consequently cannot be changed by men: but this or that
civil offi^e may be made and changed by men. And the reason of the difference
is this, because God and Christ alone has dominion and power in spiritual
matters; but in civil matters men are also Gods, though not absolute.

The Doctrines arising from this.
Doct. 1. The duties of righteousness toward men, do much commend our
religion toward God.

This is gathered from the connection of these words with the foregoing words,
in that particle therefore. So James 1. 27.

Reas. 1. Because they are the effects of religion; Now the virtue of the cause
does always appear in the effect.

2. Because they are more obvious to the sight of man, then religion it self,
which is the cause thereof.

3. Because they draw men's minds to approve of that religion whence they
proceed.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, for religion sake to apply our selves to
these duties.

Doct. 2. We must perform civil subjection to our civil Magistrates for the
Lords sake.

This is gathered from the 13. v.

Reas. 1. Because by these means the Lord preserves the societies of men.

2. Because these Governments are the means to advance Gods glory, at least so
far forth as they tend to perform some part of the will of God.

3. Because in their own nature and of themselves they make for the good and
against the bad. v. 14.

Use. 1. This may serve to refute the Anabaptists and others, who for
conscience sake will not be subject to the Magistrate.

2. To admonish us, never so to subject our selves unto men, as that for their
sakes we should neglect our duty toward God, because we ought to be subject
unto them for the Lords sake, and therefore a far greater subjection is due
unto the Lord, then unto them.

Doct. 3. By these duties the good will of God is observed, and the
foolishness of wicked men is put to silence.

This is gathered from v. 15.

Reas. 1. Because we serve God, when for conscience sake toward God, we are
subject unto men; therefore we fulfill the will of God.

2. Because we do that before men, which they do usually praise most, and so
we remove all occasion of offense.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, so much the more carefully to apply our
selves to such duties.

Doct. 4. Christian liberty is not contrary to that subjection, which we owe
either unto God or man.

This is gathered from v. 16.

Reas. 1. Because by it we are freed from sin, but not from that duty, which
is contrary unto sin.

2. Because Christian liberty consists properly in spiritual things, and not
in corporal; for although we are subject unto God alone in spiritual things,
yet in corporal things we owe subjection unto men also.

3. Because for that end did we receive this liberty, that we might more freely
and readily perform those things, which we owe unto God and men.

Use. This may serve to condemn those, that use Christian liberty for a cloak
of maliciousness, as it is in the text.

Doct. 5. We are to take exact notice of the difference of our duty toward
men, toward our brethren, toward God, and toward the Magistrates.

This is gathered from v. 17.

Reas. Because great is the difference of the grounds or reasons, whereupon
these duties depend, as it is intimated in the text; but we must make
conscience of our duty in all.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, that do any way sever or disjoyne these
duties, to wit, such as seem to fear God, but do not love or honor men; or
such as seem to honor men, but do not fear God at all.

Verse. 18. Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward.

Verse 19. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrong ful^y.

Verse 20. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults ye
shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God.

Verse. 21. For even hereunto were you called: because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.

V. 22. Who did not sin, neither was guile found in his mouth?

V. 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him, that judges righteously.

V. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that
we being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye
were healed.

V. 25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
shepherd and Bishop of your souls.


The Analysis.
HEre the Apostle makes a special exhortation about the duty of servants to
their masters: and this duty he does 1. As it were define by a special kind of
subjection wherein it consists. Be subject with all fear. 2. He does
illustrate it by a distribution of the object, or the masters, to whom this
subjection is due; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. 3.
He proves that this subjection is to be made to both sorts, by an argument
taken from the adjuncts thereof, grace and glory, that is, Gods praising and
approving of it, which accompanies the subjection that is made unto wicked
masters verse 19. For this is thank-worthy. The reason of which consequence is
set forth. 1. By a description of that subjection which is due unto wicked
Masters, to wit, that it is a patient suffering of wrong for conscience toward
God v. 19. 2. By a comparison that is made betwixt those that suffer justly,
and those that suffer unjustly, which he shows to be unlike, in that the
former can look for no glory from their sufferings, but the latter may expect
great glory, verse 20. In the second place, he proves the same duty from that
relation which arises from our general calling, because we are thereunto
called, that we should patiently suffer the injuries of the world: and this he
confirms by the example of Christ; to whose imitation we are called: for he
shows two ends of the suffering of Christ; one was to dye for us, that is, to
expiate our sins, which is the primary end. The other was, to leave us an
example to imitate. verse 21. which is the secondary end. Now a special part
of this secondary end was, that when he was without sin v. 22. Yet he
patiently suffered all kinds of reproach^s and afflictions, v. 23. And the
primary end of Christ's sufferings, which was to redeem us from sin, is upon
this occasion also declared v. 24. 25. Because therehence also may be drawn a
powerful argument, to persuade us to imitate Christ in doing righteously, and
suffering unjustly: And this is declared, 1. From the nature of Christ's death,
that it was a sacrifice for our sins to take away the guilt of them; 2. From
the end of this propitiation, which is the death of sin, and the life of
righteousness. And hereof there is an illustration made by comparing that
condition, which went before our conversion, with that condition which follows
it, verse the last.

The Doctrines drawn here-hence.
Doct. 1. They that are in the lowest condition, should by their good works
glorify God in that condition.

This is gathered from the connection of the 18 Verse with the 11 and 12.

Reason 1. Because servants also are called to liberty and glory in Christ,
neither is there any difference, as touching life spiritual, betwixt the
freeman and the servant, 1 Cor. 7. 22.

2. Because there is the same reward for servants and freemen.

3. Because the servile condition has a proper occasion and means to glorify
God, which other conditions have not, like as other conditions have their
occasions and means, which the servile has not.

Use 1. This may serve to comfort us, in regard that no man is excluded from
having a part in this honor, that has a part in advancing the glory of God.

2. To exhort all, both servants and all other sorts of men, to endeavor to
promote Gods glory: for if servants ought to do this; much more ought free
masters, and those that are in any place of dignity.

Doct. 2. Servants, to the end that they may glorify God in their servile
condition, must be subject to their Masters with all fear.

Reason 1. Because subjection to another man's will is properly that wherein
service consists; and therefore all they that are bound as servants, are bound
to subjection.

2. Because the subjection of a servant is such, that it does necessarily
command a fear to displease, not only in that respect, because in every duty,
both toward God and man, we should fear to offend by doing amiss, but also
in respect of that singular power, which masters have to punish their servants.
This is that fear, which we usually call servile, which is not to be disliked
in servants, though in the children of God there be another fear required over
and above, which arises from love.

Use. This may serve to admonish, first, Servants and subjects, not to separate
fear from subjection. Secondly, all men to subject themselves to God with all
fear, as it becomes servants.

Doct. 3. We ought to perform our duty, even unto wick^d men and froward.

This is gathered from the 18 Verse.

Reason 1. Because the ground of our duty does not consist in the goodness or
naughtiness of men, but in that obligation which the law of God imposes upon
us, which may consist with the naughtiness of men.

2. Because in performing this duty, we serve God and Christ, and shall
receive a reward from him, Ephesians. 6. 5. 6, 7. 8.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, that direct their duties according to
the persons of the men with whom they have to do.

Doct. 4. We ought to do our duty for conscience toward God, though we are
wrongfully afflicted by men.

This is gathered from Verse 19.

Reason 1. Because conscience always looks to the judgment of God and not to
the qualities and judgments of men.

2. Because the conscience is by this means constant, immutable, and always
like it self, howsoever men's judgments may alter.

Use. This may serve to direct us in all our actions to have a special respect
to the conscience.

Doct. 5. It is thank-worthy, and we shall receive glory from God, if we suffer
wrongfully, and not justly.

This is gathered from the 19 and 20 verses.

Reason. 1. Because this is proper and peculiar to Christians, as is the love
of our enemies, Matthew. 5. 44, 45.

2. Because by this means we give great glory unto God, when we suffer the
bitterest things out of conscience toward him.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, cheerfully to set our selves to the
performing of these duties.

Doct. 6. The calling of Christians does in a special manner lead to the
patient suffering of afflictions.

This is gathered from the 21 verse, at the beginning.

Reason 1. Because they are called unto glory by the enduring of all kinds of
afflictions, as by the way that leads thereunto, cap. 5. verse 10.

2. Because they are called to overcome their enemies and evil doers by
well-doing, and if it be possible to win them thereby, Matthew. 5. 44. Romans 12.
21.

3. Because they are called to imitate Christ, as it is in the text.

Use. 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to imitate or follow the men of the
world in these things, because we have another manner of calling.

2. To exhort us to have a great care that we make conscience of this duty,
because it does most nearly belong to our calling.

Doct. 7. Christ's actions are a most perfect example for our duty and calling.

This is gathered from Verse 21.

Reason 1. Because Christ is unto us an example given by God, as it were the
praxis of Divinity and rule of living well.

2. Because he has no imperfection at all, such as may be found in all men's
examples.

3. Because the Spirit of Christ makes us to be conformable unto his image.

Use. This may serve to direct us, that beholding Christ as it were in a
glass, we may be as it were changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3. 18.

Doct. 8. The Chiefest manner of imitating Christ in enduring afflictions,
consists in this, that we commit our cause unto God.

This is gathered from verse 23, at the end.

Reason. Because this is the rule of patience in such cases, not to revenge our
selves, but to commit the whole business unto the Lord, and to rest well
contented and pleased in his will.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, never to please our own carnal will, but
to subject our selves wholly to the good will of God.

Doct. 9. Christ by his death did not only leave us an example of our lives,
but also expiated our sins, and procured for us such power, whereby we may
imitate him in living well.

This is gathered from verse 24.

Reason 1. Because after the same manner are we restored in Christ, as we were
lost in Adam, which was not by imitation and example only, Romans 5.

2. Because Christ ought to be a sacrifice to pacify God toward us, which is
not done by example.

3. Because an example would have nothing at all profited those that were dead
in sin and hated of God.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Socinians and others, which feine that the
redemption of Christ consists in doctrine and example only.

2. To direct us, always to join these two together, redemption, and the
example of Christ.

Doct. 10. Without Christ we are nothing else but sheep going astray and lost.

This is gathered from the last verse.

Reason. Because upon him alone depends our salvation and the direction of our
lives.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to leave Christ so much as in the
least thing, but to cleave faster and faster unto him.

Chapter III.
Verse 1. Likewise ye wives be in subjection to your own husbands, that if
any obey not the word, they also may without the word be wenne by the
conversation of the wives.

Verse 2. While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear:

Verse 3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel.

Verse 4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.

Verse 5. For after this manner in the old time, the holy women also who
trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own
husbands.

Verse 6. Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose daughters ye
are as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.

Verse 7. Likewise ye husbands dwell with them according to the knowledge of
God, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being
heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.


The Analysis.
HEre the Apostle instructs Wives and Husbands in those particular duties which
belong unto their conjugall society. And he sets down the duty of wives in the
first place, because that comes nearest unto those duties which he had lately
spoken of, namely, the duty of subjects toward the^r Magistrates, and of
servants toward their Master. For that which is here in general prescribed
unto wives, is their subjection to their husbands, Verse 1. Be in subjection to
your own husbands. Which subjection he does afterward explain by certain
adjuncts or properties, which do in a peculiar manner belong to the subjection
of wives, and not to the subjection of servants and subjects. The first of
these properties is, conjugall fear, verse. 2. The second is chastity of
conversation, in the same verse. The third is, meek^nesse and mildness, verse
4. And he does persuade them unto this subjection together with the properties
thereof. 1. By an argument taken from the effects and fruit, which by the grace
of God might follow thereupon; for it is a means tending to the conversion of
their husbands, if they obey not the Gospel, verse 1. 2. He commends and
illustrates it by a comparison which he makes betwixt that pious subjection,
and that adorning which women use to make great account of, verse 3, 4. where
he shows that outward adorning to be nothing worth in Gods sight. 3. He does
persuade them unto it by the example of those holy women, which God did approve
of in old time, verse 5. And in particular by the example of Sara, and her
obedience unto Abraham, verse 6. Of whose example he gives a special reason;
because as Abraham was the father of all the faithful, so Sara in some sort
might be called the mother of all holy women. The duty of husbands he sets down
1, in general, in their husbandlike government, which he calls a dwelling with
their wives according to knowledge, which knowledge and understanding is the
ground of direction, and therefore is more required in a man, then in a woman.
2. In the special manner of this government, to wit, that it should be joined
with the honor of the wife, in bearing with her infirmities, which he does
persuade them unto by an argument taken, 1. from that society and equality
which is betwixt the husband and the wife, in respect of the grace of life, as
it is here called. 2. From the great discommodity, which will follow upon the
neglect of this duty, for by their domestical differences and dissentions
their domestical prayers also are hindered, Verse 7.

The Doctrines arising here-hence.

Doct. 1. There is the like duty of subjects, servants, wives, and husbands.

This is gathered from that particle, Likewise ye wives, verse 1. and Likewise
ye husbands, verse 7. Not, that there is the same kind of duty in all these in
all respects, but that there is the same kind of obligation, whereby every one
is bound to do his own duty.

Reason 1. Because it is the same Lawgiver and the same law that commands
every man his duty.

2. Because the disparity of the condition makes no disparity in the
obligation, which is the formality of the duty; but only in those things, to
which the obligation binds us, which is the materiality of the duty.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to cast off from our selves those
things which we either read or hear to be commanded men of another condition,
but always to consider, that quamvis non ad similia, tamen similiter, though
we are not tied to the like duties, yet we are in the like manner tied to our
own duties: when servants are commanded any thing, then masters should think,
that they likewise are commanded something; when wives are commanded any thing,
then husbands should think that they likewise; and when husbands are commanded
any thing, then wives should think, that they likewise.

Doct. 2. It is the duty of wives to be subject to their husbands.

This is gathered from verse 1. See Colos. 3. 18. Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, 24.

Reason 1. Because the husband is the head of the wife, Ephesians. 5. 23. 1 Cor.
11. 3.

2. Because there can be no order kept in a family, except all therest be
subject to the father of the family.

Use. This may serve to reprove those wives that are undutifull and will not be
subject; and those husbands also, who by their own fault lose this authority
and dignity, and are themselves the causes that their own power is lessened
and diminished.

Doct. 3. The conversation of wives should be such, that it should win their
husbands to approve of the true religion.

This is gathered from verse 1.

Reason 1. Because all should, as much as they can, cooperate with God for the
conversion of men.

2. Because this general Christian duty is in a special manner determined and
intended in respect of those, with whom we have a nearer communion.

3. Because love, which does in a singular manner belong to man and wife,
requires that they should desire and seek for one another greatest good.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, which in wedlock so live, that they have
no care at all, either to advance Gods glory, or to further their own
salvation, in that state: and they are to be condemned much more, which so
carry themselves in that state, that they do more and more alienate their
husbands from true religion and piety either touching the doctrine, or touching
the practice of it. And if this belongs to wives toward their husbands, much
more will it belong to husbands toward their wives.

Doct. 4. Conjugall chastity should be joined with fear.

This is gathered from verse 2.

Reason. Because not only is impurity to be shunned, but also all suspicion of
impurity, or of a mind inclining thereunto.

Use. 1. This may serve to admonish man and wife, to shun all those courses,
that may any way be any blemish to their chastity, though it be but in show or
appearance.

2. To admonish all Christians, to preserve their spiritual chastity with
Christ and God, with all fear.

Doct. 5. It is not the outward adorning, but the inward, thae we should make
account of.

This is gathered from verse 3, 4.

Reason 1. Because the outward adorning belongs to the vanity of this world,
but the inward is spiritual life it self. For Christ and grace is called the
inward adorning of the heart or mind, because it makes a man amiable and
commends him in the sight of those which esteem and prize it.

2. Because only men look after the outward adorning, and and those none of the
graver sort neither; but God himself looks after the inward, as it is in
verse 4.

3. Because the outward adorning is not durable, but the inward is
incorruptible, as it is in verse 4. which is not corruptible, and 2 Cor. 4. 18.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, every day more and more to renounce this
outward and worldly adorning, and to look to the inward and true adorning of
the mind and soul.

Doct. 6. Meekness and mildness of spirit in women, as in all others also,
is an adorning that is precious in the sight of God.

This is gathered from verse 4.

Reason 1. Because many filthy unbeseeming things, which arise from anger and
perturbation of the mind, are removed by such a disposition.

2. Because such a disposition is very apt to please, and all men desire that
others should be well pleased with their behavior.

Use. 1. This may serve to refute those, which affect a kind of glory and
honor by their fierceness and impatiency.

2. To exhort us, not only for civility sake, but also for conscience toward
God to endeavor to get such a disposition.

Doct. 7. Every man should seek for examples of such virtues out of Scripture,
and apply them unto himself according to his own proper condition.

For women have holy women proposed unto them for examples verse 5. So have men
holy men.

Doct. 8. In weighing of examples we should have the chiefest regard to those
that are most commended in Scripture.

This is gathered from those words, Abraham, Sara, and the like, verse 6.

Doct. 9. Then and not before are we the children of such holy ones, by a true
imitation of them, when we do so persist in well doing, that no terror or any
other temptation is able to remove us from this our purpose and resolution.

This is gathered from the 6. verse at the end. For this is proposed in Sara to
be chiefly imitated by women, that out of her duty, she followed Abraham in all
his journey, nor could any terror keep her back.

Doct. 10. Husbands should likewise do their duty, as well as the wives do
theirs.

This is gathered from verse 7.

Reas. 1. Because there is the same obligation of Gods law on both sides.

2. Because there is a mutual relation betwixt these duties, that one does
necessarily require the other.

3. Because the duty of husbands to their wives, and of wives to their husbands
is almost the same, but that the wife is to do her part with subjection, and
it is the husbands part to rule.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not rigidly to exact the duty of others,
and in the mean time to neglect our own.

Doct. 11. It belongs unto men to excel in knowledge and understanding.

This is gathered from those words: according to knowledge.

Reas. 1. Because by nature they have a kind of perfection above women in those
things which belong unto knowledge, whereupon the woman is in this place called
the weaker vessel.

2. Because by their duty they should be the heads of their wives, to direct
and govern them.

3. Because they have greater means to gain knowledge; for as it is not
lawful for women to speak in the Church; so neither have they any thing to
do in other exercises, whereby men's wits are ripened.

Use. This may serve to reprove those men, that either through drunkenness, or
sloth, or the neglect of divine things, or through too much care of earthly
things, do not only come behind women, but children also in sound knowledge
and understanding.

Doct. 12. It is the husbands part to be meek unto their wives, and not to put
them in fear.

Reas. 1. Because they are not servants, but companions.

2. Because their conjugall love should show it self in all such duties.

Use. This may serve to admonish as well husbands as wives to beware of
harshnesse and bitterness.

Doct. 13. That duty which we owe unto all the coheires of grace and life
eternal, should direct and govern our particular duties toward our
superiors, inferiors and equals.

Reas. 1. Because that is the principal duty; to which all the rest are
subordinate.

2. Because that love does vertually at least contain in it all virtues.

3. Because the dignity which redounds from the relation to grace and eternal
life, makes all those that are partakers of that grace, in some sort equal,
and therefore restraines contempt, opposition, and all kinds of injuries.

Use. This may serve to direct us, in all parts of our conversation with
Christian men, to have chief regard to this duty.

Doct. 14. All our conversation, as well in public as in private, should be
so ordered, that it should not hinder, but rather further our Prayers.

This is gathered from the last words.

Reas. 1. Because otherwise we should wrong God himself, in violating his
honor.

2. Because we should diminish at least our greatest comfort, which depends
upon our prayers.

Use, This may serve to admonish us, to take heed therefore, not only of the
grosser sort of sins, but also of contentions, injuries, perturbations, and all
those vanities, by which we are made unfit to call upon the name of God aright.

Verse 8. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous.

V. 9. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise
blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a
blessing.


The Analysis.
THe Apostle does in these two verses briefly comprehend those duties, which
belong unto all sorts of men. For because it would be too long particularly to
describe all the particular virtues, nor can there be such a doctrine
delivered, that should direct * every particular man in his duty, * singules
qua singulos, as such a particular man, as before it was delivered touching
masters and servants, wives and husbands, therefore he does here commend some
general duties unto all, from which all particular ones will easily follow.
And the first of these is Concord. 2. Mutual sympathy. 3. Brotherly love. 4.
Pity. 5. Courteousnesse. 6. Christian Patience, whereby we do not only
forbear to curse those that curse us, but also bless them; of which last
duty, as being the difficultest of all, he gives a special reason, which is
taken from the end of our calling, whereby we come to the possession of all
blessings, and as much as in us lies, ought we to communicate it unto others.

The Doctrines arising herehence.
Doct. 1. Concord is a virtue, which all Christians should mightily labor for.

Reas. 1. Because God has endued all those, that are truly faithful, with one
and the same Spirit, and therefore with one heart as it were. For they have
received a new heart of one and the same making and nature.

2. Because they propose unto themselves one and the same end, and they should
go one and the same way unto that end.

3. Because if there be any difference in other things, which do not belong
unto that way, they are not so great, as that they should cause any discord:
For there may be some difference of opinions in many things without any discord
or alienation of men's minds. And if there be some difference about those
things, which do belong unto that way, a bearing one with another, when they
do both earnestly desire the truth, will preserve concord safe and sound
betwixt those which are true Christians, according to that of the Apostle
Philip. 3. 15. 16.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, which for light causes are estranged
from their brethren, and turn the smallest difference, even the least
controversy into discord. And how many are guilty of this fault, and how
closely it sticks unto them, may evidently appear by this, that they cannot
lay aside their anger and hatred, no not for Gods sake, for Christ sake, and
their own salvation sake. And this we may see in too too many, when they
forbear to come to the Lords Supper by reason of those contentions, which they
maintain betwixt themselves and their neighbors; for they do thereby show
that they cannot pray unto God to forgive them their trespasses, as they
forgive others that trespass against them, and therefore they seem to love
discord more then God himself, and their own salvation.

Doct. 2. There should be a sympathy betwixt Christians.

By which word is signified not only a fellow-feeling of one another troubles,
but also of one another good, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

Reas. 1. Because they are members of one body, and all the members look unto
the good of the whole.

2. Because the evil or good of one member, does in some sort redound unto the
rest of the members, by that near union and communion, which is betwixt them.

3. Because the consent and concord of their wills commands this, that whereof
one does rejoice or grieve, the other also should rejoice and grieve.

Use. This may serve to reprove that Stoicall hardness, which has taken hold
of men's minds, whereby it comes to pass that they are no way sensible of the
condition of others.

Doct. 3. Brotherly love is moreover greatly to be embraced, which unto concord
and Sympathy adds a will also and endeavor to do good unto others as unto
our brethren.

Reas. 1. Because we are brethren.

2. Because love is the character of Christian brotherhood.

3. Because love is the bond of perfection and the means of Christian
edification.

Use. This may serve to exhort us to the exercise of this grace.

Doct. 4. To our love we should joy no mercy, which looks only unto the good
that is to be done.

Reas. 1. Because true love is by this means made most manifest, when it is
showed unto those which cannot give us thanks.

2. Because in this we do imit^te our heavenly Father, who is the Father of
mercies.

3. Because the same benefit is greater, when it is bestowed upon one that is
in misery, then when it is bestowed upon another.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, which seem to love such men only, from
whom they may expect something.

Doct. 5. Together with our love and mercy we should join courteousnesse.

Reas. 1. Because true love and mercy proceeding from the enlargement of the
heart, fits and disposes the whole man for the doing of good.

2. Because a benefit bestowed in a rough and harsh manner, does in some sort
cease to be a benefit.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, more and more to lay aside all severity,
and to have a care to beautify that good which we do, in the manner of doing
it.

Doct. 6. Christians should not render evil for evil, or railing for railing.

This is gathered out of the 9. verse. So Romans 12. 17. and Matthew. 5. 39.

Reas. 1. Because the railing or ill-doing of another, does not loose the bond,
or take away the duty of our love.

2. Because this is to be overcome of evil. Romans 12. 21.

3. Because this derogates from Gods fidelity, and takes that, which belongs
unto him, out of his hands, Romans 12. 19. Prove. 22. 23.

Use. This may serve to reprove those men, that are easily provoked, and when
they are provoked by any injury, think that they may do any thing, and so
give themselves liberty to exercise all kind of revenge: and that they do not
this from the hatred of sin, but from too much love of themselves, it does
sufficiently appear by this, that when more heinous and grievous offenses are
committed against God, and the same wrongs done unto others; they can hear it
and behold it, and never be troubled at it.

Doct. 7. It is the duty of Christians to bless those that curse and wrong
them.

This is gathered from the 9. v. at the middle. So Matthew. 5. 44. and Romans 12.
14.

Reas. 1. Because love and mercy does in a special manner require this duty of
those, which by such like sins make themselves obnoxious unto cursing.

2. Because we should overcome evil with good. Romans 12. 21.

3. Because we should imitate our heavenly Father. Matthew. 5. 45.

Use. This may serve to exhort us to use our selves unto this perfection.

Doct. 8. The remembrance of our calling, that it tends unto blessing, should
stir us up to bless others.

This is gathered from v. 9. at the latter end.

Reas. 1. Because that which we have freely received from the blessing of God,
we should, as much as in us lies, freely and liberally give. Matthew. 10. 8.

2. Because by this means we exercise and perfect our own calling.

3. Because by this means we show forth and advance the glory of God, that
bestowed this benefit upon us.

Use. This may serve for direction, very often to meditate upon our calling,
and that to this end, that we may be made the more ready and fit for Christian
duties.

Verse. 10. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile:

Verse. 11, Let him eschew evil, and do good, let him seek peace and ensue
it.

Verse. For the eyes of the Lord are set over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do
evil.


The Analysis.
IN these three verses, the Apostle proves by the testimony of Scripture, that
which he had spoken in the last place, to wit, that Godly men shall inherit a
blessing. In which testimony there is in the first place the blessing set
down, which all desire, He that will love life, and see good days. 2. The
piety of those, to whom this blessing is promised, is synecdochically declared
by a distribution of the subjects, as it is in the speech, v. 10. or in the
deeds and conversation of life v. 11.

3. The connection of the blessing, with this piety is confirmed by the most
powerful cause thereof, namely, the providence of God, watching over the Godly
for their good, verse 12. at the beginning. Which is illustrated by a contrary
effect of the same providence toward those that do evil, namely, that he
watches over those always for evils, v. 12. at the end.

The Doctrines arising herehence.
Doct. 1. It is common unto all men, in some sort to desire blessing and
happiness.

For therefore does he in this place, use a common argument to stir up all to
the practice of piety.

Reas. 1. Because * omnia appetunt bonum, all things desire their own good, and
in some sort too that which they apprehend as summum bonum, the chiefest good.

2. Because all nature tends unto its own perfection, and this perfection is
happiness.

3. Because the nature of happiness is such, that if the understanding does in
any manner comprehend it, the will cannot but in some measure desire it,
because it is in all respects desirable.

Use. 1. Let us not therefore rest contented with a confused desire of
happiness, but endeavor and labor to stir up and to increase in our selves
the true, genuine and effectual desire thereof.

2. For direction, not to corrupt this desire that is approved of God, or to
choke it with worldly desires, but to go forward and increase it daily
according to that rule, which it given unto us from God.

Doct. 2. True and solid piety is the only way to attain unto these blessings.

Reas. 1. Because God has promised it to the Godly alone.

2. Because piety in its own nature leads to God, and joins us with God,
who is the fountain of all good.

3. Because piety it self has that perfection joined with it, namely, peace
of conscience and sound consolation, which is a great part of happiness.

Use. 1. This may serve to convince those of folly and madness, that would be
happy, but will not be Godly.

2. To direct us, to kindle in our hearts an earnest endeavor to be godly by
the expectation of this happiness, and to gain unto our selves an assurance
of it.

Doct. 3. The providence of God alone, makes for the furtherance of this piety,
and the confirmation of this happiness.

This is gathered from v. 12.

Reas. 1. Because God by his providence does fulfill and perfect all his
promises.

2. Because the same providence looks over and takes care for the particular
necessities of the Godly.

3. Because he takes special notice of all their desires and prayers, as it is
in the text.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to build up our selves in a true and lively
faith of this providence.

Verse. 13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which
is Good?

Verse. 14. But and if ye suffer any thing for righteousness sake, happy are
ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled.

Verse. 15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear, having a good conscience:

Verse. 16. That whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may
be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.


The Analysis.
THat which the Apostle had before proposed concerning the practice of piety,
he does there persuade them unto by an argument taken, 1. from the effect
thereof, that by this means men are freed and delivered from those harms,
which the wicked seek occasion to bring upon them, v. 13. 2. From the
happiness adjoined, because no afflictions that are suffered for
righteousness and godliness sake, are able to exclude that, verse 14. at the
beginning. 3. He shows the right manner of undergoing afflictions, so that
happiness may follow thereupon, which consists 1. in the laying aside of that
fear and perturbation, which usually men's minds are troubled with in their
afflictions, in these words, be not afraid of their terror. 2. In that
confidence and relyance of our hearts upon God, whereby his name is sanctified,
and by virtue whereof that immoderate fear may be laid aside. And this
confidence is set forth by its proper effect, which consists in courageous and
ready confession of the faith; of which confession he sets down two
properties, namely, meekness and fear or reverence, and moreover he shows
the helping and preserving cause thereof, namely, a good conscience, and the
effect also which it will work in others, verse 16. to wit, that it will make
their enemies with shame to leave off their speaking evil of them.

But here-hence arises a question.

Quest. How can this be made good, which the Apostle says, that no man shall
harm the godly? Verse 13.

Answer 1. Because the nature of godliness and goodness tends thereunto, to
win the minds of all men, and to take off all ill will.

2. Because often times also it has this effect, that taking away all pretense
and occasion of unrighteousness, it does in some measure mollify the enemies
minds, except they be quite and clean savage and furiously mad.

3. Because nemo propri^^ laeditur nisi a scipso, no body is properly hurt but
by himself and his own fault; he therefore that escheweth evil and does
good, cannot properly be said to be hurt by others, though they do earnestly
desire and endeavor to do it.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. Christians should be emulators and fellowers of that which is good.

This is gathered from verse 13.

Reason 1. Because they are called to the imitation of Gods goodness: Be ye
holy as I am holy: be ye perfect as your Father is perfect.

2. Because there are begotten again unto the image of God, and should daily
more and more be fashioned thereunto.

3. Because there is nothing besides that is worthy of our serious imitation.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to lift up our minds, and betake our selves
to this holy and divine emulation.

Doct. 2. They that are followers of that which is good are freed from harm.

This is gathered from verse 13.

Reason 1. Because if God be for us, who can be against us?

2. Because wicked men's minds also are oftentimes overcome by the goodness of
the good: as Esau was moved by the obsequiousness of Jacob.

3. Because the greatest good cannot be taken away from those that labor for
true godliness.

Use. This may serve to comfort us against all dangers which may befall us by
following that which is good.

Doct. 3. To suffer afflictions for righteousness sake does not hinder, but
further our happiness.

This is gathered from Verse 14. So Matthew. 5. 10.

Reason 1. Because such afflictions make us conformable unto Christ in the
fellowship of his sufferings, Phil. 3. 10.

2. Because it is a singular part of that obedience and holiness, which tends
unto happiness.

3. Because God has promised bountifully to reward it.

Use. This may serve to comfort us, against all the evils which may befall us
for righteousness sake and a good conscience.

Doct. 4. We must lay aside the fear of all dangers wherewith our mind may be
troubled.

This is gathered from the same verse at the end.

Reason 1. Because such fear is contrary unto faith and a sure confidence.

2. Because it has no other use, but to hinder us in doing of our duty.

3. Because it is contrary to the honor of God and the worthiness of a good
cause.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to give place to such pusillanimity
and faint-heartednesse.

Doct. 5. We should strengthen our hearts against all fear, by putting our
trust in God.

Reason 1. Because there is nothing else whereby we can overcome all fears and
terrors.

2. Because God has taken this upon himself, and commanded us to commit our
cause unto him.

3. Because by this trust and confidence God is made the strength of our souls.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, truly to put our trust in God.

Doct. 6. By this trust and confidence we sanctify God in our hearts.

This is gathered from verse 15.

Reason 1. Because thereby we acknowledge him to be a holy God, that is, a God
of perfect power, mercy, truth and fidelity.

2. Because by the effectual acknowledgement of this holiness we give unto
him that glory, which is due unto his name from our hearts.

3. Because thereby we advance his glory amongst others, as well in our actions
as in our professions.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, wholly to rely upon him.

Doct. 7. We should sanctify God not only in our hearts, but with our mouths
also, and in our profession.

This is gathered from these words: Be ready always to give an answer. So Romans
10. 10.

Reason 1. Because we should glorify God not only in our spirit, but in our
body also, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

2. Because we should advance Gods glory, not only in our selves, but amongst
others also.

3. Because out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: we cannot
therefore sanctify God with all our heart, unless we are ready to do the same
likewise with our mouth.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, which boast of the sincerity of their
heart, and in the mean time take no care for the holiness of their heart and
words.

2. To exhort us to prepare our selves for this duty, Eph^s. 4. 29.

Doct. 8. All Christians should be ready not only to profess the truth, but
also to give a good reason of their prof^ssion.

This is gathered from these words: to give an answer to every man that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you. And this is not to be understood of
all truth, but of the truth of religion; nor of all these things neither, which
do any way pertain unto religion, but of the very substance of faith, hope, and
religion, as it is in the text: a reason of the hope that is in you: nor is it
either a natural reason that is required, or such a kind of reason that may
stop the mouths of every gainsayer; for this all are not able to do, nor does
it belong unto all; but some sure ground out of Gods word, whereupon our faith
and hope should be built and strengthened against all kind of temptations. Now
here arises a question.

Quest. Whether such a reason is to be given to every one that asks, or no?

Answ. No not absolutely to every one, because we are not to give it to Dogs
and Swine, (that is, to unclean persons) without a necessary cause, but to
every one that asks us, so that our profession or answer may probably at
least turn to the glory of God, as it is in the text, to sanctify God.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, 1 seriously to study our religion, to
understand the grounds thereof. 2 Freely and ingeniously to declare and defend
it upon a good occasion.

Doct. 9. Our profession of religion should be with meekness in respect of
men, and with fear in respect of God.

Reason. Because by meekness we do good amongst men, and the fear of God
will stir us up to do our duty, and keep us within the bounds and limi^s
thereof.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, which keep no measure in their words
and actions.

Doct. 10. A good conscience is very necessary as well in the sanctification of
Gods name, as in the profession of his religion.

That is, a conscience bearing us witness, both of the grace of God toward us
in Christ, and of the sincere desire and endeavor of our hearts to please God
in all things.

Reason 1. Because without such a conscience, our faith, confidence, fortitude,
and liberty, does languish and decay.

2. Because such a conscience freeth us from all that burden, wherewith
otherwise we should be oppressed, and terrified, and affrighted from doing our
duty.

3. Because it stirs us up to all the duties of piety; for without the care
of performing them, a good conscience can afford us no comfort.

Use. This may serve to exhort us to have a care of our conscience, to keep it
pure before God and men.

The 17 verse is all one with the 20 verse of the 2 chapter.

Verse 17. For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
well-doing, then for evill-doing.

Verse 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit.

Verse 19. By which also he went, and preached unto the Spirits in prison.

Verse 20. Which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of
God waited in the days of Noah, while the Arc was a preparing; wherein few
(that is, eight) souls were saved by water.

Verse 21. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now save us,
(not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Verse 22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels,
and authorities, and powers, being made subject unto him.


The Analysis.
IN this part of the chapter, the Apostle urges that exhortation which he had
before proposed concerning an endeavor to do well, even unto those that wrong
us. And this he does persuade them unto, 1, by a comparison which he makes
betwixt those which suffer for evil doing: which comparison although it may
seem to be of a greater or lesser good, when it is said, It is better to
suffer for well doing, yet it is indeed a dissimilitude, which is intimated by
this (...) extenuation, as appears by the 19 and 20 verse of the second
chapter. For it is thank-worthy and it will turn to our glory, if we suffer
for well-doing; not so, if it be for evil doing. 2. He confirms this by the
example of Christ, verse 18. who though he did most justly, yet suffered
unjustly; which example he shows to be of great force, by the end of his
suffering; because therefore he suffered, that he might bring us the same way
unto God: which that he does now effectually do, he shows by the cause
thereof, to wit, life and glory, which he assumed unto himself by his divine
Spirit after his suffering. And to show that that effect, namely, the bringing
of men unto God, does proceed from this cause, to wit, the Spirit of Christ,
the Apostle makes a comparison of the like, betwixt those things which the
Spirit of Christ did heretofore in the days of Noah, and those things which he
does now since the coming of Christ in the flesh. Heretofore he preached the
way of salvation, and patiently waited for the performance of obedience, upon
the disobedient he inflicted condign punishment, and a few that were obedient
he saved in the Arc: so now also he preaches the way of salvation, he waits
for obedience, and by Baptism, as it were a figure like unto the old Arc, he
saves those that are obedient and have a good conscience before God, and that
by the glorious life and power which he has in heaven since the time of his
resurrection, verse 21, 22. All which things rend hereunto, that we should hold
fast a good conscience, even when we are evil entreated; because it is better
as he said before, verse 17. and has now showed as well by the example of
Christ, as by his effectual dispensation throughout all ages, as it is, verse.
18, 19. of which we may sue more, if we look back to chap. 2. ver. 21. to the
end. All the other things almost are explained in the answer to Bellarmine,
about Christ's descending into hell.

The Doctrines arising here-hence.

Doct. 1. It was the Spirit of Christ, which preached heretofore from the
beginning of the world by the Prophets and men of God, before that he appeared
in the flesh.

This is gathered from verse 19.

Reason 1. Because the person of Christ was the same from everlasting in the
unity of the Divine Essence, so that whatsoever the Spirit of God did, that
also may the Spirit of Christ be truly said to have done.

2. Because Christ was the Mediator of mankind from the beginning of the
world, in virtue and force: therefore whatsoever the Spirit did, which belonged
to the furtherance of the Churches safety, all that he did by virtue of Christ's
mediation, and that no less then since his coming in the flesh.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us in the truth of Christ's divine nature.

2. To comfort us and strengthen our faith, in that we have the same Teacher,
which instructed the Church from the beginning of the world, and brought it to
salvation; and consequently we embrace the same religion, as touching the
substance of it, that all the faithful embraced from the beginning of the
world.

3. To admonish us, never to reject or make light account of those things which
are preached unto us out of Gods word, because it is the Spirit of Christ,
which preaches unto us those things, like as he preached unto others from the
beginning of the world.

Doct. 2. They which do not obey the preaching of Christ's Spirit, wilfully
bring upon themselves everlasting damnation.

This is gathered from verse 19. 20.

Reason 1. Because in neglecting the preaching of the Gospel, they neglect and
refuse the only means that can keep them from damnation, and bring them unto
salvation.

2. Because they do greatly dishonor Christ and his Spirit.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, always, when we come to the hearing of
Gods word, to endeavor to have circumcised ears and hearts, ready and willing
to yield all obedience thereunto.

Doct. 3. God uses much patience and long-suffering toward the disobedient.

This is gathered from verse 20.

Reason 1. Because by this means Gods clemency and mercy is manifested.

2. Because by this patience of God all are invited, and many are drawn unto
the obedience of faith.

3. Because this patience makes those that are stubbornely disobedient
altogether inexcusable, and so justifies God in his just judgments.

Use 1. This may serve to direct us, to give the glory of this patience unto
God, when we see sinners to go unpunished for a time.

2. To admonish us not to abuse this patience of God, but to make it a means
for the amendment of our lives, and our own salvation, Romans 2. 4.

Doct. 4. In the destruction of the disobedient, God has a special eye over
the faithful; to save them from the destruction.

This is gathered from verse 20.

Reason 1. Because he disposes his judgments according to his certain and
perfect counsel, not rashly or confusedly, therefore he passes over whom he
pleases.

2. Because the punishments of sin should not fall alike upon the godly and
wicked, for then he would not be a just disposer of them.

3. Because it stands upon Gods glory to save those that fly unto him, as he
promised them in his covenant.

Use. This may serve to comfort us, in the time of public calamities, wherein
God revengeth the wickedness of men.

Doct. 5. God does often times preserve those that are his, partly by the same
means whereby he destroys others.

For it is said that the Arc saved Noah and those seven souls in the waters
and by the waters. The same water that drowned others, by lifting up the Arc
on high, was the means of their preservation. So Jeremy was delivered by the
Babylonians, by whom the Jews were oppressed.

Reason. Because God can use the same instrument to produce diverse and contrary
effects, and when he does this, his glory is the more manifested; because
thereby it appears that the effect does not depend upon the instrument, but
upon God: nor does this come to pass rashly, or by chance, but is ordered and
directed by Gods certain counsel.

Use. This may serve to direct us, in the time of danger not to look so much
upon the means which God uses, as to depend upon God himself, who can turn
any means unto the good of those that are his.

Doct. 6. Baptism is such a means of our spiritual salvation, as the water
of the flood together with the Arc, was heretofore of the corporal safety of
Noah and his family.

This is gathered from verse 21. It is called the Antitype of that water, not
because the water was the type of Baptism, and Baptism the exemplar of it,
but because there is a typical representative similitude betwixt these two
waters. And the similitude consists herein, that as the water of the flood
lifted up the Arc and saved Noah and his family in the destruction of the
rest, so baptism strengthening our faith, and lifting up our souls unto God
reconciled in Christ, saves us in the mortification of our sins.

Reason. Because it is Gods institution.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, which make little esteem of baptism.

2. To direct us, to seek this right and proper use of Baptism together with
it and by it, and to apply it unto our selves to our comfort.

Doct. 7. The outward baptism does not save us of it self, but the inward.

This is gathered from verse 21. Not the putting away of the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience.

Reason 1. Because outward baptism is common to the hypocrites as well as to
the faithful.

2. Because it comes not unto the soul.

3. Because it has no saving power in it self.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to put too much trust and confidence
in the outward Sacraments, or to rely thereupon, that we are baptized and
partake of the Lords Supper, but always to seek the spiritual grace of the
Sacraments.

Doct. 8. A singular effect and sign of the inward baptism and effectual
grace, is the answer of a good conscience toward God.

For when the Apostle meant to oppose inward Baptism unto outward, in steed of
the inward he puts the answer of a good conscience, as the proper effect
thereof, by which it may be perceived and known. Now by the answer of a good
conscience is meant all that confidence which we have before God of his
reconciliation, which chiefly appears in our prayers, and in a pious
confession of the faith, and a holy care of obedience.

Reas. 1. Because then are we properly said to be saved, at least according to
our apprehension, when our consciences are freed from the guilt and bondage of
sin.

2. Because the peace of a good conscience is part of our glorification.

3. Because such a conscience makes us to go on constantly in the way of
salvation.

Use. This may serve to direct us, to make it our chiefest care to keep a good
conscience toward God.

Doct. 9. Such a conscience and our salvation does in a special manner depend
upon Christ's resurrection.

Reas. 1. Because in the resurrection of Christ, Gods sentence was declared,
absolving us in him from all sin and death. Romans 4. 25.

2. Because Christ being raised from the dead, did powerfully accomplish that,
which he merited by his death. Romans 8. 34.

3. Because our consciences are lifted upwards unto Christ sitting in heaven.

Use. This may serve to direct us, to fix the eyes of our faith upon Christ, as
he was raised from the dead.

Doct. 10. Since the time of Christ's resurrection, great is his glory and power
in heaven.

This is gathered from the last verse.

Reason. 1. Because the time of his humiliation and emptying of himself was
finished before.

2. Because it was fit, that he which in singular obedience was mightily
humbled, should afterward be exalted unto great glory.

3. Because this glory and power is necessarily required, that Christ might
finish all things, which belong to the salvation of the Church.

Use. This may serve to comfort us, against all dangers and fears, seeing we
have such a Savior in heaven.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. For as much then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm
your selves likewise with the same mind: for that he that has suffered in the
flesh, has ceased from sin:

Verse. 2. That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to
the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

Verse 3. For the time past of our life, may suffice us to have wrought the
will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of
wine, revellings, banquettings, and abominable idolatries.

Verse 4. Wherein they think it strange, that you run not with them to the
same excess of riot, speaking evil of you:

Verse 5. Who shall give account to him, that is ready to judge the quick and
the dead.

Verse 6. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are
dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
according to God in the Spirit.


The Analysis.
THe Apostle having set before us the example of Christ, in this place he
concludes the^ehence that which he proposed to be concluded chap. 3. v. 17. and
before that v. 11. that is, that all Christians should eschew evil, and follow
that which is good. And this conclusion he lays down in such manner, that if
a due proportion be observed betwixt Christ as our example, and Christians that
are regenerated, and renewed according to his image, he shows it does
necessarily depend upon and flow from the example of Christ. He concludes with
such a Syllogism as this:

All Christians should be armed with the same mind, concerning sin and
righteousness, as Christ himself was: But Christ having suffered in the flesh
ceased from sin, and lived in the spirit unto God: Therefore all Christians
should be wholly bent, and endeavor all that they can to cease from sin or
the lusts of men, and live unto God, or the will of God.
Both the proposition and Assumptionare in v. 1. The conclusion in v. 2. The
conclusion is illustrated by a comparison made betwixt the time past, and that
which is to come; or betwixt that kind of life, which men are wont to lead
before their calling, and that, which they should lead after they are called.

For the time past he affirms, that we lived according to the manner of the
Gentiles in all the lusts of the flesh, v. 3. And for the time to come, he
denies that we should follow those lusts, but that we should live unto the will
of God. v. 2. and the beginning of the 3. It may suffice us etc. where he
intimates a reason also, why we should now leave off such courses, namely;
Because we have too much offended God already in the time past, and if we
should abuse his mercy and patience any longer, we could expect nothing else
but the revelation of his just anger and indignation, to our eternal
confusion. The same conclusion and Comparison is farther illustrated by
anticipation of an obj^ction and difficulty, which might take off our desires
and endeavors to change our lives, and live contrary to the fashion of others.
And the objection is this; that it will seem strange unto many; and for this
very cause will they revile us, and speak evil of religion it self, verse 4.
The answer is, that this is not our fault, but theirs; and they shall give an
account for it unto God at the day of judgment, verse 5. Which judgment is
set forth by a distribution of the object, and upon occasion of that
distribution he makes a new argument to remove the forenamed difficulty out of
our minds; namely, because the Gospel had the same end, and the same effect
amongst the faithful that are now dead; to wit, that they being condemned by
men, did patiently bear that condemnation, and lived according to God in the
spirit, verse 6.

The Doctrines arising herehence.
Doct. 1. We should all arm our selves with such meditations, as the
contemplation of Christ's death affoords as.

This is gathered from v. 1.

Reas. 1. Because we are thereunto called, that we should be made conformable
unto Christ.

2. Because Christ's death, or Christ crucified is a brief Epitome of all
saving knowledge, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

3. Because by such meditations we do more and more put on Christ, and by his
power are our minds strengthened and fore-armed, as with a complete armor,
against all kind of temptations, and in this respect is this phrase, arm your
selv^s, used in the text.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to arm our minds daily with godly and
Christian meditations, that so we may not be exposed to the danger of
temptations unarmed and naked; in the bearing of a blow, or suffering any
violence, there is great difference betwixt a man that is armed, and one that
is not armed.

2. To direct us, in our meditations chiefly to contemplate upon Christ, and
those things which pertain unto his death and resurrection.

Doct. 2. He that has true communion with Christ, has ceased from sin, and
by meditation thereupon does daily more and more cease from it.

This is gathered from verse 1, at the end.

Reason 1. Because our communion with Christ is by the Spirit of Christ, which
makes us conformable to his death and resurrection, Romans 6. throughout the
whole Chapter.

2. Because in our conversion unto Christ, there is always included an
aversion from sin by serious repentance.

3. Because such meditations are the ordinary means whereby the work of the
Spirit is perfected, and our repentance renewed and furthered.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that profess Christ in word, but in
their deeds do not cease from sin.

2. To direct us, to press such syllogismes and reasonings upon our
consciences, Romans 6.

Doct. 3. He that cease from sin, does not live to the lusts of men, but to
the will of God.

This is gathered from verse 2.

Reason 1. Because the lusts of sinful men are in themselves sins, and lead
unto sin.

2. Because these lusts fight against the soul, and we in our conversion have
bound our selves to fight against them.

3. Because the will of God is the only rule of our life, which is altogether
contrary to the lusts of the flesh.

Use. This may serve to direct us in the trial of our state and condition. For
look how our life is sincerely directed in respect of the lusts of men, and
the will of God, so may we certainly judge our selves to be either in the
state of sin, or in the state of grace.

Doct. 4. It seems more then enough to the faithful, that before their
conversion they so long followed the lusts of the flesh, and fashions of the
world.

This is gathered from verse 3.

Reason 1. Because they are ashamed with a holy shame of those courses, Romans 6.
21.

2. Because they receive no benefit by them, but repentance.

3. Because they see that it was Gods great mercy, that they were at length
delivered from them, and from the death which they bring, in the same Chapter.

4. Because the rest of their time seems but a little unto them, in respect of
the duty which they have to do, in seeking and glorifying God.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, which defer and put off the time of
amending their lives, as if they had not yet sinned enough.

2. To admonish us, to redeem the time, and spend it in advancing of Gods
glory, and our own salvation.

Doct. 5. Amongst all the vicious lusts and courses of the world, luxury is one
of the chiefest, whereby men walk in lasciviousness, excess of wine and
banquetings.

^eason 1. Because in these men do most of all pamper the flesh, and have no
regard at all unto the soul.

2. Because by these the soul is drowned, as it were in the pleasures of the
flesh, so that it cannot lift up it self unto God, and to divine things.

3. Because these make way for the devil, and all devilish sins; a^^
thereupon abominable idolatry ^eemes to be joined with them in the text because
by them many were brought to be p^esent at idolat^ous feasts, and ^o to honor
the idols themselves, though in their consciences they made no reckoning of
them.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to beware of these wicked courses.

Doct. 6. It seems very strange to the men of the world, that the godly should
refuse to live after that manner, as they live.

Reason 1. Because they think there is a kind of happiness in that kind of
life, which for any man to dislike, they cannot but wonder at it.

2. Because as long as they are carnal, they cannot rightly discern those
spiritual reasons, which make the faithful to abhor such conversation.

3. Because they measuring others by themselves, think that all men do
gree^ily desire such kind of pleasures.

Use. This may serve to admonish the faithful, 1. Not to think that they do
live so, as their calling or profession does require, unless they do so far
estrange themselves from the common courses of worldly men, that they make them
to wonder at them. 2. Not to be troubled at such opinions of men, but to take
their dislike, as a token of Gods good liking and approbation.

Doct. 7. By this alienation of minds, which arises from the difference of
the conversation, betwixt the believers and the unbeleevers, the regenerate and
the unregenerate, it oftentimes comes to pass, that the unregenerate speak
evil of the truth of God.

This is gathered from verse 5 at the end. For although some are so taken with
the splendor of piety whlch shines forth in the godly that they glorify God,
as it is chap. 2. ver. 12. and it becomes a means of winning them, as it is
chap. 3. verse 1. or at least that they are ashamed, as it is chap. 3. v. 16.
Yet there are others which take occasion thereby to blaspheme, chiefly,
because the godly by abstaining from those lusts and courses, which they highly
esteem, seem seriously to reprove them, as well in their deeds as their words.

Reason 1. Because all they that do evil hate the light.

2. Because ^uch a separation in conversation of life is as it were a
condemning of those from whom separation is made out of conscience and religion.

3. Because wicked men being blinded with anger and hatred, and udgeing of
others by themsel^es, d^e imagine that this separation is usually made in
hypocrisy, and simulation, not out of conscience and religion.

Use. This may serve to comfort and strengthen our souls against the
temptations and troubles which may arise unto us from such men's blasphemies.

Doct. 8. God will require an account from men for all such blasphemies, either
in this life, or at the last judgment.

This is gathered from verse 5.

Reason 1. Because his Majesty is wronged more in these blasphemies, then in
most of the other sins.

2. Because those sins are most heinous, and come nearest to the sin
against the Holy Ghost.

3. Because they directly tend to the hinderance of the kingdom of God, and
the righteousness thereof.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to take heed of all those, that do any
way partake in such a sin.

2. To comfort us: because God revengeth such injuries, we should commit
themunto him.

Doct. 9. God keeps a just account of those things that are done to the
faithful, not only while they live, but also after their death.

For in that sense is he said to be ready to judge the quick and the dead,
where by the quick and the dead the faithful are most properly understood, as
appears by verse 6.

Reason 1. Because God always lives, and his word and covenant lives.

2. Because it stands upon Gods glory, to defend the cause also of his servants
that are dead, and to revenge their injuries.

3. Because oftentimes the iniquity of the wicked is not come to its full
measure, before the death of Gods children whom they have vexed.

Use 1. This may serve to comfort us, as well in life as in death.

2. To admonish us not to judge rashly of Gods ways in his patience and
long-suffering; but to compose our minds to a patient waiting for the wished
event.

Doct. 10. The condition of the faithful now living, and of those that lived
heretofore in all ages, is wholly alike, as touching the substance of it.

This is gathered from verse 6. compared with the verse foregoing.

Rea. Because God is the same, and faith is the same; and on the contrary side
also, the devil and the world are like themselves.

Use. This may serve to direct us, not to give way to too much complaining of
the present age, as if there had never been the like before; but courageously
to go forward in doing our duty, that we may do that in our times according to
our ability, which other faithful men did in their time; who as it is sa^d of
David, Acts 13. 36. after they had in their age served the will of God, fell on
sleep in the Lord.

Doct. 11. The short compendium of our whole Christian life, is, so to receive
the Gospel, that renouncing the flesh we should in that respect be judged
according to men, and live according to God in the Spirit.

This is gathered from verse 6.

Reason. Because therein consists all divinity.

Use. This may serve to direct us, to make trial of our condition by this rule.

Verse 7. But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer.

Verse 8. And above all things have fervent charity among your selves: for
charity shall cover the multitude of sins.

Verse 9. Use hospitality one to another, without grudging.

Verse 10. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifeld grace of God.

Verse 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified throuh Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for
ever, and ever, Amen.


The Analysis.
FRom the last discourse about the judgment of God, the Apostle takes occasion
to press his exhortation to the duties of piety, by that very argument. First
therefore he lays down that third argument for a ground, that the last
judgment, the end of all things, is at hand; and thereupon concludes that we
must seriously and diligently apply our selves to the duties of piety. And
these duties he sets down by an induction of the principal parts, 1 Prayer,
with the adjuncts and helping causes thereof, to wit, temperance and fobriety,
verse 7. 2. Mutual charity, verse 8. which he sets forth, 1. By the singular
care, wherewith we should labor for it above other virtues, in these words:
above all things, and then by the degree, wherein we should have it, and
exercise it in this word, fervent: of which exhortation he gives a reason also
from the effect, for charity covers a multitude of sins. 3. To charity he
joins hospitality, verse 9. as it were a special act of charity, whereof he
shows the due manner how it should be used, that it should be without
grudging, that is, voluntary, not by constraint. 4. A mutual communication of
all the gifts of God, verse 10. And the reason of this duty is taken partly
from the nature of the gift in respect of the author thereof, that it is the
grace of God, and partly from that relation, which they that have received the
gift, have unto such a grace, to wit, that they are not masters, but stewards
of it. And of this communication he propounds two chief kinds, which he
describes and persuades them unto, verse 11. The first is communication in
speech, or in the word of God, the description and rule whereof is, that it
should be conformable to the nature of Gods word. The second is communication
in our abilities and wealth, the description and rule whereof is common to
both, together with all the foregoing exhortations, taken from the end and
benefit of them, that God in all things may be glorified; which glorification
of God is set forth by a present declaration of it; to whom be praise for ever
and ever, Amen.

The Doctrines drawn here-hence.

Doct. 1. The end of all things is at hand.

This is gathered from verse 7. Now this may be understood, 1. of the end of
all men, that live together, because a generation of men soon passes away,
and so the end of all those is properly said to be at hand. 2. It may also by
the same reason be understood of the final condition of all those: because
look how every one dies, so shall he continue for ever, either happy or
wretched. 3. It may also in some sort be understood of the end of the world.

Reason 1. Because these are the last ages, after which there is no coming of
Christ to be expected; but unto judgment, nor any change of worship, but upon
the consummation of all things.

2. Because the Lord does not delay the promise of his coming, but prepares
all things for himself, and in their order shows forth the judgments of that
day which is approaching.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to think with the evil servant that
the coming of the Lord is far off, but certainly to look for it, and
accordingly to prepare our selves for that day, Matthew. 24. 44. 46.

Doct. 2. For the preparing of our selves aright against the coming of the
Lord, it is chiefly required, that we should pray continually.

This is gathered from verse 7.

Reason 1. Because in our prayers we do stir up our faith, hope, and desire
touching those good things, which the Lord will impart unto us at his coming.

2. Because by our prayers we do turn aside and remove those evils from our
selves, which make his coming dreadful unto sinners: for by flying unto Gods
mercy, we do fly both from our sins, and from his wrath.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to be diligent in prayer.

Doct. 3. Temperance and sobriety should be joined with our prayers.

This is also gathered from verse 7. It is the same which is said every where,
Watch and pray.

Reason 1. Because the effectual consideration thereof, that the end of all
things is at hand, makes us to love this world the less, and so to use it, as
not to abuse it, that is, soberly and temperately, 1 Cor. 7. 31.

2. Because these are the means whereby our prayers are helped and furthered;
therefore it is said in the text, Be sober and watch unto prayer.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to make conscience of doing our duty in
prayer.

Doct. 4. Above all things we should labor for brotherly love, that it may be
sincere and fervent.

This is gathered from verse 8. Not that charity toward men is more excellent
then faith hope and love toward God, but because it is the chiefest of those
things which belong unto men, and should be preferred before all those things,
which might any way hinder it.

Reason 1. Because love is the sum of the whole law, and so contains in it
all other duties.

2. Because charity covers a multitude of sins, as it is in the text: amongst
men themselves, that they stir not up anger, hatred, and contention, Prove.
10. 12.

2. Because charity also does in some sort cover a multitude of our sins
before God, to wit, that they procure not the revenge of his anger. For this it
does, as a sign and argument, whereby we are the more assured of the
forgiveness of our sins, because we forgive others their offenses, Mat. 6. 15.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to labor for charity.

Doct. 5. Hospitality is one of the principal acts of charity.

This is gathered from verse 9. So Romans 12. 13. Heb. 13. 2.

Reason 1. Because in hospitality we do not only communicate our goods unto our
brethren, but our selves also by a fami^iar conversation.

2. Because it is more acceptable unto others to receive a little upon such an
occasion, then in any other respect to receive much, because the
seasonablenesse and courteousnesse makes that which is given to be the better
accepted.

3. Because by this means friendship is more increased then by other
bountiful expenses.

Use. This may serve to reprove the merciless minds and conditions of men,
for luxury and coverousnesse has quite taken away all hospitality.

Doct. 6. The duties of this kind should be performed without grudging.

This is gathered from verse 9.

Reason 1. Because God loves a ready and cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7.

2. Because grudging makes the benefit unacceptable to him that receives it.

3. Because grudging is as it were a repenting for doing the duty, and so makes
it void and of no effect.

Use. The use hereof is, that in doing good we should watch over our minds,
that they be rightly and fitly disposed.

Doct. 7. It is an office of charity to minister unto others the gifts which we
have received, of what kind soever they be.

This is gathered from verse 10.

Reason 1. Because the gifts of God do in their nature tend unto the glory of
God in promoting the good of men.

2. Because to this end are all the gifts of God committed unto us, as stewards
of the grace of God, as it is in the text.

3. Because this very thing does the communion of Saints require, to the
believing and exercising whereof are all Christians called.

Use 1. This may serve to comfort us, in that there is no faithful Christian,
but has some gift, whereby he may minister something unto others.

2. To exhort us, every one to use that gift which he has, to the good of
others.

Doct. 8. In exercising those gifts, which belong to the preaching or
declaration of Gods word, our chief care should be, so to carry our selves as
becomes the word of God.

This is gathered from verse 11 at the beginning.

Reason 1. Because every action rightly ordered should have a just proportion
to its object.

2. Because so great is the dignity of Gods word, that without such a care it
cannot be kept safe, without wronging of it.

3. Because all the power of our speech concerning Gods word is lost, if it
take not its whole strength from the word it self.

Use. This may serve to admonish, not only the Preachers, that they handle the
word of God holily, faithfully, and gravely, but also all hearers, that they
judge aright of the Sermon, and make distinction betwixt those Preachers, which
speak as the Oracles of God, and others, which speak as a humane speech or
oration; and that they themselves also, if upon occasion they should treat of
the word of God in private, should do it holily, gravely, and reverently, as
it becomes the word of God to be handled.

Doct. 9. He that with his wealth ministers to the necessities of others,
should do it according to the ability which he has received of god.

This is gathered from verse 11, that is, he must do it not by constraint,
sparingly, and slowly, but with a ready and cheerful affection, to his power,
and beyond his power voluntarily, 2 Cor. 8. 3.

Reason 1. Because this communicating is as it were a sacrifice, wherewith God
is well pleased, Heb. 3. 16.

2. Because from this sowing we may expect a great harvest, of Gods blessing, 2
Cor. 9. 6.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to perform such duties according to
the fashion and custom of the world, as if their example were our rule, but
according to the ability which God has afforded us.

Doct. 10. God is to be glorified in all things.

As the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Reas. 1. Because the glory of God is the end of all things.

2. Because our actions are not religious, but so far forth as they are
directed to that end.

3 Because God will glorify those which glorify him.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to imagine that our duty in glorifying
God is restrained to the public worship, as many use to do, but to have a care
of this duty in all things.

Doct. 11. God is to be glorified by Jesus Christ.

Reason 1. Because in the name and by the power of Christ we do all the good
that we do, Col. 3. 17.

2. Because we should represent that which we do, before God by Christ.

3. Because we cannot glorify God by any other means, but by following the
example of Christ, and observing his doctrine.

Use. This may serve to direct us, that Christ should be all in all unto us.

Doct. 12. We should be so disposed toward God in Christ, that we should never
think of his glory without an elevation of the heart to confess God, which we
should cherish and increase.

This is gathered from that doxologie, to whom be praise and dominion for ever
and ever, Amen. For the Apostle breaks forth into this declaration of Gods
glory, being as it were forced thereunto by the meditation of that duty, which
he had now propounded, to glorify God.

Reason 1. Because thereby appears our inward disposition to the performing of
that duty.

2. Because it is the beginning of the deed.

3. Because God should reign in our hearts, that we might not so much upon
deliberation, as naturally, be stirred up, and moved toward him to the
declaration of all those things which may make for his glory.

Use. This may serve to reprove the common stupidity of men, who are nothing at
all moved with those things, which do most nearly belong to the glory of Gods
name.

Verse 12. Beloved, think is not strange concerning the fiery trial. which is
to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you.

Verse 13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's suff^^ings,
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with ex^^eding ^oy.

Verse 14. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the
Spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon you: on their part he is evil (...)
of but on your part he is glorified.

Verse 15. But let none of you (...) as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evil doer, or as a busie-body, in other men's matters.

Verse 16. Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but
let him glorify God on this behalf.

Verse 17. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God:
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God?

Verse 18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear?

Verse 19. Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.


The Analysis.
THe Apostle does here repeat that exhortation, to suffer persecution aright,
which he had heretofore used again and again; because this exhortation was
very necessary, and contains in it the primary scope of the Epistle. But in
this place he repeates it as a pre-occupation or anticipation of an objection
or difficulty, which might be made against the foregoing exhortation, wherein
he persuaded them to a constant care of all the duties of piety. For they to
whom this Epistle was to come, might thus think with themselves, that by this
profession and practice of piety most grievous persecutions are like to befall
them, and that contrary to their expectation, and therefore they are not to be
requested by walking in the same way to heap so great evils upon themselves.
Of these persecutions therefore the Apostle warnes them. 1. In general, that
it should not seem any new or strange thing to any Christian, thereby to be
troubled at it, which he shows, 1. From their proper end, that they are as it
were fire to try the faith, sincerity and constancy of the faithful, verse 12.
2. From the similitude that is betwixt the faithful and Christ in suffering
afflictions, in which respect they should be so far from being troubled at
it, that they should rejoice, which is contrary to perturbation. The reason of
which consequence is taken from the effect, to wit, because by suffering
afflictions after this manner the faithful come to partake of glory and
eternal joy with Christ. 3. From the blessedness which is adjoined unto it,
in respect of the communion of the holy Spirit, who when he is blasphemed by
the persecutors, is present with those that suffer, and is glorified by them,
verse 14. But that this which the Apostle has spoken, may be rightly
understood, he tells them, that this cannot be meant of every affliction, but of
that alone which a man suffers for the name of Christ, verse 24. as it is
explained, verse 15, 16. when a man suffers not for his own deserts, but
merely as, or because he is a Christian: from which consideration the
conclusion which he laid down before is effectually deduced, verse 16. to wit,
that in that respect he should not be ashamed, or so troubled, as if he were
ashamed of the name of Christ, but therefore to glorify God. 4. From the
ruling cause which orders and governes such events, namely, the will of God,
whereby he has appointed a certain time to exercise judgment in his house or
Church, verse 17. at the beginning. For that which is there spoken of the time
of judgment, is afterward referred to the will of God, verse 19. 5. To the
same purpose is the condition of the faithful set forth by comparing the
condition of the unbelievers, verse 17, 18. which is declared by such a
connection: If the condition of the faithful be so hard, the condition of the
unbelievers must be altogether intolerable; whence he does closely intimate,
that we must neither envy the unbelieving persecutors, or revolt from the
faith by reason of persecutions. From all these things the primary conclusion
is specially inferred, verse 19. that the faithful in suffering afflictions
should arm themselves with true confidence, against all the perturbations and
temptations which may arise unto them from afflictions.

The Doctrines drawn herehence.

Doct. 1. Afflictions and persecutions should not seem a new or strange thing
unto Christians.

This is gathered from verse 12.

Reason 1. Because they were foretold by Christ and his Apostles.

2. Because Christ himself and his chief Disciples were used after the same
manner.

3. Because such is the disposition of the world, that we must always expect
such things from it.

Use. This may serve to admonish us not to be troubled at these things, as it
is in the text.

Doct. 2. The end and use of afflictions is for the trial of Christians.

This is gathered from the same verse. See the same doctrine Chap. 1. verse 7.

Doct. 3. The faithful in suffering afflictions and persecutions are partakers
of Christ's sufferings.

This is gathered from verse 13.

Reason 1. Because when they suffer for the name of Christ, Christ suffers in
them, according to that of the Lord, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

2. Because they are made conformable unto Christ's death, Phil. 3. 10.

Use. This may serve to comfort us, because therein we have matter of
rejoicing, as it is in the text.

Doct. 4. From these afflictions, if we suffer them joyfully, we have a sure
argument of our eternal joy and glory to come hereafter.

This is gathered from verse 13.

Reason 1. Because they that are partakers of Christ's death, are partakers also
of his resurrection and everlasting life, Romans 8. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 11.

2. Because that joy which we have in afflictions, is the first fruits of our
eternal joy and glory.

Use. This may serve to admonish us to learn to suffer joyfully for the name
of Christ, James 1. 2. Acts 5. 41.

Doct. 5. The reproaches which the faithful suffer for godliness sake, are to
be reckoned amongst those persecutions, which they suffer for the name of
Christ.

This is gathered from verse 14.

Reason 1. Because they tend to the dishonouring and disgracing of us.

2. Because they show that the minds of the authors of them are as ready to
bring greater evils upon us, i^occasion should serve.

3. Because reproaches do work more upon some men's minds then real injuries.

Use. This may serve to admonish, 1 all men, to take heed that they have no
communion with the wicked world in scoffing at any part of true piety. 2. The
godly, to have a special care, that they be not moved at such reproaches, but
to bear them with the same patience, that they ought to bear other
persecutions.

Doct. 6. In these reproaches which the godly suffer for the name of Christ,
the Spirit of God is in a special manner blasphemed on the one side, and
glorified on the other.

This is gathered from verse 14.

Reason. Because look how far forth the faithful make profession of true
piety, so far forth are they the temples of the holy Ghost: therefore when in
that respect they are reproached, the holy Ghost is evil spoken of: and when
they hold fast and adorn their profession notwithstanding these reproaches, the
same Spirit which is evil spoken of by the reproaches, is glorified by them.

Use 1. This may serve for terror to those that do reproach others.

And 2. For comfort to those that are reproached.

Those things which are in the 13 verse, were handled before cap. 2. and 3.

Doct. 7. God has certain and appointed times to execute his judgments.

This is gathered from verse 17 at the beginning.

Reason 1. Because the patience and long-suffering of God must have their time.

2. Because there is a time also required, that men may fill up the measure of
their sins.

3. Because there are certain opportunities of time, wherein Gods judgments
are executed with greater benefit, then they could be at other times.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to condemn God any way either of
slownesse or rashness in respect of his judgments, but to rest well satisfied
in his most wise ordering of all things.

Doct. 8. Judgment does often begin at the house of God, that is, at the
Church.

This is gathered from the same place.

Reason 1. Because the sins of those, which profess Gods name, do in a
special manner wrong Gods name and his honor, and therefore the more they
offend God, the more ought they to be punished.

2. Because Gods chief care is, to purify his Church by such chastisements.

3. Because God oftentimes uses the unbelievers as his instruments to correct
his Church; they must therefore be first tolerated, that they may accomplish
Gods counsel, and afterward punished, because they have done so wickedly.

Use. This may serve to direct us, not to be troubled in mind, when we see the
Church afflicted before and above other people, but to acknowledge Gods divine
ordering of it.

Doct. 9. The judgment which God exercises upon his Church, is a most
certain argument of the most sever^ and heavy judgment that shall in its due
time come upon wicked men and unbeleevers.

This is gathered from verse 17, 18. So Ier. 25. 29.

Reason 1. Because God deals with his Church as a Father, but he will deal
with others as a Judge.

2. Toward the Church in the midst of judgment he remembers mercy, but
toward the wicked and unbeleevers he exercises revenge.

3. Because to the believers judgment works together for good, but in the
unbelievers it has no such mitigation.

Use 1. This may be for comfort to the faithful in their afflictions.

2. For terror to the unbeleevers in their persecutions and carnal security.

Doct. 10. They that suffer for the name of Christ, do properly suffer
according to the will of God.

This is gathered from verse 19. compared with ver. 14. 16.

Reason 1. Because their sins oftentimes are not the causes of these
afflictions, but the will of God to make trial of them.

2. Because it is the revealed will of God, that such afflictions are the lot
of the faithful, and the way by which they usually come to the kingdom of God.

3. Because this suffering of such afflictions is part of our obedience to the
revealed will of God.

Use. This may serve to comfort us against the trouble of these afflictions.

Doct. 11. They which suffer in this manner, may commend their souls unto God.

This is gathered from the same verse.

Reason 1. Because when they suffer for the name of God, God does in some sort
suffer with them, and therefore their cause is Gods cause.

2. Because in that duty which we perform unto God, as his servants, we may
expect protection from him, as our Master.

3. Because while we are exposed unto danger for Gods sake, God cannot but take
care of us.

Use. This is a use of consolation, and it is explained and set forth by the
Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 12.

Doct. 12. They should do this by well doing.

This is gathered from the same verse. So Romans 1.

Reason 1. Because they cannot suffer for the name of Christ but as they suffer
for well doing.

2. Because they cannot preserve the liberty of their confidence, but by a good
conscience, that is, by well doing.

3. Because to commend an evil cause unto God, is, to make God as it were the
Patron of evil.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to take heed, that we do not deprive our
selves of this great privilege by evil doing.

Doct. 13. God is a faithful protector and defender of those that commend
their souls unto him.

Reason 1. Because it is easy for him to preserve our souls, as it was
heretofore to make them: and in this respect he is called in the text, God the
Creator not the Preserver.

2. Because it stands upon his glory to do this.

3. Because the fidelity and truth of his promises requires as much.

This may serve to comfort us in all straits and adversities: Let them commend
their souls under afaithfull Creator, says the Apostle.

Chapter V.
Verse 1. The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be revealed.

Verse 2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind.

Verse 3. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage: but being ensamples to the
flock.

Verse 4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
crown of glory that fades not away.


The Analysis.
HEre is a special exhortation propounded toward the Elders, that they should
perform their duty and office in a holy manner. The duty in general is set
down to be, to feed the flock, whereof they were made overseers, by a diligent
over^^ght and care of them, verse 2. at the beginning. And withal it is
described by 3 conditions that are in a special manner required therein, which
are set forth by a dehortation from the three contrary vices, that are opposed
to those three conditions. 1. The first condition is, willingly to feed the
flock; the contrary vice whereunto is, to do it by constraint. 2. To do it
readily and freely* the contrary vice unto this, is, to seek after fifthy
lucre thereby. 3. Not only in doctrine, but in example of life to go before the
Church; the contrary vice whereunto is, to Lord it over the Church. This duty
being thus declared and described, they are persuaded unto it by the reward
that is adjoined, which for that cause all faithful shepherds do receive,
verse 4. at the end. Which reward is set fo^th both by the internal nature of
it, that it is a crown of glory that fades not away; and by the author and
giver of it, to wit, that the chief Shepherd our Lord Jesus Christ, will give
it; and also by the time of this giving of it, when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, that is, at the last day of judgment. Now this exhortation, that it
might be the more effectual, and might work the more upon them, is urged and
set forth by the person of Peter, who was the ministering cause thereof, 1. From
the parity and fellowship of the same duty, as Peter an Elder prayed the other
Elders to do their duty. 2. From the knowledge which he had* and the testimony
which he could give of the afflictions of Christ, which he suffered for the
Church, the remembrance whereof should stir up all shepherds to a diligent care
of the Church. 3. From that certain expectation which he had of the glory to
come, which glory he promises to all shepherds in the name of the chief
shepherd.

The Doctrines drawn herehence.

Doct. 1. Those exhortations are most effectual which are propounded in an
humble manner.

This is gathered from verse 1. where the Apostle prays, not commands, in
humility and charity. So Phil. 1. 9. 1 Timothy 5. 1. He prays the Elders also as
a fellow Elder, although he was placed in a higher degree, as Apostle.

Reason 1. Because by this manner of doing it appears, that he which exhorts
does not aim at his own good, but the good of another.

2. Because by this manner of doing his zeal shows it self to be the purer.

3. Because he, to whom such an exhortation is made, is honored thereby, and
to takes it the easier and better.

Use. This may serve to direct us, in all our exhortations and admonitions to
have respect unto this.

Doct. 2. It makes the exhortation the more eff^ctuall, when a man speaks out
of certain judgment and communion of affection.

This is gathered herehence, that Peter makes way for his exhortation in that
he was a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and so had a certain knowledge
of those things which belong unto Christ, and that he was partaker of the same
glory; and therefore he was affected after the same manner himself, as he
desired they should be.

Reason 1. Because knowledge gives ability and authority, and communion of
affection adds zeal and charity to the exhortation.

2. Because these two will take away those obj^ctions, which usually hinde^ the
efficacy of the exhortation; namely, either that he gives his judgment of
things that he does not know, or else at least he is an unexperienced man, of
whom it may rightly be said, If thou were here, thou would think otherwise.

Use. This may serve to direct us to get knowledge of those things which we
exhort others unto, and affections also answerable thereunto.

Doct. 3. Men should be exhorted in a special manner unto these duties, which
belong unto their proper or particular functions or calling^.

This is gathered from verse 2. where the shepherds are exhored to feed the
flock.

Reason 1. Because every man's particular function is that condition wherein
God* has placed him to advance his glory.

2. Because a man's faithfulness is most of all made trial of in that
condition.

3. Because the duties of our general calling should be exer^^ed in every
Christians particular condition.

Use. This may serve to admonish every one to take greatest care of those
duties which are proper to his calling or condition.

Doct. 4. It is the proper duty of a Shepherd, to feed the flock that is
committed to his charge.

This is gathered from verse 2.

Reason 1. Because the shepherds are appointed for the edification of the
Church: now to feed is nothing else, but to use all means that are appointed
by God to procure the edification of the Church.

2. Because Pastors are properly given to the faithful that are converted, who
as newborn babes should be nourished and brought up with milk and food,
until they come to perfection.

3. Because the overseers of the Church should take most care of those things,
that are most necessary for the Church; but it is most necessary for the
faithful being imperfect, to have their spiritual life preserved and
increased by feeding.

Use. This may serve to admonish, 1 The Ministers not to think that it is a
light or common duty that lies upon them, but that the very life of the Church
does in some sort depend upon their labor and Ministry, and therefore so to
carry themselves, as befits and becomes so great a duty.

2. The people, not to expect from their Ministers vain and light things which
might tickle their ears, but to come to a Sermon as to the Lords Table, and
seek for spiritual food to feed their souls unto everlasting life.

Doct. 5. Pastors should perform their duties willingly, not by constraint.

This is gathered from the same verse. Now by constraint is meant that forcing
which proceeds from outward things, whereby a man performs the part of a
Minister in some sort, either to avoid poverty, or disgrace and infamy, or the
censure of others.

Reason 1. Because that which is done by constraint, comes not from the heart
as from an inward principle, nor from the Spirit sanctifying; and therefore it
is not a duty pleasing and acceptable unto God.

2. Because that which comes not from the heart, and is not done willingly is
done only perfunctorily and for fashion sake, not with that diligence and care
which God requires.

3. Because that which proceeds not from the heart and the dearest affection of
the soul, does not usually work upon other men's minds, and therefore is not
effectual to the edification of the Church, which is the end of the Ministry.

Use. This should admonish us, to look not only to the understanding, but also
to the disposition of the will and heart in the Ministers of the Church.

Doct. 6. They should do the same of a ready mind, not for lucre.

Now by lucre is meant all kind of worldly profit, which men acquire unto
themselves, either in doing the thing, or in getting fame, or in gaining
friends, and the like.

Reason 1. Because that which depends upon lucre or some such like end, must
necessarily be applied thereunto, and this is to corrupt the word of God, 2
Cor. 2. 17.

2. Because that which depends upon mutable things, that also it self is
mutable and inconstant.

3. Because he which seeks after lucre, is not a Minister of God, but of
Mammon.

Use. This may serve to admonish, 1 The Ministers not to follow after lucre. 2.
The people not to suffer their Ministers to be tempted by poverty, and so to be
the less cheerful and ready in performing their duty, Heb. 13. 17.

Doct. 7. The affectation of Lordlinesse should be far from Christ's Ministers.

This is gathered from verse 3.

Reason 1. Because they are called to mere service, not to Lordlinesse.

2. Because Christ himself, whose Ministers they are, did purposely live
amongst men as one that serves, that he might leave an example unto those that
should minister unto others in his name, Luke 22. 27.

3. Because the work wherein they are employed, is not subject to the command
and authority of men. For men cannot command religion, but only persuade unto
it.

4. Because the Lordlinesse of Ministers alienates men's minds from their
testimony, because they neither willingly subject themselves to such as affect
Lordlinesse, and they suppose too that those men, whom they see to study their
own glory and power, do neither look after the glory of God, nor the good or
the Church.

Use. This may serve to admonish all Ministers, to take heed not only of all
affectation but also all show of Lordlinesse. Now these men have a show of
Lordlinesse, 1 That would have others in some sort to depend upon their
authority.

2. Those that prescribe something as necessary to be believed or done, which
is not taken out of Gods word. 3. Those that expound the will of God it self
too imperiously, having no regard to the infirmity of those with whom they have
to do.

Doct. 8. Ministers should go before the people not only in doctrine, but in
example also.

This is gathered from verse 3.

Reason 1. Because they are called to feed the flock with all their strength;
and therefore they should edify the Church not only by their words, but by
their deeds also.

2. Because a wicked life does either utterly destroy their preaching, or at
least much weaken it.

3. Because a good example is of a singular force, in that it shows that that
very thing may be done, which he preaches should be done.

4. Because it takes away all prejudice out of men's minds, and all suspicion of
affecting Lordlinesse and vain glory, when they see Ministers seriously to do
that, which they propound and persuade others to do.

Use. This may serve to exhort, first, the Ministers, to labor to lead an
exemplary life. Secondly, the people, to imitate the good life of their
Ministers, for therefore are they proposed as examples. The common vices
contrary to this duty, are: 1. That many observe those things only in their
Ministers, which they may carpe at or calumniate, and not those things which
they should take notice of, with intention to imitate them. 2. That many
imagine that there is a special kind of holiness belonging to Ministers,
which others are not bound to labor for. 3. That many excuse their wicked
courses by this pretense, that they are Laymen, not Ecclesiastical or
Clergymen.

Doct. 9. Ministers should expect the j ust reward of their labor and care,
not from men, but from Christ.

This is gathered from verse 4.

Reason 1. Because Christ is the chief shepherd, and Lord of the flock, as it
is in the text.

2. Because they must expect many injuries from men, and those good things
which do happen, are not such, or so highly to be esteemed of, as that they
should depend upon them.

3. Because they will labor to please him most from whom they expect their
reward. Now they should please Christ, not men.

Use. This may serve to comfort godly Ministers against those troubles, which
they find men to make against them.

Doct. 10. Their reward is a crown of eternal glory.

Reason 1. Because glory is the reward of the faithful for all kind of
obedience toward God. Now in the Ministry there is a special kind of
obedience.

2. Because those that did strive or run lawfully in a race, there was wont
to be a Crown set before them; so for those that carry themselves well in the
exercise of the Ministry, besides the glory common to all the Saints, there is
a special kind of addition prepared, which is like as it were a crown.

Use. This may serve to exhort Ministers, courageously to contemn all
temporary ignominy and disgrace for this Crown of eternal glory.

Doct. 11. This Crown of glory shall be fully given at Christ's second coming
to judgment.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, patiently to persevere unto the end.

Verse 5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the elder: yea, all of
you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Verse 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time.

Verse 7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.


The Analysis.
THe Apostle having in the former verses described the duty of the Elders
toward the Church or the younger sort, and persuaded them unto it, he does
there-hence conclude the duty of the younger toward the elders by a comparing
of things that are alike unto it, as the first word of the 5 verse shows unto
us, Likewise. This duty is in general pointed out by subjection, which is set
forth by the other duty, that is due not only to the Elders, but also to all
the members of the Church, by reason of that nature which it has common with
the former; and it is also called subjection in those words, yea, all of you be
subject one to another. Now this subjection as well unto the Elders as unto
all, is first described what kind of subjection it ought to be, to wit, not
only outward, but proceeding from the inward subjection of the soul unto God,
be clothed with humility. And that it is meant of humility toward God may be
gathered from verse 6. Secondly, He does persuade them also unto this humility:
1. Because it is an ornament of the mind; that by the way. 2. From Gods
blessing adjoined, which follows thereupon, God gives grace unto the humble,
which is illustrated by Gods curse contrary thereunto, that falls upon the
proud, God resists the proud. Thirdly, he does urge and press them unto this
subjection toward God, verse 6. Humble your selves therefore; and he shows
the proper reason of this subjection, which is the mighty hand or omnipotency
of God: and withal he explaines that reason, which he had before propounded
concerning the blessing and grace of God toward the humble, to wit, that by
that grace they shall be exalted: the time of which exaltation is marked out,
that it shall be in due time, that he may exalt you in due time. In the last
place by anticipation of a close, but weighty objection, whereby this
subjection is usually made very difficult, he shows the true manner thereof,
to wit, that it should be joined with that confidence, which casts all care
upon God, so that no fear or worldly care can hinder this subjection, which
confidence he does persuade them unto by that effectual providence which God
has over the faithful for their good, verse 7, at the end, For he cares for
you.

The doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. There is the like duty of the people toward their Pastors, as there
is of the Pastors toward the people.

This is gathered from verse 5 at the beginning. Likewise ye younger. Now by
the younger in this place is chiefly meant the flock, which depends upon the
Pastors, because the Pastors and Presbyters were for the most part chosen of
those that were elder in age, and therefore the greatest part of the flock
consisted of youngers. Now their duty is said to be like, not for that it is in
the same kind, that the people should guide their Pastors, as the Pastors do
gu^de the people, but because there is the like reason of both their duties.

Reason 1. Because the same God and Lord both of Pastors and people, has
imposed and prescribed to both their duties.

2. Because that relation which is betwixt the Pastor and people, requires a
mutual intercourse of duty.

3. Because the Pastors labor and care is made void, if the people do not in
some sort answer the same.

4. Because the Pastors care and labor, tending to the salvation of the
people, deserves it.

Us. This may serve to reprove those that are very curious and rigid in
exacting their Pastors duty, when in the mean time they are nothing careful
of their own duty.

Doct. 2. The duty of people toward their Pastors consists chiefly in
subjection.

Reason 1. Because their Pastors are set over them in Gods name.

2. Because faithful Pastors propound nothing else to themselves to observe,
but the will of God, whereunto subjection and obedience must necessarily be
yielded.

3. Because in the calling of their Pastors, they did either expressly or
covertly at least promise this very thing.

Use. This may serve to reprove those that come unto Sermons, as Judges, to
play the Critics, not to subject themselves to the will of God, and such as
cast off all discipline as an intolerable yoke.

Doct. 3. There is a kind of subjection also due unto all Christians.

This is gathered from these words, Be ye all subject one to another.

Reason 1. Because as occasion shall serve, we should humble our selves to
perform the meanest offices unto our brethren.

2. Because we should submit our selves unto the private admonitions of our
brethren.

3. Because we should with all patience bear all the infirmities of our
brethren.

Use. This may serve to reprove the arrogance and pride of men, which cannot
endure any such subjection.

Doct. 4. Humility is a great ornament.

Reason 1. Because humility is a singular virtue, and in some sort the
foundation of all the rest.

2. Because it makes us acceptable unto godly men, to whom in this regard we
are made more profitable.

3. Because it does greatly commend us in the sight of God, when for his sake
we are subject not only to our superiors and equals, but also to those of the
lowest degree.

Use. This may serve to refute all those, that seek for honor and reputation
by arrogance; and shun humility as it were a vile debasing of a man's self.

Doct. 5. God resists the proud.

Reason 1. Because the proud resist the will of God.

2. Because they seek unfitting things, or at least not after a due manner.

3. Because whatsoever proceeds from pride, turns to the dishonor of God, to
whom all subjection is due.

Use. This may serve to condemn proud men.

Doct. 6. God gives grace to the humble.

Reason 1. Because the promise of grace was made to humility.

2. Because humility is the disposing and fitting of a man for to receive grace.

3. Because only the humble men have a worthy esteem of Gods grace.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, greatly to labor for humility.

Doct. 7. The strength and power of God should stir us up to subjection
toward him.

This is gathered from verse 6 at the beginning.

Reason 1. Because it were madness to resist the Almighty.

2. Because Gods omnipotency is the protection of those that humble themselves
before him.

Use. This may serve to admonish us* not to suffer our selves so much as in
thought to be led away from our obedience toward God, but from the meditation
of Gods omnipotency and our own infirmity to increase daily more and more in
humility.

Doct. 8. God will exalt the humble in due time.

This is gathered from verse 6 at the end.

Reason 1. Because glory is the reward of obedience.

2. Because they glorify God, and therefore God will exalt them according to
his promise, Those that honor me, I will honor.

Use. This may serve to direct us, to seek for true exaltation by humility and
submission.

Doct. 9. They that humble themselves before God, may safely, and also should
cast all their care upon God.

This is gathered from verse 7.

Reason 1. Because this is Gods covenant, that he will be always
all-sufficient unto them that walk before him.

2. Because God by a singular care and providence watches over those that have
a care of his glory, and seek his kingdom, as it is in the text, He cares for
you.

Use. This may serve to comfort all the godly, because God has freed them from
all care; and they should embrace this liberty by true faith, and putting
their trust in him, and apply it to themselves.

Verse 8. Be sober, be vigilant: because your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour:

Verse 9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions
are accomplished in yonr brethren that are in the world.

Verse 10. But the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory
by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you.

Verse 11. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.


The Analysis.
FOr conclusion of the whole Epistle, to the foregoing exhortations there is
added one general one, which does most nearly belong to the scope of the
Apostle, to wit, that notwithstanding all opposition, difficulty, and
temptation, they should constantly persist and go forward in that grace, which
they had received. Now this care is described, 1 by two duties, which belong to
the due manner thereof, soberness, and vigilance. 2. The necessity of these
duties is showed by the grievous danger, to which otherwise they should be
exposed. And this danger is set forth by the efficient cause thereof, the
Devil, of whom the Apostle makes a description to that purpose: 1 By the
opposition and enmity which he has against us; in respect whereof he is
called, our adversary or enemy. 2. By the manner and degree of that enmity,
that it is joined with cruelty, as of a roaring Lion. 3. That besides this
cruelty there is over and above in him very great diligence and greediness to
do us hurt, in these words: seeking whom he may devour. Now the Apostle gives
us warning, that we must not yield to this enemy and danger which he threatens
us, but resist it, verse 9 at the beginning, which is nothing else, but not to
suffer our selves to be removed by his temptations from the grace of God: and
the chief means of this resistance he shows to consist in the steadfastness
of our faith: which faith may in this respect be wonderfully confirmed by the
example of our brethren in the world, who have experience of the like
afflictions and temptations of Satan. Agreeable to this exhortation he adds a
prayer verse 10. Because the success of all our endeavors depends upon the
grace and blessing of God: And in this prayer he beseeches God to strengthen
the faithful, and make them perfect in all grace, at the end of the verse,
make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. The arguments whereby he
confirms their faith that they shall obtain this petition, are two: 1. The
all-sufficiencie of the grace of God in it self, in which respect this title
is given unto God, that he is the God of all grace. 2. The communicating of
this grace in the calling of the faithful, in these words: who has called
you: the grace of which calling is showed, first, by the end and scope, that it
is, to partake of the eternal glory of God. Secondly, by the principal
cause, in Christ Jesus. Thirdly, by the condition that goes before the
accomplishment of this calling, and properly belongs to this exhortation of the
Apostle unto constancy in afflictions, to wit, because we are so called unto
eternal glory, that in the mean time we must suffer afflictions, after that
ye have suffered a while. In the last place upon occasion of this prayer he
adds a religious doxologie, glorifying God, verse 11. wherein is contained
both the last end of that petition, and a confirmation of the same that it
shall be heard; as also an indirect exhortation to the faithful, to bend all
their care thereunto, to glorify Gods name really and effectually, by
persisting in the grace of God.

The Doctrines arising here-hence.

Doct. 1. We had need to watch continually. Be vigilant.

Reason 1. Because sin and danger does naturally steal upon us, if we do not
resist it.

2. Because we cannot do our duty without diligent care and labor, and therein
consists the manner of watching.

3. Because if we could avoid danger, and obtain our desires, if we did not
seek it with care and diligence, it would be no praise to us, nor peace of
conscience.

Use. This may serve to direct us, to imitate watchmen, which watch and ward to
keep the City; the like diligence should we use in keeping our souls, to
examine all that goes in and out, our thoughts, affections, words, and actions,
together with the occasions of them, what they are, whence they came; and
whither they tend.

Doct. 2. That we may watch as we ought to do, it is required that we should be
sober.

Now by soberness is meant the moderation of our affections touching all
worldly things.

Reason 1. Because the cares of this world do so burden the soul, that they
leave no place for spiritual cares.

2. Because the care of the world does draw and distract the mind, so that
although it does not altogether exclude religion, yet it does diminish and
weaken it.

3. Because under the show of some worldly profit, pleasure, or honor, we do
oftentimes admit of those things, which betray and destroy our souls.

Use. This may serve to admonish us not to drown our selves in the things of
this world, but so to use the world, as if we used it not, 1 Cor. 7. 31.

Doct. 3. We have such a spiritual enemy, that we had need to watch and ward
continually against him.

Reason 1. Because he is full of spiritual malice and craft.

2. Because his diligence is answerable to his malice.

3. Because he is most cruel, seeking not to bring some small inconvenience
upon us, but our utter destruction.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, never to be secure, but day and night to
be mindful of that danger wherein we are.

Doct. 4. We must courageously resist the Devil.

This is gathered from verse 9.

Reason 1. Because he is such an enemy, that we can make no peace or league
with him.

2. Because they which yield unto the devil give themselves up into his hands,
as being overcome.

3. Because the courage of our mind to resist is a great part of spiritual
victory.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to strengthen our minds in all things to
make this resistance.

Doct. 5. The chief power of resisting, consists in a steadfast faith.

This is gathered from these words, Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

Reason 1. Because faith lays hold upon Christ who overcame the devil, and in
him they lay hold of victory it self.

2. Because says lays hold of the truth of all the promises, whereby the
soul is invincibly fortified.

3. Because faith, seeing it is the foundation of all grace, if it be stirred
up and strengthened, it confirms and strengthens also all the other virtues.

Use. This may serve to direct us, to have a special care to raise and build
up our faith.

Doct. 6. The examples of other believers do make much for the confirmation of
our faith in afflictions and other temptations.

Reason 1. Because thereby it appears that such conflicts are not contrary to
faith and piety.

2. Because therehence we have a cloud of witnesses, to show, that at length we
shall obtain the victory by faith.

Use. This may serve to direct us, to stablish our minds more and more by such
meditations.

Doct. 7. All those things which we desire, either for our selves or for others
unto salvation, we must ask of God.

This is gathered from verse 10, compared with the foregoing verse. For all
those things which the Apostle had before required of the faithful, he does
now at the end of the Epistle in their name crave of God, and he asks it with
discretion, as appears by that particle, But as if he should have said,
Although all these things which I have proposed unto you by way of admonition,
exhortation, and consolation, are duties which you ought necessarily to do, yet
it is not to be expected, that you should accomplish it by your own strength: I
do therefore call upon God, (which you likewise should always do) that he
would increase his grace more and more in you, whereby you may receive both to
will and to do all these things.

Reason 1. Because of our selves we can do nothing that is good.

2. Because in such like purposes and endeavors we are let and hindered by
diverse temptations, and such as are most strong through our infirmity.

3. Because all our spiritual life proceeds from God, and of him should we
ask it.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to rest in good purposes and
intentions, but always to seek for grace from God, to accomplish the same
happily.

2. To direct us, when we read, hear, and meditate upon Gods word, to water
it, as it were, with our prayers, that it may be fruitful.

Note. By such conclusions of the Apostles, wherein they do close up their
Doctrine with prayer, the Ministers especially are warned and admonished, after
their Sermons to desire God to give both themselves and the people grace to
observe those things, which they have learned in the Sermon: and others also
are admonished diligently and earnestly to seek the same, both in public with
the Minister, and in private by themselves.

Doct. 8. We stand in need of manifold grace.

As it is set forth by diverse words in the text: Make perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle, which may be thus distinguished, that to make perfect is to
add those degrees of grace, which are yet wanting: to stablish, is to protect
and defend from temptations and dangers: to strengthen is to give inward power
and strength: and to settle, is to fasten the root it self of grace more and
more.

Reason 1. Because all those good things which we have, we have but in part.

2. Because we are assaulted by continual temptations, and are over and above
prone to revolt.

3. Because great and manifold is that perfection, whereunto we are called.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to rest in the beginning, but by much
prayer to ask much grace of God.

Doct. 9. God is the fountain and author of all grace.

For this title is given unto God in this place, because it is most agreeable
to the petition for manifold grace. For Holy Men in their prayers day hold of
that in God, and propose those titles of God unto themselves, which make most
for the furtherance of those prayers which they make.

Reason 1. Because God has in himself infinite riches of grace.

2 Because grace is not given but by grace, and not for any merit of our own.

3. Because every degree and all kind of grace is revealed and exhibited unto
us by God in the Gospel.

Use 1. This may serve to direct us to build up our selves in this belief of
Gods grace.

2. To admonish us, not so to rest in that grace which we have received, as if
there were nothing farther to be looked after, because God is God not of this
or that particular grace, but of all grace.

Doct. 10. The chief effect of this grace, which is in us, is our calling.

Reason 1. Because before our calling we lie in sin and spiritual death.

2. Because by our calling we come to the hope of eternal glory; who has
called you into his eternal glory, as it is in the text.

3. Because in our calling we are ingrafted into Jesus Christ, that by him we
are brought unto this glory, who has called you unto eternal glory in Jesus
Christ, as it is in the text.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to labor to make our effectual calling
more and more sure.

2. To exhort us, to give God all the thanks for this calling, and to lead a
life answerable thereunto, which seems to be aimed at in the text, viz. that
for this eternal glory whereunto we are called, we should contemn all worldly
things, whether good or evil.

Doct. 11. The sufferings of this life are not repugnant to the comfort of this
glory.

Reason 1. Because we suffer but a while* for although the time of affliction
may seem long, yet it is but short, if it be compared either with eternal
death, which the wicked shall suffer, and we have deserved; or with eternal
glory whereunto we are called.

2. Because these afflictions are the way, whereby according to Gods will we
come unto glory.

3. Because glory it self appears the more glorious for the afflictions going
before.

Use. This may serve to comfort us against all the sufferings of this life.

Doct. 12. For this grace of God we should give all glory unto God.

This is gathered from verse 11.

Reason 1. Because therein consists our thankfulness.

2. Because therein also consists the perfection of the work of grace.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to give place to luke-warmenesse, but
to make such high reckoning of the saving grace of God, that upon every
mentioning thereof our minds should be stirred up sincerely to glorify the
name of God, and always endeavor so to do.

The end of the first Epistle.
A BRIEF ANALYSIS of the Second Epistle General of Saint PETER.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. Simon Peter, a Servant, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that
have obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteousness of God,
and of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Verse 2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of God,
and of Jesus our Lord.


The Analysis.
SUch kind of writings, as well Ethnic or profane, as sacred, are usually
divided into three parts, whereof the first is, the Superscription, Salutation,
and Preface. 2. The Epistle it self. 3. The Subscription or Conclusion. But
more accurately me thinks, we may say, that the preface and conclusion are only
adjuncts of the Epistle, which depend upon the Epistle it self, and are also
useful thereunto. But in this Epistle only one of these adjuncts is used,
namely, the Preface. For there is no subscription made, or any such conclusion,
as is used in the Epistles of Paul, and in the first of Peter. The Preface is
contained in four verses, and it consists of two parts, a salutation, and a
confirmation of the salutation: that in the two first, this in the third and
fourth verse. In the salutation there are those three things expressed, which
are in every action; namely, the agent, the action it self, and the object of
it. For so is there the person saluting, the persons saluted, and the
salutation it self. The person saluting is described, first, by his name
adjoined. Secondly, by his office adjoined, and that both general, that he is
a servant of Jesus Christ, and special, that he is an Apostle of his. The
persons saluted are described by a special adjunct, which is in stead of the
form, namely, by faith: which faith is set forth, first, by a comparison of
the like, that it is like precious with the faith of the Apostles. 2. By the
principal efficient cause, God and Jesus Christ. 3. By the means thereof,
viz. righteousness. The confirmation of the salutation contains, 1. the good
that is wished, which consists of two parts, Grace, and peace. 2. The degree
and quality of this good, be multiplied. 3. The helping cause of this
multiplication of good, which is the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ.

This is the Analysis.

As for the person, he has a double respect. For he is here considered as the
Author of the Epistle, and also as the Author of the Salutation: in the former
respect we have these Doctrines.

Doct. 1. The very names of Christ's famous Disciples, were heretofore of great
force for the confirmation and advancement of the truth in the Church.

For to that end did the Apostles usually set down their names in the
Epistles, which they wrote unto the Churches.

Use. This may be for exhortation, that we also according to our abilities
should labor so far with those amongst whom we live, that our names may be
like precious ointment, and may make something for the edification of others.

2. It may serve to reprove those which so carry themselves, that they are a
disgrace to godliness, and to the Church.

In the latter respect the person yields us this observation.

Doct. 2. The salutation of the Apostles and Ministers of God is more highly to
be prized.

Reason. Because it is not only a good and godly prayer, as are the salutations
of all the faithful, but it is also a ministerial application of the good
things which God communicates unto us by them. For it proceeds not only from a
pious affection, but from their singular office and duty.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to neglect or contemn such blessings,
whether they be public or private.

Doct. 3. It is an honorable title, if a man be rightly and deservedly called
a servant of God or Christ.

Reason. Because the chiefest men in the Church of God always gloried in this
title; not only the Apostles and Prophets, but also Kings and Princes, as we
see in David.

Use. This may serve to comfort poor Christians that have no titles whereof to
boast. For if they be the servants of God and Christ, they have no cause to
envy others, or to complain of their own condition. Now that it may be known
who are the servants of God, we must know that there are two things, as it were
essential to a servant, 1. To depend upon his Masters will and pleasure, for
direction in his work. 2. To refer all that he has to the use and profit of
his Master, not to his own. So also every faithful servant of God, 1 depends
wholly upon God for the direction of his life, not upon himself and his own
counsel, nor upon the examples and customs of the world, much less upon the
suggestions of the flesh and the devil. 2. He referres himself and all that
he has to advance and set forth the glory of God.

Doct. 4. Those servants of Christ which are called Apostles, have the chiefest
authority in the Church of God.

For that is the reason why Peter says that he is an Apostle of Jesus Christ.
All the faithful are Christ's servants, but they are not Apostles: even the
ordinary Ministers themselves, although in a large sense they may be called
Apostles and Ambassadors of Christ, yet not in that sense as Peter, Paul, and
the like are called. For the word Apostle, in this and the like places,
signifies not only an Embassage, but a singular privilege or prerogative in
that embassage. Now the privilege of the Apostles above other Ministers
consists in these four things: First, In the manner of the embassage, viz.
that they were called neither of men, nor by men but immediately of Christ.
Secondly, in the office imposed upon them by virtue of this embassage, viz.
that they were chiefly sent to plant Churches, to feed and build them up.
Thirdly, in the object whereabout their labor should be employed, viz. that
they were sent not to any one Church, but to diverse, and for the conversion of
the whole world. Fourthly, in their gifts and assistance of the Spirit, which
always accompanied this their embassage, viz. because in executing this their
office, as well in preaching as in writing, they were freed from all error. As
in the Creation of the world God first made light, and afterward set some
lights in the Firmament of Heaven to give light upon the Earth: So also in the
re-creation and restitution of the world, God first gave light in Christ
himself, who was the Son of Righteousness, as he is called in Scripture,
and afterward ordained the Apostles, as great lights, to bring this light upon
the Earth. And this is it which our Savior says unto them: Ye are the light
of the world.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us, to give God thanks, that he has not left
us in darkness, to wander at uncertainties, but has set up these shining
lights for us, by whose means we might be directed unto heaven.

2. To admonish us, to observe also and believe those things which they have
prescribed us. For we must receive the writings of the Apostles after the same
manner, as we should receive Christ himself, if he were with us on earth.

3. To refute the Pope, who brags that he is an Apostle, and has Apostolical
authority, (whereupon also he calls his seat at Rome, Apostolical,) when as he
has not so much as one of those conditions, which are necessarily required to
make an Apostle.

Hitherto of the person saluting. It follows now to speak of the persons
saluted, where we have these Doctrines.

Doct. 1. The Apostles wrote not properly to the unbelievers, but to the Church.

For so here and elsewhere are they described to whom the Epistles are sent.

Reason. Because the preaching of the Gospel, not the writing, is the
effectual means of conversion. The writing and reading do more properly serve
for the confirmation and edification of those that are converted, then for the
first conversion.

Use. This may serve to exhort, first of all, that they will principally apply
themselves unto Sermons. Secondly, those that have received some benefit by
Sermons, that they would also diligently apply themselves to the reading of the
Scripture, that they might more and more confirm and edify themselves.

Doct. 2. Faith is the proper mark of difference, whereby the Church is
distinguished from all other societies.

For therefore are the Christians here described by faith, that they may be
distinguished from all other men: and the same which in other Epistles are wont
to be called the elect, the called, the Churches of God, those which are in God
the Father, and in Jesus Christ, are in this place barely called the faithful.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, if we will make our calling and the
condition of our salvation sure, then to labor especially to obtain faith,
and also to increase it more and more.

Doct. 3. The faith of Christians is a most precious profession.

Therefore it is here called precious faith; and in the former Epistle, Chap.
1. v. 7. faith is said to be more precious then gold that perishes.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us, to make more account of faith then of all
worldly things, according to that of Christ: What shall it profit a man to
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, or faith?

2. To comfort poor Christians which have no possessions in this world. For if
they have true faith, they have that which is more excellent then silver and
gold.

Doct. 4. The faith of common Christians is as precious as was the faith of the
Apostles.

Which is not to be understood of the degree or quantity, but of the nature or
quality.

Reason. Because the faith of all Christians lays hold of the same good, viz.
Christ and his benefits. Hereupon Paul calls it common faith: for as one that is
sick of the Palsy, that takes some precious thing with a shaking hand, does
possess it as well as the other, that is strong; so the faithful, though they
be weak, if they do truly lay hold of Christ, have him to be their Savior as
well as they that are most strong.

Use. This may serve to comfort weak Christians; for if they have true faith,
though it be but like a grain of Mustard seed, they have the same comfort that
the Apostles themselves had. If they be truly knit unto Christ, though it be
but with a slender thread as it were, yet they hold Christ as well as they that
are tied unto him with the strongest cords: which yet is not so to be taken, as
if we were not to seek for a stronger and surer faith; for although the weak
possess the same good that the strong do, yet they have not the same fruit and
benefit of this possession.

Doct. 5. The cause of this precious faith is not in any man, but in the
righteousness of God and Christ.

Now by righteousness is not meant any recompense of desert; but the
faithfulness and truth of the promises, which depend upon the mere goodness
of God. And these promises made unto Abraham himself, that his seed should be
as the stars of heaven, and the sand of the Sea, out of all nations; and they
were afterward often repeated by the Prophets.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those, that ascribe it unto man's free will; so
that first they make the calling of the faithful to be uncertain, as if the
promises of God could be made void; and then they take away the glory it self
of man's conversion from God, and give it unto man.

2. To exhort us, to give God thanks, for this so incomparable a good.

The Doctrines that arise from v. 2.
Doct. 1. All spiritual good things, are contained in these two words, Grace
and peac^.

For by Grace is meant both the free favor of God, and also the application
and manifestation thereof in the hearts of the faithful, by the operation of
the holy Ghost; in the word and Sacraments. And by peace is meant quietness of
mind, which is the fruit of grace. So that Grace is the first benefit, and
Peace the last. And therefore all benefits that pass between are included
therein, as in two extremes. Hereupon in all the Epistles almost the Apostles
prayer and salutation is contained in these two: To Timothy and Titus, he adds
mercy also, Grace, mercy and peace. But that is only an application of the same
thing, which is signified by grace, and for a peculiar reason is added in those
Epistles, because Timothy and Titus wanted a special kind of grace, in respect
of the service, which they did undergo in the Churches, in regard of their
age, and those diverse temptations, whereunto they were obnoxious in that
Service. In the old Testament peace only was usually wished in their
salutations, without any mention of Grace; but yet grace also at that time was
understood: But in the time of the new Testament, which is the time of grace,
and wherein all things are more fully delivered, it was most fitting, that
grace should be named in such l^ke salutations.

Use. This may serve to exhort and direct us, above all things to wish grace
and Christian peace unto all those, to whom we are well-wishers.

Doct. 11. The desires of the faithful are chiefly for those spiritual good
things, Grace and peace.

Reason. The Reason of the Collection is this, because the Apostle in this
beginning of the Epistle, labors to get the good will of those to whom he
writes, by showing the prayer that he had made for them: Now he could not
effect this, if his prayer were not according to their desire; for if he should
have wished any of those things, that they cared not for, such a wish would
have done no good with them.

Use. This may serve to exhort us all, to examine our selves according to this
rule. For if we make no reckoning at all, of the means and instruments of
grace, but do reject or despise those, that labor most to procure this grace
and peace for us, we have cause to fear, that we are yet far from the
nature, and disposition of true believers.

Doct. 3. They which have gone farthest in faith and grace, have yet need of
grace.

This is gathered therehence, that the Apostle wishes grace unto those, that
have obtained like precious faith, with the Apostles themselves.

Use. 1. This may serve to refute the Papists of their merits.

2. To exhort us to humility, and continual prayer for the grace of God.

Doct. 4. Without Grace, there is no true peace.

Grace is the cause and foundation of peace, peace the effect and fruit of
grace; it is the inheritance, which Christ left unto his disciples alone, John
14. 27. Isay 48. last. For this peace is not an external and worldly peace,
but spiritual and internal. Before we are partakers of grace, we are called
in Scripture, Gods enemies, so that we do wage a kind of war against God
himself, and therefore also against the Angels of God, and other of his
creatures. Now by grace, and by it alone is peace made.

Use. This may serve to refute and reprove the folly of those men, which so
please themselves, in that outward quietness which they enjoy, when in the
mean time, they are utterly void and ignorant of the grace of God.

Doct. 5. We must seek not only for grace and peace, but also for great
abundance of it.

This is gathered from that word, Grace and peace be multiplied. For the good
things of that grace are such, that they cannot be too much: in this there is
no sinning in excess. Hence it is that the Apostle Paul always exhorts the
faithful, and prays also that the faithful may abound more and more in all
grace. And to the Ephesians he proposes the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height of this grace, that they may be rooted and grounded in it, Chap. 3.
verse 18.

Use 1. This may serve to refute and condemn those, that so rest in the
present grace which they have, or seem to have, that they look for no more.
Such do those men seem to be, that think they know enough, believe enough,
love enough, etc. And therefore they neglect both the public and the private
means, whereby they might be farther edified. The state of a Christian in this
life is a state of building, not perfection: therefore as he would show
himself to be a foolish builder, that should rest in the middle of his work,
and not make up the perfect structure, so also in a Christian life.

2. To exhort us to stir up our selves, and labor for more abundant grace
and peace.

Argument 1. The first argument may be taken from the nature of grace and
peace, which is such, that he that has once tasted the sweetness thereof,
cannot but desire a fuller draught of it, 1 Pet. 2. 2. 3. Desire the sincere
milk, etc.

Argument 2. From the imperfect degree, that we have yet attained: We are for
the most part, as newborn babes, as the Apostle speaks in the same place.

Argument 3. From the will of God, to whom nothing is more acceptable, then
that we should seek for plenty of his grace, Isay 55. 2. Prove. 9.

Argument 4. From the sin or guilt, which follows the neglect of that duty.
For as amongst men, if one should set before us most precious wares, and should
commend them, and also offer them freely unto us, he could not but take it ill,
if we should refuse them: so much more may we think that Gods anger is incensed
toward those, that neglect and despise the riches of this grace, that he has
set before them and commended unto them.

Doct. 6. God is the only author of grace and peace.

This is gathered from 1 Peter 5. 10.

God is called the author of all grace. Hence by a kind of appropriation he is
called the God of grace, as in another place he is called the Father of
mercies, and God of all consolations; and grace also in this signification is
called the grace of God; so also of peace we find in Scriptures, that God is
called the God of peace, and true peace is every where called the peace of God.

Use 1. This may serve to refute all the Papists, that manifest the contrary
both in their words and practice. For they are wont to call the blessed Virgin
the Mother of grace: so also they run unto her and to other Saints, as if
they were the authors of grace and peace.

2. To instruct and confirm us in this truth, that the bestowing of grace and
peace depends upon the mere good will and pleasure of God. For when God is
called the God of grace, it is meant also that he is the Lord of grace, who can
according to his good pleasure give it to whom he will, and deny it to whom he
will. This is gathered from 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16. for he that in
the former place is called the God of peace, in the latter is called the Lord
of peace. Therefore when we see that grace and peace is granted unto some, and
denied unto others, we should rest satisfied in the good will of God, according
to the example of Christ, Matthew. 10. For by so doing we give glory to God, as
is evident.

3. To exhort us, to pray unto this great God to give us grace and peace.

Doct. 7. Jesus Christ is the beginning of all grace and peace.

God is the first and principal author, and so also Christ, as he is God: but
as he is God and man, our Mediator, so he is the beginning ordained by God, as
the head, from whom all grace is to be derived unto his members, as into the
vessels of grace; so that God is as it were the first and principal fountain,
Christ as the secondary fountain, in whom is hid all grace that is to be given
unto the faithful, and the faithful themselves are the vessels that draw and
receive this grace, which runs into them from these fountains, and the word
and Sacraments are as the channels.

Use. This may serve to inform us of the manner, how we should seek for
grace, viz. that we should always go unto God in Christ, because extra
Christum, out of Christ, he is unto sinners not a God of grace and peace, but
of vengeance, and a consuming fi^e.

Doct. 8. True faith is the isntrumental cause of grace and peace, and of the
multiplying of both, whereby it is derived unto us.

Reason. Because by knowledge in this place is meant faith. For it is not meant
a bare knowledge, but something more, which follows this knowledge, therefore
it is not called, (...), but (...), that is, an acknowledging. 2. Thereby is
meant an effectual knowledge, such as there is no other taught us in the
Scriptures, but faith. Now faith is signified by the name of knowledge, because
by the hearing and knowledge of the word it is usually begotten in us. And
faith is called the instrument of grace, not as it is in God himself, willing,
intending, and ordaining spiritual good things unto us, for so grace is the
cause of faith; but as the sense, fruit and knowledge of this grace is
communicated unto us. For faith is so the fruit and effect of grace, that it
has the first place, and is the isntrumental cause of all following grace.
And this efficacy it has in respect of the object, which it lays hold of,
Jesus Christ, because as we said before, he is the beginning of all grace, so
that as Adam was the beginning of nature and the corruption thereof, and that
relation which we have unto Adam by natural generation, makes us partakers
both of his nature and corruption: so Christ was made the beginning of life
spiritual, and grace, and that relation of faith which we have unto Christ in
our regeneration, makes us partakers both of the life and grace which is in
Christ.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, 1. To have a special care of our faith, if
we would not be destitute of all the grace and peace of God. This is it which
the Apostle says elsewhere, above all, take the shield of faith, that is,
above all things get faith, Ephesians. 6. 16. This is it which is often pressed, By
faith we are saved, by faith we stand, by faith we obtain the victory, etc. 2.
To labor also for the increase of faith, if (...) desire the increase of grace
and peace. For grace is multiplied by the multiplying of faith, and the
knowledge of God. As in a house, which is enlightened by the Sun, the more the
windows stand open, the more it is filled with light: so also in us, the more
our faith is increased, the more is grace and peace increased in us. Let that
therefore be our daily prayer, which was Christ's Disciples, Lord increase our
faith.

Verse 3. According as his Divine power has given unto us all things that
pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has
called us to glory and virtue.


The Analysis.
THe scope of the Apostle in this verse is to confirm the faith of Christians
touching the multiplying of grace and peace through the knowledge of God, which
he had wished unto them in the former verse. And the argument is taken from the
comparing of things alike, as that particle, According as, intimates unto us.
The things compared are. 1. The giving of peace and grace; and 2. The
consequent multiplying of them. And of these he shows that there is the same
reason, both in respect of the principal cause, and the less principal or
isntrumental cause; so that the whole argument runs after this manner; If God
and our Lord Jesus Christ will give unto us grace and peace through the
knowledge of him, then will he also multiply unto us the same gifts by the
same: But the former is true: Therefore the latter. The Assumption is contained
in verse 3. And it is not barely set down, but with an illustration, although
he adds some things to confirm the reason it self and our faith. For in
stead of grace and peace the Apostle here puts things necessary unto life and
godliness; and in the second place glory and virtue: like as by life and glory
he means the same thing, that he did before by peace, though in a different
respect: so also by godliness and virtue he means the same thing that he did
before by grace. The principal cause of this gifting he explains by the power
which he has, which he calls divine; the isntrumental he explaines by the
object thereof, namely, Christ. For he argues from a singular effect, which
does most of all pertain to the thing it self, namely to our calling, glory
and virtue.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. Life and glory are contained in Christian peace.

For the condition, that Christians are made partakers of by peace, is called
life in respect of that inward and permanent principle of the most perfect
operations, wherein consists man's felicity, which is given unto all the
faithful. And it is called glory in respect of the complete happiness, which
flows from that principle, and shall in its due time also appear with outward
splendor.

Use 1. This may serve to inform and instruct us, not to think meanly or
contemptibly of the condition of faithful Christians, but to judge aright
according to the nature of the thing, viz. that the only life and chiefest
glory is proper to them.

2. To exhort us, to preserve faith, grace, and Christian peace before all
worldly things, yea, before this present life it self, and the glory thereof,
because by our faith we shall obtain a far more perfect life and glory,
according to that of Christ, He that loses his life, shall find and obtain a
far better life.

Doct. 2. Christian grace brings with it godliness and virtue.

For the same thing is called grace, which is the effect of Gods favor; it is
called godliness, as it has God for its object: and it is called virtue, as
it perfects a man in operation.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, not to boast of the grace of God,
unless we show it by our godliness and virtue.

2. To reprove and condemn those, that either out of presumption or fe^ned
simulation, do either separate grace from godliness, or grace from virtue, or
virtue from either.

Doct. 3. All things necessary unto life and godliness are given by God unto
the faithful.

Now to make a gift perfect 3 things are required. 1. That the gift which is
given be made the receivers, or his to whom it is said to be given; for
otherwise it is not a gift, or a thing actually given, but potentially only. 2.
That ^t be made his absolutely or irrevocably, not conditionally, that the gift
it self should depend upon a condition. 3. That the giver be moved for no
other cause to give, but to show and exercise his bounty and liberality. the
more perfectly and purely these conditions are found in any gift, the more
perfect and pure is the gift. Now all these do most exactly agree to those
gifts of God, which pertain unto life and godliness. As for example, Christ
is said to be given for us, and also given unto us: the holy Ghost has that
name as it were appropriated unto him, that he is the gift of God: faith and
repentance are expressly called the gift of God.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, against the error of those, that will
not take such like good things as a gift, but teach us that we must seek for
them by our own merits; for as the Apostle says If of grace, then not by
works, for othe^wise grace were not grace: so may we also say; if of gift,
then not by works, for otherwise the gift would be no gift.

2. To admonish us, throughout our whole life to seek for such good things
after that manner as is agreeable to their nature, that is, to ask, pray, and
supplicate for them, etc. And in the second place to use all our endeavor to
show our selves thankful unto God for such divine gifts.

4. He gives these spiritual gifts unto us by his Divine Power.

His Divine Power haeth given unto us all things, as it is in the text: the
like hereunto is that in the first Epistle, c. 1. v. 5. Ye are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation. And Christ tells us, Matthew. 19. 26.
With men this is unpossible, but with God all things are possible: where we are
expressly taught, that salvation and spiritual good things are given unto us by
the power of God, to whom all things are possible, that is, his omnipotency,
Ier. 31. 35. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun, etc.

Reason. Because such a power is necessarily required to bring this to pass,
by reason of those strong impediments, which withstand and cross this work.
For so Christ tells us, that the Devil as a strong man holds his palace, till a
stronger then he comes upon him and overcomes him, and takes from him all his
armor wherein he trusted, Luke. 11. 21, 22. This is also fully explained by
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 8. When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. Where he shows that gifts are given unto us
by that very power, whereby captivity is led captive. It is expressly said
Ephesians. 1. 19. that it is the exceeding greatness of Gods power, which works
in us by the might of his power, and Verse 20. the same power whereby Christ
was raised from the dead.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Remonstrants and such like men, that deny
faith to be begotten in us, and our conversion to be wrought by Gods almighty
power. For they make grace only morally persuading, that may be resisted,
impotent, and consequently uneffectuall.

2. To comfort the weak and all the faithful, in that they have no reason too
much to fear the gates of hell, because they have the gates of heaven making
with them: although they must wrestle not only against flesh and blood, but
against principalities and the powers of the world, etc. Ephesians. 6. 12. Yet they
have a divine power, far beyond all those enemies, to uphold them in this
wrestling.

3. To exhort us, 1. To behave our selves stoutly, and show our selves men in
the cause of God, answerable to so Divine a Power, as he is ready to afford
unto us. 2. To give God thanks, that has not left us in our own infirmities
to be exposed as a prey unto our enemies, but by his divine power helps our
infirmities.

Doct. 5. This Divine Power is the power of Christ himself.

Use 1. This may serve to confirm our faith, touching Christ's divine nature.
For the divine power is not separated from the divine nature.

2. To comfort us, that he who so loved us, that he gave himself for us, has
such sufficient strength to perfect our salvation. He uses this argument to
comfort his Disciples. John 10. 28, 29, 30.

Doct. 6. Christ gives us these things by his divine power, when he does
effectually call us, through the knowledge of him that calls us.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to apply our selves with fear and reverence
unto the means of our calling, because Christ's divine power is showed therein.

Doct. 7. The consideration of the end whereunto we are called in Christ,
should build us up in faith, hope, and all those things which pertain unto
life and godliness.

Therefore the Apostle here puts us in mind, that he has called us to glory
and virtue; so in the former Epistle, c. 5. v. 10. who has called us unto his
eternal glory, etc. To that purpose the Apostle Ephesians. 1. 18. earnestly prays
for the Ephesians, that the eyes of their understanding may be enlightened, to
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches, etc. Now this
consideration is of great force for these reasons.

Reason 1. Because it is an argument confirming our faith, whilst we thus
think with our selves: If God has called us unto glory, then there is no
doubt, but that he will in due time bring us unto glory, and in the mean time
keep us in the way that leads thereunto.

2. Because it is an argument whereby we are stirred up to labor for virtue,
whilst we thus think with our selves: if we are called unto glory and virtue,
we must not carry our selves sordidly and basely, defiling our selves with the
pollutions of the flesh, like Swine wallowing in the mire, but as it becomes
such a calling.

Doct. 8. There is the same reason of this calling and the first gift of grace,
that there is of the multiplying of all grace and peace.

For they are alike free, they do depend alike upon the divine power, they are
always knit and linked together: this follows from the connection of verse 3.
with the second.

Use. This may serve to comfort us, as it is set forth, Phil. 1. 6. That he
which has begun a good works in us, will perform it until the day of Christ.

Verse 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that
by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.


The Analysis.
THe Apostle had before confirmed his prayer and the hope of the faithful,
touching the multiplying of grace and peace, by the comparing of things alike,
that is, from the giving of all things which are necessary unto life and
godliness. Now he confirms and proves the assumption also, touching the
giving of things necessary to life and godliness. And the argument is taken
from the testimony of God, that is, from Gods promises: for his promise is a
testimony of the good that he will bestow. Now while the Apostle disputes from
the promises to the gifts promised, he disputes from the testimony to the
things testified, which kind of argumentation he does sufficiently intimate,
when he puts the things promised in stead of the promise. And the things
promised are thus explained; 1. In general, by two adjuncts, that they are
exceeding great and precious, that is neither concerning small things, or
things of little moment, nor concerning things, that we have nothing to do
with, or are little to be esteemed by us, but things of exceeding great weight,
and of exceeding great price. 2. In special, by those effects, which are
contained in these things promised, and they are two. First, A lifting up of
the faithful to perfection, which is explained by a likeness unto the divine
nature. Secondly, A freeing of them from corruption, which is set forth by the
subject and the cause thereof. The subject is the world, the cause is lust or
concupiscence.

The Doctrine arising herehence.

Doct. 1. Gods promises carry in them the virtue of a gift.

Reason. Because they make the thing promised certainly to belong unto those,
to whom it is promised. For although it be not yet actually in their
possession, yet it is that power that is certainly produced into act. The cause
is, 1. The truth of God that promises. 2. The Divine Power which accompanies
Gods promises, whereof mention was made in the former verse.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those that make Gods promises wholly to depend
upon man's will.

2. To comfort all the faithful, that they may be of good courage, and have a
firm hope in the good things that are promised by God.

Doct. 2 Gods promises are of things exceeding great.

Hence it is that the Scripture often speaks of the wondrous things of Gods
word, Psalm. 119. 18. And it evidently appears by the things themselves, if they
are well weighed and considered; whether we look unto the divine properties
which break forth in the things promised, or their divine effects. For
wonderful is the mercy, and power, and providence whereupon they depend; and
the effects also are wonderful, for many of them are such, that they do so
transcend man's capacity, that they seem unto many utterly unpossible and
incredible: as the resurrection, immortality, and life everlasting.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn the stupidity of those, that are nothing
moved or taken with these things that are so great and wonderful.

2. To exhort us, to labor and strive in our prayers with David, that our eyes
may be more and more opened, to be able to see the wonderful nature of them.

Doct. 3. Gods promises are as precious unto us, as they are great in
themselves.

So they are distinguished: for if God had promised that he would make another
World, yet so, as that it should nothing pertain unto us, this indeed had been
an exceeding great promise, but nothing precious unto us; but when he so
promised a world to come, wherein immortality and great glory shall dwell, as
that we should possess it, this promise is as precious as it is great. Hence
it is, that in the Scriptures the testimonies of God are extolled, whose
promises are exceeding great above all riches, Psalm. 119. 14. Above gold and
silver, and all precious things, as we often read in the Psalms and Proverbs.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us, both in judgment, affection and all our
endeavour^, to carry our selves answerable to these divine promises, as to the
most precious thing that is, as we are admonished, Prove. 2. 4. To seek them as
silver, and search for them as for hid treasures. And Prove. 8. 10. to receive
them, and not silver, etc. And to be more delighted with these then with the
sweetest gifts, to get these promises at any price, how great soever, though we
sell all that we have, as it is in the parable of the Merchant, who found a
precious Jewel.

2. To comfort those Christians that are poor in spirit, even in this present
world; for though they have nothing excellent in these outward things, yet they
have those exceeding great and precious things provided by God for them. They
are in this like unto that heir, of whom Paul makes mention, Gal. 4. 1.

Doct. 4. By virtue of these promises we are made partakers of the divine
nature.

Now by nature is not meant the essence of God, but those perfections, whereof
we have a representation made by the Spirit Epist. 1. c. 2. v. 9. They are
called the virtues of God, and in other places, it is called the life of God,
the Image of God, and the Spirit of God. And this nature is communicated by
virtue of the promises, because the promise of the Gospel in this differs from
the Law, for the Law considered in it self is a killing Letter, and the
ministration of death in respect of sinners, but the Gospel is the
ministration of the quickening Spirit 2 Cor. 3 6, 7, 8.

Reason. Because the Spirit of God together with the Gospel works our
salvation.

Use 1. This may serve to direct us, to examine our selves whether the promises
of God have been effectual in us yet or no? for if we have nothing in us
above natural men, or our corrupt nature, we are yet strangers to the
promises of God.

2. To reprove those, that are wont to say, when they are stirred up to
Christian duties, that they are not Saints or Angels, but flesh and blood, and
therefore cannot either abstain from common vices, or come near unto a
heavenly life. For Christians besides and above that nature, which they have
from Adam, are made partakers also of a divine nature, whereby they are able to
do all things through him that strengthens them, namely Christ, Phil. 4. 13.

3. To exhort us, to labor with all diligence, that the grace of God may be
unto us like a second nature, as some say of Custom. And so it will be, when
we perform the works of grace and new obedience, not by constraint or
unwillingly, as many use to do, but with delight and cheerfulness, as if we
were carried hereunto by the inclination of nature, as the fire is upward.

Doct. 5. The corruption of sin is contrary both to this nature, and Gods
promises.

Reason. Because the presence of the divine nature and the virtue of the
promises drives out this corruption, as heat does cold, and as light dispells
darkness, 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Tit. 2. 11. 12.

Use. 1. This may serve to condemn those, that will join together these
things that are so inconsistent and repugnant and contrary to God himself,
that is, those that join the profession of Religion with most corrupt practice.

2. To exhort us, if we believe the promises of God, and love the divine nature
to our own salvation, then to eschew all these corruptions. Thus much the
Apostle intimates, when he says: Having escaped the corruption, as if a flying
away were required, and that quickly, as it were from a fire, wherein we are
almost burned, or from a plague that rages in our houses, 1 Pet. 2. 11. 2 Cor.
4. 1. Having received mercy, let us not faint, etc. and Chap. 7. v. 1.

Doct. 6. This corruption of sin bears rule in the world.

This is gathered herehence, because this is the true description of corruption
made by the Apostle.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, 1 not to love the world too much. This use
the Apostle makes of it, 1 John 2. 5. ^. Not to fashion our selves according to
this world, Romans 12. 2.

Doct. 7. Lust is the essential cause of this corruption, which is in the
world.

For it is not from the fabric of heaven and earth, nor in any created
substance, but in the naughty affections and dispositions, together with the
actions flowing therehence, so that every man carries this world in his own
bowels. And the reason why this wickedness is signified by concupiscence or
lust, is:

Reason 1. Because in man's conversion to worldly and unl^wfull things, sin is
more manifest then in a simple aversion from God.

2. Because this desire of unlawful things is most contrary to that affection,
which we should have toward God, and divine and heavenly things.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to use great diligence to subdue and root
out our own lusts and concupiscence.

Verse 5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue;
and to virtue knowledge;

Verse 6. And to knowledge continence; and to continence, patience; and to
patience, godliness;

Verse 7. And to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness,
charity.


The Analysis.
Now the Apostle comes unto that which he chiefly aimed at in this Epistle: and
the scope of the Epistle is showed expressly, Chap. 3. verse 1. namely, to
stir up the pure minds of the faithful, by way of remembrance; and verse
the last, more distinctly, that they should grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. This same thing he proposes in these verses, 5. 6,
7. and confirms it in the rest of the Chapter, and in the two following
Chapters, he vindicates it from those things which cross this purpose, namely,
the seducings of false teachers, chap. 2. and the derisions of profane
scoffers, chap. 3. Now his scope and purpose, as it is explained in these three
verses, is, to exhort the faithful, to apply themselves wholly to those duties
that are answerable to the faith, which they have obtained and do profess. And
those duties are set forth; 1. By the common conditions and all the properties
of the virtue and duty; and 2. By the species or kinds of virtues and duties.
The common conditions and properties of virtue are four, which are usually
called cardinal virtues, Justice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude. Justice
is here signified by the name of virtue, because it does most nearly belong to
the efficacy of virtue, to be according to the rule, which is general justice.
Prudence is signified by knowledge, because prudence and Christian wisdom
consists in the practical knowledge of Gods will. Temperance is called
continence, because this is general temperance, if a man contains himself or
abstaines from those intisements, whereby he may be withdrawn from his duty.
Fortitude is meant here by patience, because this is true Christian fortitude,
patiently to suffer all afflictions, and to persist in his duty notwithstanding
all afflictions. These are such conditions, that they should be in every duty,
which if they be, they make every duty complete; nor can any of them be away,
without hurting of the virtue and duty. The kinds of duties are two:
godliness, which contains the duties of the first table; and charity, which
belongs unto the second table: which charity is determined by a special
manner, whilst it is called also brotherly love, whereby we love those, that
are joined in the same faith with us. Concerning these duties the Apostle
proposes first the common act, that we should use in them, namely adding, as
he says, add; Secondly, The manner how we should use this act, namely, giving
all diligence: where both the manner and the degree is showed; the manner, is
diligence, the degree, is all diligence. Thirdly, the end and scope of the act
and duty in these words, besides this, or hereunto, that is, to that end of
which he had spoken before, viz. that we might be made partakers of the
Divine Nature, and have grace and peace multiplied.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. Our endeavors must be joined to our prayers, and to the operation of
Gods grace.

This is gathered herehence, that the Apostle says; we must labor for that
very thing which he wished unto us, and so proposed unto us to be prayed for,
and which he said the grace of God did work in us.

Our endeavors must be joined unto our prayers.

Reason 1. Because otherwise we cannot have a sincere desire in our prayers,
without which our prayers are in vain; for what we sincerely desire, that also
we do always labor to attain.

2. Because our prayers themselves do bind us to such an endeavor. For in
every prayer there is a promise and vow, wherein we promise unto God that we
will seek that which we ask of him: so that to ask any thing of God without
such an endeavor, is not only to take Gods name in vain, but also plainly to
mock his Majesty.

Our endeavors also must be joined with the grace of God, because grace tends
thereunto, both to afford us strength to endeavor, and also to stir us up to
exercise that strength.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those slothful men, which wish for many
things, and after their manner also ask them of God, but yet will not move so
much as their finger to obtain them: these men are like that slothful man,
that the wi^e man describes, Prove. 22* 13. and elsewhere, where the slothful
man carries his hand in his bosom, etc.

2. To exhort us, daily to be mindful of this obligation, when we pray unto
God for the forgiveness of our sins, for deliverance from temptations, for
newness of life, or any other thing, let us constantly also use our endeavors
to attain these ends.

Doct. 2. Our endeavors must always tend to the increase of the grace which
we have received.

This is gathered therehence, that the sum of our duty consists in adding:
the reasons are diverse;

Reason 1. Because that is imperfect which we have: while we remain in this
life, we are in a state of progress and edifying; not of rest or perfection,
Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.

2. Because that which we have ^eceived, is given unto us to be an earnest, a
pledge, and the ^^rst fruits of that which we yet look and seek for.

3. Because it cannot be, that we should rightly esteem the grace that we have
received, if we do not labor to attain the highest degree thereof, but rest
contented with the benefit that we have received, and never look for any more
of that kind.

4. Because we cannot keep that which we have received, if we do not labor
to increase it; for as the vital heat does always either increase or
decrease, and he that goes up a sandy-hill, must still labor to get up, or
else he will slide down; so it is in a Christian life.

5. Because we should do that unto God, which we would have God do unto us;
for we would have God always add unto those benefits and blessings which he
bestows upon us; we therefore should likewise add unto those duties which we
perform unto him.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that rest satisfied with that which
they have, and never seek farther, and much more those, that by diminishing
and losing, waste and consume that which they had, Apoc. 2. 4. This may be
explained by the parable of the talents.

2. To exhort us, to exercise a holy kind of covetousness in these spiritual
things; for as covetous men join house to house, field to field, Isay 5. 8. so
should we also join faith to faith, obedience to obedience, charity to charity.

Doct. 3. We must use our endeavors about these spiritual things with all
diligence.

Now by all diligence is meant, 1. The greatest heedfulnesse of the mind. 2.
The greatest earnestness of the will. 3. The greatest care, that is intimated
by that phrase, whereby we are commanded, to seek the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof. For when Christ had told them, Matthew. 6. 31. that they
should not be careful what they should eat, or what they should drink, he
explaines this care, verse 32, 33. by the phrase of seeking. 4. A diligence in
the use of the means, whereby we may come to attain that which we desire. And
the reasons why we should use this diligence about spiritual things, are,

Reason 1. The dignity and excellency of these things above all earthly things,
which worldly men are so busy about.

2. The difficulty, for in their nature they are above our strength, and there
are many impediments also, as well inward as outward, which we cannot overcome,
but by using all diligence.

3. The necessity of these things, without which we are miserable wretches.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove the slothful and sluggish Christians, that
are so remiss, so cold and lukewarm at least in these things, which require
so great diligence. Here appears the crossenesse of man's disposition: for when
God has forbidden us, to be over-carefull about worldly things, because all
these things should be added unto us without such care; and has commanded us,
to be diligent and careful about spiritual things, because we shall never be
partakers of them without diligence; we on the contrary are careful and
diligent about the world, and neglect Heaven.

2. To exhort us, by all means daily to stir up our selves, and to provoke one
another to this so necessary d^ligence.

Doct. 4. Faith is the fountain and beginning of all Christian virtue.

This is gathered from the text. Because faith is here laid as the foundation
upon which all virtues are to be built.

Reason 1. Because without faith no man can please God unto everlasting life,
and therefore the very virtues of unbelievers, although they be pleasing unto
God in themselves, especially if a comparison be made betwixt them and vices,
yet they are not pleasing unto God unto salvation, or such as that they may
expect a spiritual reward from God; and therefore if a comparison be made
betwixt them and the virtues of the faithful, they may not unfitly be called,
splendid peccata, glorious sins.

2. Because to the making up of virtue there is required not only good matter
and form, but also the beginning and end. Now in a heart destitute of faith
there is not the beginning of Christian virtue, and from the defect of this
beginning there follows also a defect, both in the end, and in the form. The
manner how faith produces virtue, is, 1. In regard of the object which it
lays hold of, because all grace and virtue is derived from Christ. 2. In
regard of the effect, because faith purifies the heart of man, and so makes it
fit for such operations and dispositions. 3. Because faith it self is an
impulsive argument, moving us to labor for virtue.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those imprudent builders, that neglect faith
and seek for virtue, as if they would build the roof of the house, and not
lay the foundation.

2. To exhort us, to have great care of faith, because all virtues depend upon
it.

Doct. 5. Virtue is the glory of faith.

This is gathered therehence, that it is said, it must be added to faith as
something belonging to the perfection thereof. Now it is not an essential
perfection, but complementall; not internal properly, but external.

Reason 1. Because faith without virtue is not a living, but a dead faith.

2. Because virtue is the end of faith.

3. Because it is the adorning thereof.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that boast of faith and neglect
virtue, such were many even in the Apostles time, as appears by the Epistle of
James.

2. To exhort us, to give all diligence, to add virtue to faith.

Doct. 6. The perfection of virtue depends upon knowledge.

This is gathered from that; To virtue add knowledge. By knowledge we mean,
not so much that intellectual virtue, which is properly called scientia,
knowledge, as understanding, wisdom, and prudence, all which are signified in
the Scriptures by the right knowledge of Gods will. Now this knowledge is
necessary unto virtue both in general and particular.

Reason 1. Because virtus est habitus electivus, virtue is an habit pertaining
to election, or has good election joined with it. Now to this election it is
required, that a man should rightly know the end, and also the means that lead
unto the end, and the manner also how he may come to the end by those means.

2. Because actiones virtutum versantur in particularibus, the actions of
virtues are in particulars, and therefore it is not sufficient to judge aright
of good and evil i^ general, unless that judgment be also applied to
particular actions, according to their circumstances.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that please themselves in their
ignorance, as if ignorance were the mother of devotion, or of any virtue,
whereas it is the greatest enemy to virtue, and the mother of all profaneness,
especially if it be voluntary, as Peter shows, Epist. 2. Chap 3. verse 5.
Where he gives a reason of their great wickedness, because those scoffers of
whom he speaks, were willingly ignorant of those things which pertain unto
true godliness.

2. To exhort us, to seek for knowledge, and when we have gotten it to apply
it also to the increase of virtue. For virtue without knowledge is blind, and
knowledge without virtue is vain.

Doct. 7. Continence or temperance is the perfection of knowledge.

Now by continence and temperance we mean a moderation, whereby all lusts are
suppressed that might allure or withdraw us to any thing that is contrary to
virtue and knowledge.

Reason 1. Because knowledge tends to such a moderation and government of the
affections.

2. Because knowledge it self cannot subsist without this moderation. For
unless the affections are directed by knowledge, knowledge it self is
corrupted by the affections: hence it is, that many errors and heresies
oftentimes take their rise and beginning from evil manners and affections,
Ephesians. 4. 18.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that are puffed up with knowledge,
when in the mean time they show by their intemperance that they know nothing
yet, as they ought to know, 1 Co^. 8. 12.

2. To exhort us, to use all our knowledge to the government of our affections
and manners.

Doct. 8. Patience must be joined with continence to the perfection of virtue.

By patience we mean that grace whereby we continue and persist in well-doing,
although we are crossed by many grievous things. Therefore it includes in it
patience, constancy, and stablenesse of mind, or Christian fortitude.
Continence strengthens virtue against alluring intisements, and patience
against all adversity, so that virtue is quite perfected, if it be grounded on
faith, directed by knowledge, and strengthened on the one side by continence,
and on the other side by patience.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove the lightness and inconstancy of men, who
indeed profess themselves to be studious of virtue, and yet can bear no
thing, to keep virtue whole and entire.

2. To exhort all good men, to prepare themselves to bear all afflictions for
virtue sake and a good conscience.

Doct* 9. Godliness is the chief and most necessary of all virtues.

By godliness we mean true religion toward God, and a mind wholly given to
the true worship of God.

Reason 1. Because it has the noblest object, that is, God himself.

2. Because it does most of all perfect all other virtues, whiles it refers
them and all their acts to a divine beginning, and a divine end. For godliness
subjects the mind to God in all things, so that it acknowledges God to be the
author of all good, from whom every good and perfect gift comes, and makes
him the chiefest good and the last end to whom all our actions are to be
directed.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that attribute so much to some moral
and humane virtues, that they prefer them before godliness.

2. To exhort us, continually to exercise our selves both in public and in
private, to increase this godliness in our minds.

Doct. 10. With Godliness toward God we should join love toward our
neighbor.

Reason. Because godliness it self commands and begets this love. For we love
our neighbor with Christian love, when we love him for Gods sake, not for our
own, or any worldly respect. Now godliness produces this love toward our
neighbor, 1 Because it teaches us to obey Gods Commandment, who has
commanded us to love our neighbor. 2 Because it teaches us to love the image
of God, and every gift of God in our neighbor. 3 Because it brings us to
imitate God himself in the communicating of good. Therefore godliness, which
is separated from charity, is not true godliness; and that charity which is
separated from godliness, is not true charity, but either hypocrisy, or some
humane civility.

Use 1. This may serve to exhort us, to show and adorn our godliness toward
God, by our love toward our neighbor.

2. To reprove those, that make show of much godliness toward God, when in
the mean time they take all occasions to wrong their neighbors, if so be they
might by any means advantage themselves thereby.

Doct. 11. This love should be extended unto all men, but chiefly to be used
toward the brethren.

For so they are distinctly set down, verse 7. Brotherly kindness and
charity: Both of these is proper and peculiar to Christians. For the Christian
alone loves all, even his enemies, and he alone also loves the brethren, that
is, the household of faith. We should love all, 1. As they are partakers of the
same natural good with us. 2. As they are capable also of the same spiritual
good. And we should love the faithful also, as they are partakers of the same
spiritual good with us.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to edify our selves in this charity, which
is the character of Christianity.

Verse 8. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.


The Analysis.
HEre the Apostle begins to confirm the exhortation, which he had before made,
to add virtue to faith, and knowledge, etc. And he confirms it by a twofold
argument; 1. The first is taken from the benefit which is joined to these
virtues, whereunto he exhort them. 2. The second from the disprofit, which
follows the privation or absence of them. The first is laid down, verse 8.
the second verse 9. The benefit proposed is contained in these words, they make
you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful: where by a negation is
meant the contrary affirmation, namely, that by these virtues they shall be
quick and active, and also fruitful; which benefits are explained by the
primary efficient cause, which is the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
the secondary cause, which are the virtues themselves whereunto he exhorts
them. And these virtues he explaines according to that way which he had
intimated before in the exhortation, touching the manner, and touching the
degree: touching the manner, that they be in you; touching the degree, that
they abound.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. There are spiritual benefits arising from virtues, whereby the
faithful are stirred up to labor for virtue.

This is gathered from the scope of this verse, and from the connection which it
has with the former exhortation. These benefits are such, that they cannot be
understood by carnal and worldly men; but the faithful do not only understand
them, but also seek for them with great and continual diligence. Otherwise
this argument which the Apostle uses to the faithful, would have been
altogether uneffectuall. But these benefits are such, that they make men rich,
not in this world, but in the Lord, 1 Timothy 6. 18. Luke 12. 21.

Use. This may serve to reprove those earthly men, which are not moved with
such arguments, but covet the gain, profits, and pleasures of this life, and
savor not those things that belong to the kingdom of God.

Doct. 2* It is a great benefit to the faithful, and so they esteem it, if
they can be ready to do good works.

This is gathered from that, they make you that ye shall not be barren, that
is, not idle or slothful in the profession of religion.

Reason 1. Because it is the greatest misery for men to be reprobate unto good
works.

2. Because by this readiness to do good, the faithful come to obtain their
desires.

3. Because by this means the life spiritual is exercised and increased. For
as all life is the beginning of operation, and tends unto operation, so also is
it increased by operations.

4. Because the glory of God, wherein consists the chiefest good, and man's
happiness, is by this means advanced.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those foolish and slothful Christians, that
neglect their own proper good, or rather do not understand what that is
wherein it consists.

2. To exhort us, by all means to make our selves ready to do good, and
therefore according to the mind of the Apostle in this place, to get all
virtue, that we may not be barren in the knowledge of Christ.

Doct. 3. Good works are fruits that the faithful should continually bring
forth.

This is gathered therehence, that fruitfulness is both required and promised
in this place. It is required therein, that the Apostle intimates, that this is
necessary for the faithful, to be fruitful. It is promised thereby, that it
is made as a benefit arising from virtues. Good works are called fruits by a
metaphor, for the likeness that they have unto the fruits of trees and plants.
Now in natural fruit many things are considered, which according to the
Scripture must be applied unto good works. 1. That it be something agreeable
to the nature of the seed from which it arises. 2. That it has noe only some
good in it, but also perfections; hence flowers and leaves are not wont to be
called fruits, although they come from the same seed that the fruits do, and be
the last two that comes forth, and has in it that perfection, that it is the
end both of the seed, and all other things that arise from the seed before the
fruit. 3. It is required also, especially in those that arise from good
husbandry, that there be something that is de^^red and expected and will be
acceptable to the husbandman and master, or owner. All these things in the
Scriptures are to be applied unto good works, 1. That they be agreeable to the
word of God, which is the seed, as it is in the Parables Matthew. 13. Mark 4. of
the good seed: and good works differ from ^ares, as grapes differ from
wildegrapes, Isay 5. 2. 2. That they have goodness in them. For bad works
neither are properly fruits according to Scripture, unless it be with an
addition, evil fruits. Nor do they bring any fruit to their (...) Romans 6 21.
They must also have perfection in their kind: for as the seeds which are said
in the parable to arise, perhaps unto the ear, yet because they did not come
to just perfection, are said to have brought forth no fruits: so also
Christians, which have only the flowers and leaves of profession, and not the
solid works of godliness, are accounted by God unfruitful and barren plants.
3. Our works also must answer the expectation of God, and that care which he
has taken in manuring our souls, Isay 5. 2. Luke 13. 6, 7. and 20. 10.
Although in all these things our good works and fruits are alike, yet one
thing may be observed, wherein they are unlike; namely, that whereas the profit
of natural fruits is wont to return to the husbandman and master, the profit
of these fruits redounds properly to those that bear them, Romans 6. ^2.
Although hence also something redounds unto God our master, John 15. 8.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that bring forth no fruit, Matthew 3.
10. John 15. 2. Luke 13. 7. Much more are they to be condemned, that are like
unto the cursed ground, and in steed of fruits bring forth thorns and briers,
Hebr. 6. 8. Deuteronomy. 32. 32.

2. To exhort us, by all means to labor to bring forth good fruits, and so
also that they may be answerable unto those means which God used toward us,
to make us fruitful, according to Gods expectation, and in that season wherein
God expects them, and in that measure also which he expects, of some thirty, of
some sixty, and of some an hundred fold.

Doct. 4. Without these fruits the knowledge of God is unprofitable.

For it is as it were choked with thorns, or withered away.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to be so much the more careful to bring
forth fruit, that we may not heap up this sin of barrenness unto the other,
by making the word of God void and of no effect.

Doct. 5. That we may be fruitful, virtues must not only be in us, but also
abound in us.

They are in us when we have gotten a habit of them; they abound, when we do
seriously and diligently endeavor to make that habit more perfect.

Verse 9. But he that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see far
off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.


The Analysis.
THis is the second argument whereby the exhortation of the Apostle is
confirmed; and it is taken from the disprofits that befall all those that are
strangers to these virtues. And these disprofits are contrary to those profits
whereof mention was made in the former verse. For the Apostle would say that
they which have not these virtues, are quite barren and unfruitful. But he
does not barely express this, but sets it forth by the causes thereof. And the
causes are two, blindness and forgetfulness. For he that is blind, must
needs be barren and unfruitful, and unfit to do those businesses especially,
which require the eye sight: and he that forgets the benefit which he has
received, it is no wonder, if he bring forth no fruit worthy of that benefit.
Their forgetfulness is set forth by the object or benefit which they should
remember, that is, their purification from their old sins. By blindness in
this place is meant, not the privation of their corporal sight, or of their
natural understanding, but of that spiritual perfection, whereby we come to
the saving knowledge of those things that pertain to the kingdom of God, and
our eternal life. By those things that are far off, are meant things truly
spiritual which as touching their nature and condition, are as far off from
carnal men as heaven is from earth.

The Doctrines arising here-hence.

Doct. 1. All that are destitute of virtue are spiritually blind.

They are blind in a twofold respect. 1. In respect of that natural
blindness, wherein all the sons of Adam are born, like that man that was
blind from his birth, John 9. 1 And secondly, in respect of another
adventitious blindness, which they have brought upon themselves by their
sins* through the just judgment of God blinding those that will not see,
like that sorcerer, Acts 13. 11. upon whom the hand of the Lord seems to have
been, to blind him. The former blindness goes before as the cause, viz. the
neglect of virtue; the other follows as the effect. And both of them appears
by those signs that corporal blindness does.

Reason 1. Because those men know not the special way wherein they should go.

2. They cannot see those stumbling blocks that lie in the way, but continually
stumble and fall.

3. They cannot so much as discern the colors of those things which they
handle, and therefore as it is, Isay 5. 20. They call evil good, and good
evil, etc. And one thing there is that adds to their misery more then is in
those that are corporally blind; namely, that they seek not fit guides to
lead them, as it is said of the sorcerer, that he did, Acts 13. 11. for either
they trust wholly to themselves, because they do not know that they are
blind, Apoc. 3. 17. or else they follow some blind guide, so that both fall
into the ditch.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to acknowledge our spiritual
blindness, and to labor to get out of it. For it is in every one of us either
in whole or in part. We should therefore think with our selves how great a
misery it is to continue in perpetual darkness and in a most thick mist.
Christ wept over Jerusalem for this their blindness.

2. To exhort us earnestly to pray unto God, who can open the eyes of our
mind. The blind man, Luke 18. 38. never ceased to cry out, saying, Jesus thou
Son of David have mercy on me, and when Christ asked him, what he would that
he should do unto him, he desired nothing else, but that he might receive his
sight, verse 41. So also in spiritual blindness although a great part of it
was cu^ed in David, yet we see that he constantly prays unto God, to open his
eyes, Psalm. 119. 18 So also the Apostle says, that he ceased not to pray for
the faithful, that the eyes of their understanding might be enlightened Ephesians.
^. 18 This is the counsel of the holy Ghost, and of Christ, (...). 3. 18.

3. To instruct us, ^ever to think that we have received sight, until we find
in our selves th^s study and labor to abound in virtue.

Doct. 2. The forgetting of Gods benefits is a great evil and sin and brings
misery along with it.

For it is here attributed unto those, that are strangers unto virtue, not only
as a sin, but also as a great disprofit, and is opposed to that fruitfulness
wherein the happiness of the faithful does consist. It is a sin, because it
contains ingratitude in it, and that not the least degree of ingratitude; for
though a man be mindful of the benefit which he has received, purposing to be
thankful for it, yet if he does not render thanks, he is said to be
ungrateful; yea, and though he does render thanks, if he does it coldly, and
does not endeavor to answer the merits of him that bestowed this benefit upon
him, and the dignity of the benefit, he is not yet free from this vice; but if
he does quite forget the benefit which he has received, then he is rightly
said to be as it were twice ungrateful.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to beware of this kind of ingratitude,
and not to think our selves ungrateful then only, when we do repay evil for
good, but also when we do any way forget the benefit which we have received.

Doct. 3. God accounts him forgetful of the benefits which he has received,
that is not effectually mindful of them, that is, that does not so remember
them, as to live answerably.

This is gathered therehence, that fruitfulness and forgetfulness are
opposed. For they are made immediately contraries, so that there is no medium
between them. Deuteronomy. 32. 18. The Israelites are said to have forgotten God for
that reason only, because they had forsaken the true worship of God, and his
due obedience, as it is explained, verse 15. So Psalm. 106. 13. where they are
said to have forgotten God and his works as, often as they murmured against
him, although there is no doubt but if they had been asked, they could have
easily related the whole history of those things that God has done for them in
Egypt. After the like manner are the words of Christ to be understood, when he
asked his Disciples, whether they had forgotten the miracle of the five loaves
and two fishes, intimating that it was a manifest token of their
forgetfulness, that they were at that time so troubled about bread.

Use. 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to rest satisfied with such a
memory as consists in bare contemplation, which God accounts forgetfulness.

2. To exhort us, by all means to study this art of memory:

Which that we may the better do, let us observe these Rules.

Rule 1. That we do not slightly pass over the thought of these things, but
look narrowly into the natures and circumstances of them. For the more plainly
we come to understand them, the more firmly do we retain them.

Rule 2. That having come to such a clear knowledge of them, we should also
call them to mind, so as to consider the efficacy of them; for the more they
work upon the affections, the stronger is the impression upon the memory:
thence is it, that children are wont to remember many things, which others
forget, because they use to admire all things as new and strange; and we also
do not easily forget those things which we admire, as being things wherewith
we are much taken, Psalm. 119. 16. I will delight my self in thy statutes,
there is the affection; and I will not forget thy word, there is the memory
flowing from the affection.

Rule 3. That we should always carry a memorial with us, whereby the memory
of these things may be kept, Numb. 16. 40. This is a memorial. Now our
memorial is the word of God chiefly, which in that respect we should daily
read and meditate upon.

Doct. 4. Our purification from sin is a benefit never to be forgotten.

Reason* 1. Because it is very great in it self and its own nature, seeing by
it we are freed from the guilt and dominion of sin, from the the curse of the
law, from the anger of God and eternal death.

2. Because it is of great force and efficacy to stir us up to labor to be
thankful, and to abound in virtue, as here it appears by the manner of
arguing, which the Apostle uses. For that cause also Paul, Romans 12. 1. and in
other places exhorts the faithful by the mercies of God.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that do either not think at all upon
the mercy of God, and redemption through Christ; or else turn it into an
occasion of sin.

2. To exhort us, daily to meditate upon this benefit, and not to satisfy our
selves, unless we are daily stirred up by this argument to the practice of
piety.

Doct. 5. All the sins from which we are purged in Christ, must be accounted
old, that is, out of use, forsaken, dead, never to be taken up again.

Verse 10. Wherefore, the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling
and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

Verse 11. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:


The Analysis.
IN these word is contained the conclusion of the Apostles exhortation, as it
is intimated in the first word, Wherefore. Now because the conclusion and the
question must always be the same, as touching the thing it self, although
they differ in some respects, there is no doubt but the Apostle here concludes
the same thing, which he had before, verse 5. propounded to himself to be
concluded, viz. That they should give all diligence to add to their faith
virtue, etc. And as repetitions in the Scripture are not wont to be vain, nor
bare, but for the most part with some usury or increase; so also in this place
he does not barely repeat the exhortation to labor for virtue, but he does
illustrate this endeavor and labor by the proper office thereof, that is, by
the confirmation of our calling and election; so that he does both repeat the
exhortation, and also add a new argument, and that a most weighty one, to
press it the more, after this manner: If by the exercise of good works ye
make your election and calling sure, then should ye most of all apply your
selves thereunto: but the former is true, Therefore. The assumption is laid
down in the text, and proved by a double argument. 1. By removing the contrary
or Apostasy, which is most opposite to the assurance of ou election and
calling; and is alike opposite also to the exercise of virtue and good works,
which is showed in these words: If ye do these things, ye shall never fall:
wherein is such a reason contained, if ye shall never fall, then ye will have
your calling sure. The second argument is taken from the felicity adjoined,
which is set forth by the proper cause thereof, that is, by the abundant
entrance into the everlasting kingdom of Christ. And this argument strengthens
both the conclusion and also the foregoing argument, after this manner: If ye
have abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of Christ, then ye shall
never fall, but hold your calling sure; But if ye labor to be virtuous and to
do good works, ye shall have abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom
of Christ: therefore if ye labor to be virtuous and to do good works, ye
shall never fall, but have your calling sure. But before we consider the
conclusion it self which the Apostle lays down, there comes the manner to be
observed, how he does propound it, that so it may work the deeper. Now the
manner is showed in that title which he gives unto the faithful, when he calls
them brethren, which is not only a title of good will, but of some special and
singular love, such as uses to be betwixt these men that are most nearly
joined together.

Obser. Here we may observe in general, That our exhortations must be seasoned
with love and good will; but more especially it affords us this Observation,
That there is not a more brotherly office, then to stir up and bring those
that we love, to labor and endeavor to lead a Christian life.

Reason 1. Because by this means they are delivered from the greatest evils,
James 5. 20.

2. Because they are made partakers of the greatest good, as it appears in the
text.

Use. 1. This may serve to admonish us, to take in good part such exhortations
and admonitions that are given us, whether they be in public or in private.

2. To exhort us, to season our exhortations and admonitions after this manner,
and so to be more frequent in these duties. For oftentimes he that neglects
these duties, shows that he does hate his brother and is his enemy; they being
proper to brethren, and the nearest and dearest friends, Levit. 19. 17.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. The assurance of our calling and election i^^thing greatly to be
desired.

This is gathered from the text: because Peter in this exhortation presupposes
some such desire in the faithful, and then stirs them up to a more fervent
and earnest desire of it.

Reason. Because our happiness and all spiritual good things are greatly to
be desired, and they depend upon this assurance of our calling and election.
For election is the free love of God, whereby he intends saving grace, or
supernatural blessings unto u^. Our calling is the manifestation of that love
by the application of this saving grace. The assurance of both consists, 1. in
Gods unchangeable purpose, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure.
2. In the effectual operation, which those blessings of God have in us, as in
that place of Timothy, that foundation has this seal, that whosoever calls on
the name of Christ, should depart from iniquity. 3. In assurance of faith,
confidence, and experimental knowledge, which we come to have both of G^ds
purpose toward us, and the effectual and saving operation thereof in our
hearts.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those that have no affection at all unto
these spiritual good things, but rest well pleased in the things of this
world. They are like unto the rebellious Israelites, who more desired the
Onions and Garlic of Egypt, then the Milk and Honey of the promised Land, or
the celestial Manna, Numb. 11. 5, 6. They are far worse then the Prodigal
Son, if they always rest satisfied with the Sw^nes husks, and never desire
the bread that is in their fathers house, Luke 15. 16. 17.

2. To exhort us, to labor for a spiritual hunger and thirst after these
spiritual good things: God himself shows us the best means, wh^, when he
would stir up the people of Israel to desire the promised land, forthwith
commended unto them the riches of the land* wherewith it did abound: so also
should we always set before our eyes those innumerable blessings, which depend
upon our calling and election.

Doct. 2. It belongs to our duty to make this our calling and election sure.

Give diligence. Not as they are in the purpose of God, but as they havean
effectual operation in us, whereby they are certainly manifested and sealed
unto us; and this is the reason why our calling is set before election: for
although election be eternal in God, and our calling be in time; yet we come
to know our calling before our election, and the knowledge of our election
depends upon the effectualnesse of our calling.

Reason 1. Because although God himself causes this, yet he does it partly by
moral persuasions and by those means wherein our endeavor is required.

2. Because there ar^ no effects of our calling and election, which are not
also our effects, because God makes us to do them.

3. Because that very thing which God does in this kind, we are in some sort
said to do, if we beg it of him by continual prayer.

4. Because Gods confirmation of it is such, that it requires also the like
confirmation of us. God confirms our calling and election by his promise, his
covenant, Sacraments, oath, and spiritual pledge: And these things do in like
manner require of us our promise, and vow, to cleave unto God, our covenant,
faith, and endeavor, and all those things whereby we may be confirmed in that
communion which we have with God.

Use 1. This may serve to comfort us, because the certainty and assurance of
our calling and election is not only possible for us to attain unto, but also
commanded us; so that nothing is more pleasing unto God, then that we should
labor to be more and more assured of these things: for this is the end both of
the promise and the precept.

2. To reprove those, that either altogether neglect this primary duty of the
faithful, or take such slight care of it, that they must n^eds always waver
in their minds touching those things whereof they should be most assured.
Dangerous is that doctrine of the Papists, that holds men's minds always in
suspense, both in life and death. For in life they accuse this firm confidence
of presumption, and in death they leave wretched men in doubt, how long they
shall be tormented in Purgatory.

3. To exhort us to this labor and diligence; and indeed this endeavor is
inseparable from a true and lively ^aith: for look how it is amongst men; if
one did believe that he had an inheritance left him by his Father, or any
other, he would never be at quiet, till he had gotten it assured unto him,
according to the laws and customs of the country wherein he lives, so is it
with the faithful also touching these spiritual good things.

Doct. 3. All those, and those alone, make their election sure, that make their
calling sure.

These two God has joined together, as the Apostle does in this place, so that
no man ought or may dis-joyne them. Hence election and calling are taken
sometimes in the Scriptures for one and the same, as 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. that
which is called c^lling, verse 26. is called election, verse 27. There is
indeed an outward and ineffectuall calling, which is many times separated from
election, as when it is said, Many are called, but few are chosen. But
effectual and saving calling has always a sure connection with election,
(...) Romans 8. 3^. and 11. 28. 29.

Reason. Because this calling is nothing else but the operation of God, whereby
in time he begins to ^^^cute that purpose of election, which he had decreed
from ^v^^lasting.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove (...) that are wont to boast of their
election and predestination, (...) in the mean time they never look after
their calling (...)* to demonstrate it either to themselves or others (...),
whatsoever men say of their election, if they (...) assured of their calling.

2. To comfort all the faithful that are penitent, con^e^^ed, and called,
because all those may and ought to be sure of th^^^ election.

Doct. 4. An endeavor to abound in virtue, and to do good works is the only
means to make our calling and election sure.

This is gathered from these words, If ye do these things*

Reason 1. Because these are the proper effects of calling and election.

2. They are the causes of that knowledge which we have of our calling and
election. For the knowledge and assurance of these things depends upon the
reflex act of our understanding, whereby we see in our selves the marks and
signs of effectual calling, and consequently of eternal election. Hence this
assurance increases and decreaseth in us, according as our endeavor to abound
in virtues, and to do good works is greater or lesser.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those, that teach that the assurance of
election crosset^ the practice of piety, whereas there is as great an agreement
betwixt these, as is betwixt the effect and the cause, which absolutely agree.

2. To condemn those, that from this doctrine of the assurance of election,
take occasion to cast off all care of piety: these are they that the Apostle
speaks of, c. 3* v. 16. who being unlearned and unstable, wrest the Scriptures
unto their own destruction. Although the election of God be sure in it self,
yet no man is sure of it without the practice of piety. Then again the
certainty of election that is in God, makes this certain, that no man shall
ever be saved by virtue of election, unless there be in him the practice of
piety: such words or thoughts are certain tokens of a profane soul, which
neither cares for election nor salvation, nor has any fear of God. For
whereas it is alike certain with God, how long every one of us shall live in
this world, yet there is non^ ^^^t cares not for his life, or uses not the
means to live, unless he be quite mad: so from the certainty of election none
concludes after such a manner, unless he be altogether profane.

3. To exhort us, to stir up our selves more and more to do these things,
whereby we shall receive so great fruit and benefit.

Doct. 5. By laboring to do these things we are fore-armed against the dangers
of all temptations.

If ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

Reason 1. Because we are never led into temptation without our own fault, and
consequently without the neglect of this duty.

2. We are never led into temptation, unless we have first tempted God, by
forsaking those means, whereby we might be upheld and preserved.

3. God can and will defend those that fly unto him, and that seek him in his
ways. Hither tend those frequent promises, such as are Psalm. 15. the last
words, and Psalm. 16. 8.

Doct. 6. The more we are freed from the falls of sin, the more are we assured
of our calling and election.

This is gathered from the opposition, which is made betwixt the assurance of
our calling and our falls.

Reason. The reason is taken from the contrariety; for like as the more the
darkness is dispelled, the more the light increases, and on the contrary; so
is it in these things.

Doct. 7. Look what progress we makein grace and virtue, so much progress do
we make in glory and happiness.

This is gathered from the connection of the eleventh verse with the former, the
force whereof consists in this, that by adding virtue unto faith, and knowledge
unto virtue, we shall add also something unto that participation, which we
have in the kingdom of God: where it is to be observed that the same word is
used in this eleventh verse, where he speaks of glory, that was used, verse 5.
where he spoke of virtue; there it was (...), here (...).

Reason. The reason is, because as in evil the sin is never separated from
the punishment, but in the sin it self there is the spot or blemish, which
is like unto misery; so also in good the obedience and virtue is never
separated from the reward. For it has always joined with it that consolation
which pertaines to the reward of happiness.

Use. 1. This may serve to comfort us against the afflictions of this life; for
although the faithful receive no reward from this world, by reason of the
iniquity of men, but hatred, disgrace, contempt, and persecutions: yet they may
rest well contented in this, that they shall not only receive an ample reward
in the life to come, but also they shall receive it in some sort in this life
present* Matthew. 5. 10. 12. and 19. 29.

2. To exhort us to labor to increase in piety, for as much as this labor is
not in vain, but has its reward even in this present world, 1 Cor. 15 last.

Doct 8. This happiness consists in being made partakers of the everlasting
kingdom of God.

By the kingdom of God is meant properly that condition into which the
faithful are translated by their effectual calling: now seeing there are no
degrees of this condition, this kingdom is distinguished into the kingdom of
grace, and the kingdom of glory. Into the kingdom of grace, because the
preaching and ministry of the Gospel is the efficient cause thereof,
therefore the Gospel it self is called in Scripture the kingdom of God, and
because the Church is the proper subject of this state and condition, therefore
the Church is also called the kingdom of God; and because spiritual grace
has the chief part in this condition, therefore that also is called the
kingdom of God, Romans 14 17. but most properly the condition it self is the
kingdom of God. And it is compared to a kingdom rather then to a Democracy or
Aristocracy, or any other society.

Reason 1. Because of the dignity and splendor which it has.

2. Because the rule or government is in the power of one. For although it is
called sometimes the kingdom of God, sometimes the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as in this place; yet they are not made two Kings as touching the
essence, but thereby it is showed that he has a singular charge in this
kingdom.

3. Because the laws and edicts of this society are altogether Kingly and
Monarchical; the seals also, and all things that pertain to this government,
bear the effigies as it were, or image of one King.

Use 1. This may serve to comfort the faithful, who should think with them
selves, and often call to mind, unto what a great happiness they are called.
For that which David said heretofore, 1 Samuel 18. 23. Seems it to you a light
thing to be a kings son in law? that may all the faithful say of themselves
in respect of this kingdom, that it is not a light thing to be made Citizens
of this kingdom, and especially seeing we are poor and vile creatures, the
greater will our comfort be, when we consider the glory and eternity of this
kingdom. The glory is such that the kingdoms of David and Solomon, even in
the greatest glory that ever they had, were but imperfect representations and
shadows as it were of this kingdom. For they were but types of it. So great
is the glory of this kingdom, that all the Citizens and Subjects thereof are
in some sort Kings, Apoc. 1. 6. The eternity is such, that neither in whole nor
in part is it liable unto an end, or any essential change. Compare all the
kingdoms of the Persians, Medes, and Grecians, all which are abolished; this
kingdom of God alone continues for ever.

2. To reprove those, that profess themselves Christians, and yet live so as
if they were under no laws, and did acknowledge no King. For as this is
reckoned as the cause that the Israelites did run into all kind of
wickedness, because there was no king in Israel, but every one did that which
was right in his own eyes, Judges 17. 6. and 18. 1. So also do these men as it
were proclaim, that they neither acknowledge Christ nor God for their King,
while they do that which seems right in their own eyes, not caring whether it
do please God, or displease him. Such men must expect that sentence of Christ,
which is laid down, Luke 19. 27. Those mine enemies which would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me.

3. To exhort all to seek this kingdom of God above all other things,
according as Christ bids us; first seek the kingdom of God. And not only the
happiness of those that are admitted to be partakers of this kingdom, but
also the mise^y of all those that are excluded from it, should be an argument
to persuade hereunto: for there are two spiritual kingdoms, and every man
must needs be a subject of one of them: the kingdom of light and the kingdom
of darkness; the kingdom of righteousness and grace, and the kingdom of
sin; the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of the Devil, who is called the
Prince of this world. All those that are excluded out of the kingdom of God,
of grace and salvation, are necessarily included in the kingdom of the Devil,
sin and darkness; and deservedly does this befall all unbeleevers and
impenitent men, according to that commination, Deuteronomy. 28. 45.

Doct. 9. The faithful must seek not only to have an entrance into the
kingdom of God, but also an entrance in a plentiful and abundant manner.

Men may be considered to be in a fourefold condition in respect of the
kingdom of God. For some are very far off from it: namely, such as the
Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 2. 12. That are without Christ, and without God,
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants of
promise: such are all those that either understand nothing at all of those
things which pertain unto this kingdom, or else nothing care for them, having
their consciences feared as it were with a hot iron, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4. 2. Others there are which come near unto the kingdom of God, although
they are not partakers of it, such as that Scribe was of whom Christ says,
Mark 12. 34. that he was not far from the kingdom of God; and King Agrippa,
Acts 26. 28. Others there are that enter into the kingdom of God by faith and
repentance, John 3. 3. He that is borne again sees the kingdom of God, that
is, he enters into it, as it is, verse 5. But then again others there are,
(with whom also in that respect God is very well pleased,) that do not only
enter into it, but enter in a plentiful and abundant manner, as in this place.
The difference betwixt these two last sorts is such, as is betwixt those that
make entrance only into the borders of a country, and those that go even into
the most inward parts of it: or as is betwixt those that make entrance only
into a discipline, and those that have thoroughly learned, and do exercise the
very mysteries thereof. This Doctrine is confirmed, Colos. 3. 15* 16. And to
that purpose is that in Col^s. 1. 9.

Reason 1. Because these spiritual things are such, that they can never exceed
measure: there is nothing in them too much.

2. They are of such a nature, that they do whet and stir up the desire, so
that whosoever has tasted the sweetness of them, does still desire to be more
and more filled with them, until he shall come to the highest perfection, as
we may see in their examples, who in this respect are most commended in
Scripture.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove and condemn those, to whom the bare
profession of piety seems to be enough and too much, that fear lest they
should be too godly, that is, lest they should be too happy: this is a certain
token of a carnal mind.

2. To exhort us, 1. To give God thanks, that he has not only admitted us into
the suburbs, as it were, and gates of this kingdom, but has also revealed
unto us those things which are more inward and secret. 2. To be diligent and
careful, that we do not neglect or despise so great grace, but day by day
earnestly to strive to make a greater progress in this kingdom, which we
shall do, if we be more diligent and religious in those exercises, whereby this
kingdom is advanced.

Verse 12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance
of these things, though ye know them, and be stablished in the present truth.

Verse 13. Yea, I think it meet as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir
you up, by putting you in remembrance:

Verse 14. Knowing that shortly, I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our
Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.

Verse 15. Moreover, I will endeavor, that you may be able after my decease,
to have these things always in rem^mbrance.


The Analysis.
IN the former words the Apostle had given a reason of his exhortation, why all
the faithful should embrace it: and in these words he gives a reason of the
same, why he should use it unto them; which reason he delivers by way of
anticipation, whereby he meets with a close objection by a kind of modest
excuse, or by removing the cause which they might suspect, why he should put
them in remembrance of these things, namely, because he did think they were
ignorant and unstable. Now he shows that this was not the cause, in these
words, though ye know them, and be stablished in the present truth. And then he
brings diverse true causes that moved him to make this exhortation unto them. 1.
The great profit that would redound unto them by the performance of these
duties whereunto he exhorts them. This reason is intimated in that causall
particle, whereby he joins these words with the former, wherefore, that is,
for those benefits sake which you shall receive by this means, I thought it my
part to put you in remembrance of these things after this manner. 2. The second
reason, which depends upon the former, is the desire and care that he had to
further their good; this is intimated in these words, I will not be negligent.
3. The third reason is taken from the duty of the Apostle, because justice and
equity required this of him, in these words, I think it meet. 4. The fourth
reason is taken from the opportunity of time, which he had now, and was not
long to continue; that he had it now, he shows in these words, as long as I am
in this tabernacle; that it was not long to continue, in these words, Knowing
that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, which he confirms by the
testimony of Jesus Christ. 5. The fifth reason is taken from the fruit which
this exhortation might bring forth; which is set forth by the adjunct of time,
that it would be profitable unto them, not only while Peter lived, but also
after his death, after my decease to have these things always in remembrance,
verse 15.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. In our exhortations and admonitions, we must not only look unto it,
that that which we say be just and right, but also that we speak it with a
right mind and good intention, and that it may so appear also unto those with
whom we have to do.

This is gathered from the scope of this text.

Reason 1. The first reason is taken from our duty; for that which is good in
it self, becomes evil unto us, and our duty is turned into sin, unless
quod bonum est been agamus, we do that which is good after a good and right
manner: as if a man out of anger, hatred, envy, or a desire to disgrace him,
or pride, should tell his neighbor of any vice, or stir him up to do his
duty.

2. From the profit of our neighbor, or the benefit of our admonition and
exhortation. For it depends oftentimes upon the mind or manner of doing it,
which is chiefly looked unto in such like duties; so that they do either make
way for our neighbors receiving it, or cast an obstacle in the way to hinder
him from receiving it.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, that never exhort others but for revenge
sake, when there is some contention and strife betwixt them; and then they
please themselves most in reprooving other men's vices, when they should not,
and when they should, they are altogether silent.

Doct. 2. We must put our neighbors in remembrance of those things which make
most for their good.

This is gathered from that particle, Wherefore.

Reason. Because admonition and exhortation are according to their nature,
works of charity, and tend unto the good of our neighbor: therefore we should
use it most unto those from whom we may expect most good.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, who, if their neighbors do any thing
unseemely or uncivilly, or to the loss of their honor, or some outward
profit, do presently take notice of it in them; but never look after those
things that do most pertain to the kingdom of God: those things indeed
should not be neglected, but these things should chiefly be looked after.

2. To exhort us, in those things which pertain to the kingdom of God, and
the salvation of souls, to have an especial care of our duty toward our
neighbor. Hitherto belongs that which Peter says, that he would not be
negligent, that is, that he would never lay aside the care of these things:
which although it did in a special manner pertain to the duty of Peter, an
Apostle, and other Ministers of the word, yet it is proportionably to be
extended to the common duty of all Christians, because the reasons which
strengthen it, are for the most part common.

Doct. 3. In justice and equity we are bound to put one another in remembrance.

This is gathered from these words, I think it meet: for although it does not
pertain unto that particular justice, which consists in the equality of the
thing received and repayed, yet it is called justice, because it has as strong
an obligation, as any thing that is due by justice, Romans 1. 14.

Use. This may serve to reprove those that account it a sin to be negligent
in paying debts, but make no account of the neglect of this duty.

Doct. 4. They that are learned and also stablished in the truth, do yet stand
in need of admonitions and exhortations.

This is gathered from these words, though ye know them and be stablished in
the present truth.

Reason 1. Because they are not so learned and stablished, but that they may be
yet farther instructed and stablished.

2. Because if they had all knowledge and also faith, yet their will and
affections must be by these means stirred up unto their duty. For our will is
like unto a slow and dull servant, to whom it is not enough once to hear the
commands of his master, but they must be often told him. Then again, if they
had not only all knowledge and says, but also a most ready will and
affections, yet because they are continually assaulted by temptations, they
have need on the other side of continual remembrances and puttings in mind, to
strengthen them. The speech of the Captain and the sound of the Trumpet, and
such like excitements, do put some courage even into the most valiant soldiers.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove the pride of those men, that put such
confidence in themselves in their own knowledge and faith, that they do utterly
contemn such kind of helps.

2. To exhort all to be constant and diligent in the hearing of Sermons. For if
there be any that abound in knowledge, and perhaps exceed the Preacher
himself, so that they cannot be taught any more by him, yet they may be
stirred up by admonitions and exhortations, and in that respect they should
always be present there; but much more should they, that are not yet learned
and stablished in the truth.

3. To direct, as well the Preachers as the hearers, not only to teach the
truth, but also to bring a word of exhortation always, that is, to apply it to
the use of the truth which they deliver, and then the hearers, to come unto
Sermons, not as being greedy of novelty or speculation, but being prepared
before hand and ready to receive exhortations and admonitions, and to turn
them into practice.

Doct. 5. We must take hold of the opportunity of time, which we have,
diligently to exercise such Christian duties.

This is gathered from these words, As long as I am in this tabernacle. So Gal.
6. 10. John 9. 4. and 12. 35.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to defer or put off the time of our
repentance and obedience, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Psalm. 95. 7, 8.

Doct. 6. The nearer we come to the end of our life, the more diligent should
we be in Christian duties.

This is gathered from the words following, Knowing that shortly I must put off
this my tabernacle.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, always to be diligent, for as much as we
are never far from putting off this our tabernacle; for although we are not
expressly told, as Peter was, how soon this shall be, yet we are told that it
shall not be long; and it may happen sooner unto us, then it did unto Peter,
who wrote this Epistle.

Doct. 7. We should labor in our life, that some fruit of our life may remain
in the Church after our death.

This is gathered from verse 15. We cannot all profit the Church by our
writings, as Peter did, but yet through Gods grace we may either by some other
works, or at least by our good example leave some sweet smelling favor
behind us, that may be pleasing and accepta^^e unto those that remain.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that live so corruptly and wickedly,
that even after their death they are a scandal and offense unto those that
knew them.

2. To exhort us, (and to comfort our selves in it,) to carry and behave our
selves piously and holily while we live, because Gods glory is thereby
advanced, not only while we live, but also after our decease.

Verse 16. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his Majesty.

Verse 17. For he received from God the Father, honor, and glory, when there
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.

Verse 18. And this voice which came from heaven, we heard, when we were with
him in the holy mount.


The Analysis.
IN these verses is contained the reason and cause of those things, which he
had spoken of before, as it is manifest by the causall particle For. Now he had
said before, 1. That all the faithful must add virtue unto faith. 2. That he
had a just reason why he should so seriously stir them up unto this duty; and
in these words he shows the reason and cause of both, which is taken from the
certainty that is in the things themselves, and the assurance that all the
faithful may have of those things that were proposed unto them to believe. The
certainty is set forth first by something unlike it, that is, by cunningly
devised fables. Secondly, by the testimonies of the Apostles, who were both
eyewitnesses, and care-witnesses of these things. Eyewitnesses, in these
words, we were eyewitnesses of his Majesty. Eare-witnesses in these words, and
this voice we have heard. The sight and hearing of the Apostles, wherein lies
the foundation of the testimony, are set forth first by their objects: The
object of their sight was the majesty of Christ, the object of their hearing
was a voice which came from Heaven concerning Christ. Secondly by the cause,
which was God the Father, communicating glory unto Christ both by word and
deed, Verse 17. Thirdly, by the circumstances of time and place, When we were
with him, etc.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. Cunningly devised fables are sometimes proposed in the Church in
steed of the truth of God.

For this is the reason why the Apostle cleares himself from all suspicion of
such like fables, because there were many at that time, and many would come
afterward, that would deceive the Church with such like fables, 1 Cor. 2. 1.
Where Paul says that he came not with excellency of speech, thereby closely
rebuking some false Apostles and Preachers, who did affect nothing else but a
show of eloquence. So in this place Peter makes mention of fables, by reason of
such impostors, 1 Timothy 1. 4. and ^. 4. Tit. 1. 14. Such were the fables in the
Church of Rome* that are contained in their golden Legends of S. Francis,
Dominick, and innumerable Saints and Virgins, with the miracles that were done
by them. For such like fables were wont to be heretofore, and yet to this day
also in many places are proposed unto the people in stead of the word of God.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to receive all things that are
proposed, without trial and examination: for so we may embrace fables in steed
of the Gospel.

2. To exhort us, to give God thanks, that we live in those Churches, out of
which all such old wives fables are wholly removed, and wherein nothing is
proposed but the sincere word of God.

Doct. 2. All those professors of the faith that do not add virtue unto faith;
and all those Preachers that do not with zeal and constancy stir up the
faithful to labor for virtue, do greatly dishonor the Gospel, as if it were
of the same nature with cunningly devised fables.

This is gathered from the connection of these words with the words foregoing,
which were explained in the Analysis. For this is the force of the Apostles
reason; If I did account the truth of the Gospel like unto a cunningly devised
fable, I could not so earnestly, and with such constancy stir you up to embrace
and adorn it; nor could ye receive those things that we have spoken of,
without an endeavor to abound in virtue, if ye did not account them like unto
cunningly devised fables.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish, 1. All Preachers to beware of
carelessenesse and negligence in stirring up the people unto piety. And 2, All
the faithful also to beware of lukewarm and unfruitful profession of the
faith. For neither of them can be without an implicit and vertuall blasphemy,
And they that so carry themselves, although they do not in words* yet they do
in their deeds confess, and make it to appear, that they make no more account
of the Gospel, then of an old wives fable.

2. To exhort us, to give all diligence to sanctify, as it were, the Gospel of
Christ which we profess, and to show it in our lives, that we think far
otherwise of the nature of it, then the profane multitude does.

Doct. 3. The sum of the Gospel consists in declaring the power and coming
of Christ.

This is gathered from these words, We made known unto you the power and
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. For his power has respect unto his divine
nature, together with the effects thereof, Romans 1. 4. And his coming has
respect unto his humane nature, together with the end and benefit of his
incarnation. Now if these two be joined together, namely, that Christ came to
save us, and that he came with power, so that he had all sufficiency and
efficacy at his coming, nothing more can be desired to comfort the faithful.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish, 1 Preachers, to make the power and coming
of Christ the center as it were of all their Sermons. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Determined to know nothing save Jesus Christ and him crucified, and then also,
2. the hearers, to have a special eye unto that in the hearing of Sermons, how
they may profit in the understanding of this mystery.

2. To exhort us, to fetch all the obedience which we perform unto God, from
him as from the fountain. For whatsoever duties flow not from the power and
coming of Christ, are not Evangelicall, but are infected with hypocrisy, or
consist in civility.

Doct. 4. The certainty of this Gospel, even as it may be had after the manner
of men, is as great as any we can have of any things that are done and past.

This is gathered from these words; We have seen, we have heard. For it is
confirmed by the testimony of those, that sensibly perceived it; who by the
confession of all were men at least worthy to be believed, having no reason to
witness any otherwise then the thing it self was; in regard that they could
not expect to receive any profit thereby from men; and being such as confirmed
it unto us, not by the bare testimony of their words, but also with their life
and blood: so that even after the manner of men we may be as certain of the
Gospel as we are, that there was sometimes a Monarchy of the Assyrians,
Grecians, Romans: that there were Captains, and Knights, of such and such a
country, or the like.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove and condemn the perverseness of men, who
easily believe all other things, though there be but weak arguments to confirm
it; but they can scarce be brought to receive the Gospel of salvation.

2. To exhort us to strengthen our faith with such like reasons, even to the
full assurance thereof, 1 John 1. 3, 4. For although we our selves have not
seen these things, yet we must as strongly and firmly believe them, as if we
our selves had seen them with our eyes, John 20. 29. This pertaines unto the
thankfulness which we owe unto God, that he would not barely declare unto us
his will, but also confirm it by testimonies, Luke 1. 2. For this was one of
the special offices of the Apostles, to witness those things which they had
seen of Christ, Acts 1. 22. and 2 32.

Doct. 5. A great Majesty was sensibly perceived by the Apostles.

This is gathered from these words, We have seen his Majesty. So great was
this Majesty, that the Disciples could not bear it, Matthew. 17. 6. It
astonished and amazed Peter, Mark 9. 6.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, to conceive by this proof, how great
the glory and Majesty of Christ is now in Heaven, how great it shall be at the
last day, and how great we also shall be made in the life to come.

2. To exhort us, to have Christ in high estimation: We have no cause to be
ashamed of so great a Majesty; according to that of our Savior; If any one be
ashamed of me in this adulterous generation, him will I be ashamed of before
God and his Angels.

Doct. 6. This majesty was expressed in those words of God, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased.

In these words is contained both the power and coming of Christ, whereof the
Apostles witnessed, and wherein is contained the sum of the Gospel, as we
said before. This is gathered from the connection of the words, which these have
with the former, We made known, etc. For in the title of Son is declared the
honor and glory of Christ, where he is called this my Son: in the title of
beloved is showed the coming of Christ, and the end thereof, namely, to
reconcile us unto God, and make us beloved of him: whence he is called, My
beloved in whom I am well pleased. By the title of Son is chiefly signified
the kingdom of Christ, by the title of beloved in whom I am well pleased, is
signified the Priesthood of Christ; and by the third thing which is added, Mat.
17. 5. is signified his Prophetical office: hear ye him. And that which is
there expressed, is here understood; so that there is nothing in Christ and the
Gospel which may not fitly be reduced to these few words.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, for the building up of our faith, to
have always in our minds that divine voice; for therefore came it twice from
Heaven, once in the Baptism of Christ, and once in this transfiguration which
Peter has reference unto in this place: All the word of God indeed comes from
him, but there are some parts of it which come from him unto men in a more
special manner, that is, immediately. Such was the Decalogue in the Old
Testament: such was the voice, John 12. 28. and such was this voice that was
twice repeated: Now as we should magnify every word of God, so in a special
manner should we observe and take notice of such words as these.

2. To admonish us, to depend upon Christ alone, and to have recourse unto him
only, in those things which pertain unto our salvation. 1. Because such a
testimony was never given of any one besides Christ. 2. In this testimony,
power, honor, and glory is so given unto Christ, that it is denied unto all
others: for the demonstrative particle that, as it is in the original, (...),
has an exclusive virtue, as touching all others, excluding all others from
being partakers of it.

Doct. 7. This voice of God did effectually bring honor and glory unto Christ.

This is gathered from these words, He received from God the Father honor and
glory, when there came such a voice unto him.

Reason 1. Because the testimony of God is infallibly true.

^ 2. There is joined with it omnipotent power, when it is said to come from
the excellent glory.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, by faith to rely upon every testimony
of God. For that which God promises or any way witnesses, is as sure as that
which we have already received or do see brought to pass. We may oftentimes
doubt of men's words, because they have neither perfect truth, nor perfect
power: but the excellent glory of God, whereof mention is here made, requires
far otherwise of us.

2. To exhort us, for the confirmation of our faith, to have always in our
eyes the excellent glory of God, whereby he can and also will do whatsoever he
has said.

Doct. 8. Those things which pertain unto the kingdom of Christ, are so holy,
that they make the place it self, wherein they are declared, in some sort holy.

This is gathered from these words: in the holy Mount. For this Mount was not
holy, but by this transfiguration, and this voice that came from heaven, Exodus
3. 5. John 6. 3.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove the stupidity of those, that are nothing
taken with such things as these that are so holy.

2. To exhort us, reverently and religiously to prepare our selves, and apply
our minds unto holy exercises, Eccles. 5. 1.

Verse 19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts.

Verse 20. Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any
private interpretation:

Verse 21. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.


The Analysis.
PEter had before proved the certainty of the Gospel by the testimony of the
Apostles, who were eyewitnesses and eare-witnesses of it; now he proves the
same certainty by the testimony of the word of prophecy; which he sets forth,
1. By the adjunct of stability, and that in comparison to the testimony of the
Apostles, in respect whereof this word of prophecy is said to be more sure. 2.
By the duty adjoined which is due unto this word of prophecy, namely, a
religious heed and attention which should be given unto this word. Which
attention is declared, 1. By the end and use of this word of prophecy, which
is by way of comparison set forth by the use of a light, 2. by the helping
cause, 3. By the esteem which we should have of the Prophecy of Scripture,
verse 20, 21. namely, that it is by the instinct of the Holy Ghost* which is
set forth by those Prophesies that are contrary thereunto, namely, such, as are
of private interpretation, or by the will of man. By prophecy is meant, not
the foretelling of those things, that depend upon any natural causes, (for so
the Astrologers and Physicians can foretell many things, being skillful in the
natural causes,) nor of those things that depend upon the will of any creature
(for so those that know other men's counsel, may foretell many things, probably
at least) but prophecy is a foretelling of those things, that depend only
upon the will of God, and can be known by God alone, and those to whom he has
revealed it. By the word of Prophecy is meant the Prophecy of holy Scripture,
as it is expressly set down, verse 20. which is distinguished in this respect
not only from false prophesies, but also from other true ones, which were never
in the Canon of the Scripture.

The Doctrines rising herehence.

Doct. 1. The word of Prophecy is a more sure testimony then the testimony of
any men, or of those things that our senses themselves can give us.

This is gathered from the comparison which is here made betwixt this testimony
and that which went before. But it is said to be more sure, not more true:
because that which the Apostles witnessed, was as true; but their testimony did
not carry with it so great a confirmation of the truth.

Reason 1. Because it appeared not so much to be a divine testimony, being not
as yet expressed in the Scriptures.

2. Because it could not prevail so much upon the minds of the Jews, as the
word of prophecy, which had now for many ages bin as it were habitually
confirmed in their minds.

3. Because the testimony of one that foresaw the truth, has more divine
operation in it, then the testimony of him that witnesses what he has seen or
heard being present, Ioh. 5. 36, 39. There are three degrees of testimonies, 1
Of John. 2. Of the works of Christ. 3. Of the Scripture or word of prophecy.
The testimony of works is said to be greater then the testimony of John, and
the testimony of the Scripture by way of gradation is intimated to be greater
then both.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, in all those things that pertain unto
faith and our salvation to depend only upon the Scriptures, because nothing can
be more sure.

2. To exhort us, to give God thanks, that he has not only made known unto
us his truth, but has also confirmed it by strong and sure reasons, and in all
respects has had regard to and provided for the weakness of our faith.

3. To reprove many Christians, which do too much stagger and doubt of these
truths. For there appears such a wavering and doubting of the mind, where the
life is doubtful and uncertain, and is not surely grounded and ordered
according to the rules of Christ. Now we should be as sure of these matters of
faith by the Scriptures, as we are of those things that we our selves see now
present before our eyes; and go on as firmly and constantly in the way of
Christ, as if we did now with our eyes see Christ himself, and all those things
that he has promised us; or as if we did now hear that voice, Arise ye dead
and come to judgment.

Doct. 2. The prophecy of the Old Testament gives a most sure testimony of the
power and coming of Christ.

This is gathered from the reference which this 19 verse has to verse 16. So
Luke 1. 20. Acts 3. 18, 24. and 10. 43.

Reason. 1. The greatness of this mystery, which was such, that it must not be
showed on a sudden to the world, but, for dignity sake, as it were, by such
like messengers going before.

2. That it might the more appear that these things come from God, who was the
only author of such like prophesies.

3. Because the salvation of the people of God from the beginning of the world
depended upon the believing of this mystery.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, to confirm our faith more and more by
such like arguments.

2. To exhort us, highly to esteem of this mystery, because God himself
always made such reckoning of it, that he would have his Prophets from the
beginning of the world to be exercised in the declaration of it.

3. To admonish us, that it should never seem tedious unto us, to hear and
meditate upon those things, which pertain unto this mystery, seeing God would
have this always pressed by all his Prophets.

Doct. 3. It is most praiseworthy in Christians always to give diligent heed
unto the Prophesies and the rest of the Scripture.

This is gathered from these words: Ye do well that ye take heed. By taking
heed is meant, 1. A search and inquiry after the sense of the Scriptures, or
the truths that are contained in them. 2. An applying of those truths unto the
ends and uses whereunto they serve. 3. A religious affection of the mind,
whereby the conscience is subdued unto those truths as unto the rules of faith
and manners: now they do well, that do thus give heed unto the Scriptures.

Reason 1. Because this obedience pleases God.

2. Because they provide well for themselves, to be directed unto eternal
happiness.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Papists, and some other foolish men, who
deny that they do well, which give heed unto the Scriptures.

2. To reprove all profane and worldly men, who take great care about their
worldly profits, or their carnal pleasures, but give little or no heed at all
unto the Scriptures.

3. To exhort us, to stir up in our selves daily this care of attention.

Doct. 4. The Scripture is a light shining unto those that religiously give
heed unto it.

This is gathered from these words; Take heed as unto a light that shines. Now
it is called a light,

Reason 1. Because it is clear and manifest in it self.

2. Because it makes all other things clear and manifest.

3. Because it enlightens also the eyes of our mind, so that we are able to
behold the heavenly mysteries of the kingdom of God.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Papists, who tax the Scriptures of
obscurity.

2. To reprove and condemn those, that walk in the midst of this light, and
yet perceive no more of the things of God, then as if they were in darkness.

3. To exhort us, 1. To give God thanks for so great a benefit. For God now
deals with us, as he did heretofore with the Israelites, in whose dwellings
there was light, when in all the land of the Egyptians there was thick
darkness, Exodus 10. 22. 23. 2. To walk in this light, not to sleep or have
fellowship with the works of darkness, as it is Ephesians 5. 8. 11. 14.

Doct. 5. The whole condition of this our life has much darkness in it.

This is gathered from these words; A light shining in a dark place. We may
see the explication of these words in Calvin.

Reason. Because without the light of the Scriptures and faith we are nothing
but darkness; seeing therefore this light is communicated unto us but
imperfectly in this life, there must needs be as yet much darkness.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to puff up our selves with the
opinion of knowledge, but humbly to acknowledge our imperfections.

2. To exhort us, so much the more diligently to give heed unto the light.

Doct. 6. We must give heed unto the Scriptures, until a greater light be
communicated unto us, then we can have out of the Scriptures, that is, until
the last end of this life.

This is gathered from these words, until the day down. Although they were
very strongly confirmed, verse 12. Yet they must still give heed unto the
Scriptures. Daniel himself, though a Prophet, gave heed unto the Prophesies of
Jeremy, Daniel, 9. 2. Peter himself gave heed unto the Epistles of Paul, c. 3.
v. 15. Paul himself had great care of the Parchments, that is, of the volumes
and books of Scripture, 2 Timothy* 4. 13.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Anabaptists, who say that the Scriptures
are only profitable for novices and young beginners, and not for the stronger.

2. To reprove those, that rest in that knowledge of the Scriptures, which they
have, and seek no farther.

Doct. 7. Very great knowledge, light and cleerenesse shall be communicated
unto us in the life to come.

This is gathered from the comparison that is made betwixt the life present and
the life to come: In the present we have a light as it were in a dark place,
but in that to come we shall have full noone as it were, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

Use. This may serve to exhort us earnestly to desire to come unto that
perfection, and in the mean time to exercise our selves in those things that
lead thereunto.

Doct. 8. The light of the Scripture profits none but the faithful.

This is gathered from these words: Knowing this first, that is, believing,
Hebr. 4. 2. No great or noble effect is produced, unless the matter, or the
object wherein it should be produced, be prepared before: the seed it self
that is cast into the ground, does not grow, unless the ground be plowed and
harrowed. Besides, whereas the Scripture is a testimony, and the strength of
the testimony depends upon the authority of him that witnesses, the Scripture
can be of no force, if the authority of God be not acknowledged in it.

Use. This may serve to direct us, when we come to the reading or hearing of
the Scriptures, always to lift up our minds unto God, and stir up true
faith in our hearts.

Doct. 9. The first thing to be believed is, that the Scriptures are not of any
inhumane interpretation, but of divine revelation.

This is gathered from these words: Knowing this first, etc.

The Papists and some others gather from this place, that the interpretation of
Scripture does not belong unto private men, but unto the Church, that is, the
Pope and the Councels whom he approves of: but in this sense this place makes
most against them: for first it is not here said that a private man may not
interpret the Scriptures, but that he may not make an interpretation of his
own; now by a man's own interpretation is meant a humane interpretation, that
is made by the will of man; as it evidently appears by the opposition, verse
21. So that the Prophets themselves, although they were public Doctors of the
Church, yet if they should have said any thing of themselves without the
revelation of God, that would have been their own, that is, a humane
interpretation: whence also it follows that every interpretation of the Pope,
which he takes not from clear Scripture, or has it not by some extraordinary
revelation, is his own in that sense as this word is taken in this place.
Secondly, By interpretation in this place is not meant the interpretation of
Scripture, that was before revealed, but the revelation it self, as it appears
by the 21 verse where this interpretation is made to consist therein, that the
Prophets spoke their prophesies as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 3 Peter
himself, who in the opinion of the Papists was at that time head of the
Church, bids the faithful here, search the Scriptures, he does not bid them
depend upon him, and always look for interpretation. 4 He attributes more and
greater strength unto the Scripture, then to his own testimony. 5 He calls the
Scripture a light, and the condition of the Church a dark place* the Papists on
the contrary attribute darkness unto the Scripture, and light and clearness
unto the Church. 6 He commends the vulgar sort of the faithful, that they did
take heed unto the Scriptures, in these words, Ye do well. But the Papists by
this interpretaion debar the faithful from the reading of the Scripture.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Papists, that put the Church before the
Scripture, and say that the first thing to be believed is, that the Church
cannot err.

2. To exhort us, to lay this foundation firm and sure in our hearts.

Doct. 10. The holy Ghost moved those men that were authors of the Scriptures.

This is gathered from these words: As they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Use. This may serve to instruct us, by continual prayer to seek for the aid
of the Spirit, for the understanding of the Scriptures. The Scripture must be
understood by the help of the same Spirit, by whom it was dictated, as Hier.
Eodem spiritu debet intelligi Scriptura, quo fuit dictata.

Doct. 11. The men which the holy Ghost made use of, to deliver the Scriptures,
were holy men of God.

Holy, because they were sanctified inwardly, and also set apart to this most
holy work. Men of God they were, because they were called by God to this
office, and they did declare the will of God, and they did labor also to bring
men unto God.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to labor to be like unto them, according to
our ability, both in holiness, and in zeal of the Lord.

Chapter II.
Verse 1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

Verse 2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

Verse 3. And through covetousness shall they with feined words make
merchandise of you.


The Analysis.
HItherto the Apostle propounded an exhortation, and confirmed it also in the
foregoing Chapter. In the two following Chapters he strengthens it, by removing
the impediments, that might make this exhortation of no effect. And the chief
impediments are falls teachers and profane scoffers: of these former he speaks
Chapter 2. Of the latter chap. 3. The false teachers he does first, describe:
secondly, reprove: he describes them from the beginning to those words in verse.
3. whose judgment, etc. Then he reproves them, 1 in general in these words,
that they are damned men; which he does afterward prove, 1 by the usual
course of Gods justice, from verse 4. to the 10. 2. By their deserts, whereby
they bring upon themselves the revenging justice of God, from verse 10. to the
end of the Chapter. In the description of the false teachers he makes, 1 A
comparison of the like betwixt the false teachers and those that were false
prophets among the people of Israel, partly that he might join together this
discourse with the former, where he spoke of true Prophets; and partly that he
might meet with the scandal which might arise by such seducers; and partly
that he might stir up the faithful so much the more, to beware of their
seducing. In the first respect, the last words of the former Chapter, and the
first of this Chapter, make such a discreet axiom as this; although there were
many Prophets among the People of Israel, that were holy men of God, and were
moved by the Spirit of God in those things that they spoke; yet among the same
people also there were many false Prophets. This discretion is showed in these
words: But there were. In the second respect these words make a copulate axiom
thus: Like as there were false Prophets among the People of Israel, so also
shall there be false teachers among you. In the third respect there is
intimated and implicitly contained such a connex axiom as this: If there shall
be false teachers among you, like as there were false Prophets among the people
of Israel, then must you be alike careful to beware of these, as the Israelites
were warned heretofore to beware of them. After that description which is made
by way of comparison, follows an absolute description; wherein the false
teachers are described by their effects. Which eff^cts have either an immediate
reference unto the false teachers themselves, or unto others by them. Those
that have reference unto the false teachers themselves, are 1 The bringing in
of heresies, which are set forth by their adjunct, that they are damnable,
whereof he gives a reason also, taken from the nature of heresies, which is
said to be such, that it brings in a denying of the Lord. 2. The second effect
is, that they bring upon themselves swift destruction. In respect of others the
first effect is, that they shall have many followers, who are pointed out by
another effect accompanying this seducing, namely, a speaking evil of the
truth, or of the Gospel, which shall come to pass by their means. The other
effect is the abuse of those whom they do seduce for gain; which abuse is set
forth by the helping cause, namely by fained words.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. There are always false prophets and false teachers in the Church.

This is gathered from these words: there were, there shall be.

Reason. This comes to pass in a threefold respect, 1 in respect of God. 2. In
respect of the Devil. 3. In respect of men. First, in respect of God, and that
1 that they which are approved in the Church may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11.
19. Deuteronomy. 13. 3. 2. That the obstinate wicked may perish in their ungodliness
and cruelty, 2* These. 2. 10, 11, 12. 1 Kings 22. 20, 21, 22. Secondly, in
respect of the Devil, because he is always the father of lies, and a
murderer, and that envious one, which sows tares among the good seed.
Thirdly, In respect of men, because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against
God and his truth.

The use hereof according to the Apostles intention is twofold:

Use 1. To admonish us, not to be offended, nor to be top much troubled in
mind, when we see heresies to arise in the Church, but to say as the Apostle
did, There were, there shall be.

2. To instruct us, not to believe every spirit, but to try whether they are of
God, 1 John 4. 1.

Doct. 2. Every heresy has damnation joined with it.

This is gathered from these words: damnable heresies. Some are more damnable
then others, yet all do in their nature tend to damnation. For all are contrary
unto the way of truth, whereof mention is made, verse 2. which way alone leads
unto life. But there are some heresies which can by no means consist with
salvation or eternal life. Hereupon such opinions are by a kind of
appropriation called heresies in the Church, that is, opinions altogether
damnable. For there is a difference to be observed betwixt things rashly
spoken, bare errors in faith, and heresies properly so called. In the heresies
themselves also we must distinguish betwixt the materiality, and the formality
of it. For to make a formal heresy, for which a man is properly called an
heretic, there is required besides an error in those things that pertain
unto the fundamentals of religion, a reluctation against the clear light, and
obstinacy in that reluctation.

Use. This may serve to condemn those that under the name of peace and
charity, make so little reckoning of the bringing in of heresies into the
Church. They would have all things received in and tolerated; which is all
one, as if they would for peace and charity admit of damnation it self. For
heresies have damnation joined with it.

2. To admonish us, 1. to take diligent heed that we do not by any means
further such heresies. 2. Not rashly or for a light cause to pronounce any man
an heretic. 3. As carefully to beware of heresies, as we should of damnation.

Quest. In the reason which is here given of this property of heresies, that
they are damnable, a question is moved, What is meant by denying the Lord?
denying the Lord that bought them. For many gather from this place, that all
and every particular man were redeemed by Christ, because it is here said that
he bought even those wicked heretics: but it may be answered diverse ways.

Answ. 1. That these false teachers were members of the visible Church, and
therefore, 1. they accounted themselves such as were redeemed by Christ, and
made show of that profession. 2. Men were to account them such, as long as they
continued in the Church; and in this respect they may be said to be such as
were redeemed by Christ; like as the Apostles are wont to call whole Churches
justified, sanctified, and elect. There is not the same reason therefore of all
and every particular man, as there was of these.

Ans. 2. He does not here speak of Christ properly, as he is Redeemer, nor of
the redemption of his blood, but of that right, whereby masters challenge their
servants, as having bought them; which may be thus showed: 1. Here is no
mention of Christ as being Lord properly, but Master. For in the Greek it is
(...), which is properly, a Master in respect of a servant, not (...), Lord.
And these two names are clearly distinguished, Jude v. 4. where the same thing
is spoken of the same false teachers: there they are said to deny their Dominum
and herum Lord and master; although he may be called their Herus, Master, he is
not properly called their Dominus, Lord. Then again, the Lord is not said to
have redeemed all men, but only to have bought them: now although the word
(...), to buy, be sometimes used in the same sense that the other is, yet it is
not always so.

Ans. 3. The comparison here is plainly made betwixt the false teachers and the
false Prophets, bewixt the visible Church and the people of Israel; for the
Lord is said to have bought those men in the same sense, that he is said to
have redeemed and delivered all the people of Israel; that is, as he delivered
them out of Egypt, and challenged them to himself in a peculiar manner, that
by a solemn covenant they should be his servants; so also all those that give
their names unto the Church, he may in this respect be said to have bought* as
a Master, that they should serve him for ever. To deny the Lord is, not to
acknowledge God or Christ for the Lord, Matthew. 10. 32, 33. to confess and to
deny are made contrary one to another, Luke 12. 8, 9. The reason is, because it
has once professed the name of the Lord, and afterward departs from that
profession* it is all one as if he did plainly say, that he would no longer be
a servant of that Lord. For this denying is twofold, either* verbal or real.
A verbal denying was in Peter, a real denying is in all those that after they
have made profession of the faith* return unto a profane life, 1 Timothy 5. 8. 2 Timothy 3. 5. The denying in this place is properly meant of a real denying. For
the description of these men does rather express their profane courses, then
their open renouncing of Christ.

Doct. 3. It is a damnable impiety to deny Christ either in word or deed.

Reason 1. Because by this means Christ is greatly dishonored; for men, our
lusts, and Satan himself are preferred before him, Mark 8. 38. where the
indignity of this sin is showed, that an adulterous and sinful generation is
preferred before Christ. Christ also by this me^ns is accused of iniquity: for
no servant usually goes away from his master, if he confesses him to be a
just master; therefore this going away is as it were a professing that he does
accuse that master from whom he goes of some iniquity. Hereupon was that
contesting of the Lord against his rebellious people* that he was a just and
right master, neither did he give them any cause to depart from him, Ier. 2 5.
Mich. 6. 3. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.

2. Because Christ threatened a most heavy judgment against this sin, when he
says that he will deny those men; that he will be ashamed of them before God
and his Angels, Mark 8. 38.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn, not only the manifest Apostates, but also
all those, that with the profession of godliness join a profane life, or turn
aside from that profession. The sin of these men is more grievous, then of
Turks and Infidels, that never gave their names unto Christ; for the nearer any
man comes unto God, the more does he dishonor his name, if he does fall back
again. He that has in some sort forsaken Satan, and given himself up unto
God, and afterward forsakes God again, and gives himself up unto Satan, seems
to have known both masters, and advisedly to pronounce that he is the better,
whose servant he would rather be, that is, Satan.

2. To admonish us, 1. Carefully to beware, not only of the damnable sin it
self, but also of all appearance, and every degree of it, and every occasion
that might lead us thereunto. 2. If in any respect we have turned toward such
like abomination, to recall our selves betimes, and seriously to bewail our
offense, like as Peter did after his denying of Christ, Matthew. 26. 75.

Doct. 4. It i^ the nature of such sins to bring destruction upon men.

This is gathered from these words; bring upon themselves destruction.

Reason. Because sin in respect of the guilt that is joined with it, has a
kind of power whereby it draws all evil; like as faith and prayers obtain
every good gift from God. Hence is it, that our sins are said to cry for
vengeance; and also to draw punishment unto it as it were with strong cords,
Isay 5. 18. For while men draw sin with suchlike cords, they do also draw the
punishment of sin, which is joined unto it.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, in this respect to beware of sin.

2. To exhort us, by faith, repentance, and prayers, to turn away that
destruction from us, which our sins would bring upon us.

Doct. 5. The destruction which hangs over the heads of grievous offenders will
come swiftly.

This is gathered from these words; swift destruction.

Doct. 6. Men are wonderfully prone to embrace errors.

This is gathered from these words; And many shall follow.

Reason 1. By reason of that darkness, which has taken hold of men's minds;
thereupon they may be easily drawn under any show or glimps of light.

2. By reason of that disposition which they have, alien from the truth;
thereupon they easily embrace those things that are contrary to this truth.

3. By reason of that disposition which they have, agreeing with the nature of
errors. For sinners have in themselves the seeds, of all sins, errors and
heresies; so that the nature of corrupt man does as easily receive errors, as
the tinder fi^e.

4. By reason of the just judgment of God, whereby for the punishment of other
sins they are given over to the power of errors, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, to show the corruption and wretchedness
of our nature, how hardly are we brought to embrace the heavenly and saving
truth, when we are carried headlong unto damnable errors.

2. To admonish us, that it should not be an offense unto us, if we see many
given unto errors; because this was foretold us by the Apostle, and it has a
manifest reason; so that it is not to be wondered at, that many are given unto
errors, but that rather, that any one does believe the truth.

3. To exhort us, 1 Unto humiliation, in respect of this pronenesse unto error,
2 To care and circumspection that we be not overswayed by it. And an Argument
whereby we may and should be stirred up unto this care, we have in the text,
whiles they which follow heresies and heretics, are said to follow their
destruction. For not only the authors of heresies run unto destruction, but
also their followers, as in the place of the These. before cited. In those
which perish, so that it is a sign of destruction, to be seduced by heretics.

Doct. 7. The fruit of errors and heresies is speaking evil of the way of
truth.

This is gathered from these words, By reason of whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of. By the way of truth is meant the Gospel, or the will of God
revealed in the Scripture, which shows the true way of salvation. It is said
to be evil spoken of, when the dignity thereof is violated, most properly by
reproachful words. It is said to be evil spoken of by them, namely, by the
authors of the heresies and their followers, in a twofold respect, 1. When
they themselves speak reproachfully of it, as the Scribes and Pharisees did of
Christ. 2. While they give others occasion to speak reproachfully of it, as the
Jews did unto the Gentiles, Romans 2. 24. both respects seem to be meant here
by these, for the Greek word (...) signifies per and propter, by, and by reason
of.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, to judge aright of the nature of sin,
that never stays till it has brought men to blasphemy against God, and to
speak evil of the way of God.

2. To admonish us, 1. For this cause to withstand the beginnings of sin, lest
at length we be brought also to blasphemy against the holy Ghost, which Christ
says is a sin that shall never be forgiven. 2. To beware also of those men,
that durst openly speak evil of the truth; amongst the number of whom they are
to be put, that dare mock and scoff at the name of predestination and the
predestinate.

Doct. 8. They which propagate errors under fair pretense, do often times seek
their own gain.

This is gathered from these words; through covetousness with fained words:
Covetousness is commonly the companion of heresies, oftentimes the mother,
very often the Nurse of them, as we may see in the Papists.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, 1. Not to believe men's fained words. 2. To
beware of covetousness, which is the root, as of all evils, so also of
heresies.

Doct. 9. Miserable is the condition of those men that are seduced by
heretics; for they are sold like beasts and cattle.

This is gathered from these words, they shall make merchandise of you.

Verse 3. at the end. Whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and
their damnation slumbreth not.


The Analysis.
HItherto we have seen the description of false teachers, and their sins; now
follows their reproof, or the punishment for their sins, that shall certainly
befall them. ^his punishment is set forth, 1. Metonymically, by the cause, in
that it is called judgment. 2. By the effect, in that it is called damnation.
3. By the adjunct of swiftness and speed, which is showed by the negation of
those things that are opposed unto swiftness. Now in general, lingering or
slownesse is opposed thereunto; in special, slumbring, which is put as a
species of idleness or slacknesse. This swiftness of the punishment that
shall befail them, is set forth by the adjunct of time, that it did not now
first of all begin to make have, but now of a long time.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. The punishment of sin follows after sin.

This is gathered from the connection of these words with the words foregoing:
there was the description of sin; and here presently follows the threatening of
punishment.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, never to think of sin, but to adjoyne also
the consideration of the punishment, which is joined unto sin.

Doct. 2. This punishment proceeds from the just judgment of God, for that it
is here called judgment.

For God as judge of all the earth, pronounces sentence upon men for their
sins, and the execution of that sentence is called punishment. Now he
pronounces sentence according to right and a most holy law, and therefore the
punishment which God inflicteth is in a proper sense called judgment.

Use 1. This may serve to refute, 1 profane men, which think that those evils
that men suffer, both public and private, come by chance. 2. Those that are
wont to complain of the evils which they suffer, as if God did deal unjustly
with them, Genesis 18. 25. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.

2. To admonish us, continually to walk in the fear of the Lord, because we
live in his fight, that exercises judgment.

Doct. 3. This judgment of God brings damnation upon sinners, that is, a
privation of all good, which pertaines unto the happiness or well-being of
man, and the sense of all misery; which makes that very being bitter and
unpleasant.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, with fear to fly away from sin, and to
seek the face of God.

Doct. 4. This damnation comes swiftly upon sinners.

Reason 1. Because it comes long before their expectation of it.

2. Because it is not deferred beyond the time which is most fit, and appointed
by God, and in that respect it is said not to linger.

3. Because no impediment can hinder it, but it is deferred through Gods mercy
and long-suffering; in that respect it is said not to slumber, because
slumbring and sleep binds the mind, and hinders the actions.

4. Because now of a long time before, way is made and prepared for this
damnation.

5. Because the damnation it self, although the wicked oftentimes are not
sensible of it, yet it takes hold of them, and spiritually works in their
minds and consciences.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that give themselves wholly unto sin,
either because they think that punishment comes flowly, or else because they
hope to escape unpunished, Eccl^s. 8. 10, 11, 12.

2. To admonish us, to make haste to repent of our sins, not to linger nor
slumber.

Doct. 5. In all those things which pertain unto judgment against sinners,
like as in all other things, God does nothing rashly, but foreseeth,
premeditateth, and prepares all things.

This is gathered from the adjunct of time, Now of a long time. So Jude v. 4.

Verse 4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto
judgment.


The Analysis.
NOw the Apostle proves that which he had before laid down concerning the
punishment that should befall false teachers. The conclusion of this arguing
is, 1 In general propounded of all the wicked, v. 9. For there is the
consequent part of that connex axiom, the antecedent whereof begins v. 4. and
is showed by the connection If, as, If God spared not the Angels, etc. Then
afterward in special, of these false teachers themselves and their followers,
v. 10. In the general conclusion, v. 9. he does not barely set down the
condemnation of the wicked, but also by a copulate axiom joins together with
it, the deliverance of the godly from that temptation, which arises unto them
by means of the wicked. And the reason is, because the Apostles purpose was, so
to reprove the wicked, that he might in the mean time comfort the godly, and
strengthen them against all the temptations, whereunto they were obnoxious by
means of the wicked. In the antecedent part of this arguing he sets down three
arguments, which are as so many examples and judgments of God against the
wicked; and they may make three syllogismes to prove one and the same
conclusion. The first example is of the Angels that fell, v. 4. The second is
of the old world, v. 5. The third is of Sodom and Gomorrha. The syllogismes
are knit together, after this manner: If God spared not the Angels, nor the old
world, nor Sodom and Gomorrha; then he will not spare these false teachers;
nor the like wicked men; But the former is true, by the testimony of Scripture,
Therefore, etc. These examples in respect of the general conclusion, which is
set down, v. 9. are as species unto their genus. But in respect of the
special conclusion which is set down, v. 10. they are as comparata, partly
alike, partly greater. That wherein they are alike, consists therein, as God
condemned those sinners so also will he condemn these. Their inequality
therein; if God spared not his most excellent creatures, the Angels, nor the
old world, nor those cities; then much less will he spare these false teachers.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. The judgments of God which he has executed from the beginning of
the world were ordained to be examples for us.

This is evidently gathered from all this arguing of the Apostle, and it is
plainly taught us, verse 6. So 1 Cor. 10. 6. they are called types, that is,
ensamples; which appears also by verse. 11. which sense of the words Beza and
others have missed.

Reason. The reason of this truth is Gods unchangeable nature and constant
justice, whereby he is always like himself, not only inwardly and in himself,
but also outwardly toward us in the dispensation of his punishments and
rewards, if we look to the substance of God. Hence is it, that by this argument
the godly are both confirmed in their hope, Isay 59. 1. and 9. 9. 10. and
assured of the destruction of all their enemies, and of all those that give
themselves over unto impiety.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, so to read the sacred History, not as we
read profane histories and fables, either for delight, or to be informed only
in the knowledge of the times, or in things that have bin done; but always to
observe Gods warnings and apply them unto our own use.

2. To admonish us, not to deceive our selves, as if we had a privilege to sin
above other men, or as if God would not deal so severely with us, if we should
continue in our sins, as he did heretofore with those whom he destroyed: *
Other men's harms should teach us to beware of the like sins. In the first
example we have, first, The object of Gods judgment, The Angels that sinned.
Secondly, the manner how he dealt with them, If he spared them not. Thirdly,
the degree of this judgment, present, and to come: present, that they were
adjudged unto damnation; and to come, that they were to be reserved unto
judgment. The fin of the Angels is not particularly set down in the
Scriptures, because it does not so much pertain to our edification and
salvation, to know their sin, as it does to know our own sins. But in general
we are taught, that they kept not their first estate. Jude v. 6. that is, they
left that estate wherein God had placed them, and afterward exercised envy,
lying, murder toward men. We are taught also that the number of those that
fell was great; thence it is that the Apostle here speaks in the plural
number. They are said to have been cast down to hell, 1. By reason of the
change of their estate, because from that wonderful high condition, which they
had received by creation, they were cast down to the lowest of all. 2. By
reason of the change of their place, because from the place of bliss, where
they were round about the throne of God with the other Angels, they were thrust
down into a lower place fit for sin and misery: But that this place is in the
lowest parts of the earth, as the Papists would have it, it cannot be showed
out of the Scriptures, but rather the contrary: for they are said to be in the
air, and to rule there, and to go about the earth seeking to devour men. This
at least is plain out of the Scripture, and it should suffice such as are not
overcurious: 1. That they suffer a great change of estate. 2. That they are
excluded from their first habitation. 3. That they are in that place, where
they receive poenam damni and sensus, the punishment of loss, and the
punishment also of sense. They are said to be delivered into darkness, partly
in respect of sin, partly in respect of misery: for both are signified by
darkness in the Scriptures. They are said to be delivered into chains, by a
metaphor taken from malefactors that are condemned, who are kept inprison bound
with chains. Now these chains are, 1 A hardening in their sins. 2 A despair of
all deliverance. 3 A fearful looking for that misery whereof mention is made,
Heb. 10. 27. 4. The providence of God which always watches over them, to keep
and punish them. They are said to be reserved unto judgment, because they are
bound so fast with these evils, that they can never escape; and yet these are
but the beginnings of the evils, which they must farther undergo.

Doct. 2. There is no dignity that can exempt a sinner from the judgment of
God.

This is gathered from the nature of the Angels.

Reason. Because dignity does not lessen the sin, but aggravate it. For he that
has received much, owes much, and of him much is required.

Use. This may serve for admonition, that men should not trust to such staffes
of reed.

Doct. 3. That severity is due unto sin, that sinners should not be spared.

This is gathered from these words, He spared not.

Reason 1. Because sinners always abuse the goodness of God.

2. They spare not the glory of God, but themselves.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, to ascribe it unto the grace and mercy
of God, that he has hitherto spared us.

2. To exhort us, not to contemn this long-suffering of God, but thereby to be
led unto repentance, Romans 2. 4.

Doct. 4. By sin a sinner is cast down from the place and condition which he
had before.

This is gathered from these words; cast down to hell.

Reason. Because sin is an aversion from God. Now as the communion which we
have with God, makes us to ascend into a high condition, even into Heaven it
self, so that our conversation is in heaven, as it is Phil. 3. 20. So also
aversion from him makes us to descend, even until we come unto hell it self.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to trust the devil, nor our own
imaginations, as if we could ever attain any good by sinning. For so our first
parents were deceived, when they thought to make themselves like unto God by
sin, they were made like unto the devil.

Doct. 5. The darkness of misery follows the darkness of sin.

This gathered from these words; delivered them into chains of darkness.

Reason. Because the light is the same, whereby we are directed, and whereby we
are perfected; therefore the privation of perfection and happiness follows
the privation of direction.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, always to walk in the light, as children
of the light, if we desire to avoid utter darkness.

Doct. 6. Sinners are held in sin and in their misery, as it were with bonds.

This is gathered from that: Chains.

Reason. Because the sins themselves are the snares of the devil, 2 Timothy 2.
last. Lam. 1. 14. There are other reasons given of this thing in the Analysis.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, betimes to pray for deliverance from our
sins, which then we shall obtain, when we do fly unto Christ, who gives
deliverance unto the Captives, Luke 4. 18.

Doct. 7. The extremest punishment of sinners is deferred unto the last
judgment of God.

Use. This may serve for instruction, that no man should please himself
therein, that he suffers afflictions in this world, as if therefore he should
escape free in the world to come, which is the miserable comfort of some men.

Verse 5. And spared not the old world, but saved Noah, the eighth person, a
Preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly.


The Analysis.
THe second and third example of Gods justice toward sinners are not barely
propounded, as the first was, but are illustrated by different examples, or by
examples of Gods mercy, which he showed toward the godly, while he destroyed
the wicked. The reason is, that both parts of the conclusion, which is set
down, verse 9. might be fitly inferred; where the deliverance of the godly is
joined together with the destruction of the wicked. In the former of these
examples is set down, 1 The object of Gods justice, materially, the old world,
which is more formally explained by the adjunct of impiety, whence it is called
the world of the ungodly. 2. This justice is also illustrated by the instrument
thereof, namely, the bringing in of the flood upon the world of the ungodly.
The object of Gods mercy is made to be Noah with his family: who are described,
1 By their small number, wherein his family was contained, which is said to be
eight. This Peter shows, 1 Epist. c. 3. v. 20. 2 By the effect, that he was a
Preacher of righteousness. For the office or duty is not here commended, but
the act or exercise of this duty. For the duty was common to him with many
more, but the exercise of it was proper unto himself.

The Doctrines arising here-hence.

Doct. 1. The multitude of those that sin does not hinder Gods justice from
executing his judgments upon them for their sins.

This is gathered from this; He spared not the whole world. For as it was with
dignity in the Angels, so it is also with the multitude now in the world.

Reason 1. Because the multitude does not lessen, but rather increase the guilt
of sin, and more fill up the measure thereof, as it is in the Proverb, Qui
peccat exemplo, bis peccat, he that sins with example, sins twice: So he that
sins with many examples, sins often times, if the thing be rightly considered.
As if a man should see another fall in a slippery way, and not take the more
heed unto himself therein, but fall into the same place and after the same
manner, he is much more taxed by men, then if he had fallen alone, or first of
all: so is it also in these.

2. Because the multitude which seems unto us a great thing, as if it could
withstand Gods anger, is before God like unto water, that falls from a bucket.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to follow a multitude to do evil. And
so much the more necessary is this admonition, because we are all too prone to
go in the way of the multitude; which fault also we seem to commit with some
reason.

1. Because that we presume that many eyes see more then one, whence it is that
the voice of the people is often taken for the voice of God.

2. Because the labor of examination seems too difficult, and almost
impossible.

3. Because that which all men do, usually goes unpunished among men, and we
conceive the like thing of God.

4. Because he that does not follow the multitude, shall gain a multitude of
enemies, and such as hate him.

But the contrary reason, which is of greater value then all those is that of
Christ, Matthew. 7. 13. Broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be which go in thereat. To the first reason or object on we answer; that
one eye of a man that sees, perceives more then a thousand blind eyes. The
world or the multitude of the world is blinded; therefore one Christian which
has the eye of his mind enlightened by the Spirit, and follows the light of
Gods word, can see more then a great multitude of others. To the second we
answer, that the duty of examination lies upon all and every one. And they had
need to do it, not only as they are Christians, and as Christ commands them, to
prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, but also as they are men:
for it is not a humane, but a brutish thing to follow the multitude of those
that go before, without judgment. To the third we answer, that the ways of
God are not as the ways of men: Men winck at many, either out of ignorance, or
impotency, or for fear, and the like imperfections which are not incident to
God. To the fourth we answer, If God be with us, who can be against us?

Doct. 2. The creatures which are most necessary and profitable unto us, by sin
are made our enemies and hurtful unto us.

This is gathered from the flood of waters, that destroyed the old world. Now
nothing is more necessary and profitable unto us then water.

Reason. Because the creatures are the servants and host of God, and therefore
they depend upon his will, and pleasure, and command both for war and peace,
Hos. 2. 18.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, so much the more to beware of sin.

2. To instruct us, if we would have any true comfort from the creatures, to
lay the foundation thereof in our reconciliation with God.

Doct. 3. God in the midst of judgment toward the ungodly, is merciful
toward the godly.

This is gathered therehence, that when he destroyed the world, he saved Noah.

Reason. Because God does not execute judgment according to the fierceness of
his anger or fury, as men oftentimes use to do, but according to the counsel
of his most perfect wisdom.

Use. 1. This may serve to instruct us, not to ascribe those things unto
fortune or chance, which happen unto us or others in this kind.

2. To comfort us, because in a world of all dangers and judgments, we may
fly unto the mercy of God.

Doct. 4. There are wont to be but a few godly men in the world.

This is gathered therehence, that Noah is called the eighth of the godly, or
rather he may be called the seventh, because Cham was cursed.

Reason 1. In respect of God, because he gives this grace but unto a few, that
his goodness and mercy toward them may appear the more abundant.

2. In respect of the second causes, and of the nature of the thing it self,
because that which is most difficult, and of the greatest care and perfection,
is not wont to be found but in few. The gifts of nature are common unto all; of
art and industry to fewer, but the gifts of grace to fewest of all. There are
more good Tailors then good Physicians, and more good Physicians then good
Kings. So that that has the greatest perfection, which is given but to a few.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to be so much the more diligent to make
our election and calling sure.

2. To exhort us, to give God thanks, that he has made us partakers of that
happiness, which he grants but to a few.

Doct. 5. All the godly, that will be made partakers of Gods mercy, must be
preachers of righteousness, as Noah was.

Now righteousness is preached not only in words, but also in deeds. For so it
is wont to be said, The thing it self speaks, ^ or the tongue only, Phil. 2.
15, 16.

Reason. Because no man can escape the revenging justice of God, unless he
labor to follow and advance the righteousness that is prescribed by him.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn and reprove those, that are rather Preachers
of unrighteousness, then of righteousness.

2. To exhort us, more and more to stir up our selves to have a care of this
duty.

Verse 6. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, condemned
them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should
live ungodly.

Verse 7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked:

Verse 8. (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds.)


The Analysis.
IN these verses is contained the third example, which is divided after the
same manner, as the second was. For here he speaks of the judgment of God upon
the wicked, and his mercy toward the godly. The object of his judgment are
the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha; the manner is, by fire, which is intimated
in these words, turned into ashes. The degree is, in their utter overthrow; the
end and use is, to warn those that should after live ungodly. For such
judgments are ensamples not of a wicked life, but of the condemnation that
hangs over the heads of those that live ungodly; and so they are ensamples to
move men, not to do the like; but to take heed lest if they do after the like
manner, they suffer also after the like manner.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. No society of men or policy can hinder the judgment of God, which he
will bring upon them for their sins.

For as in the first example there was the dignity of the Angels, in the second
the multitude of men, so also in this place society and policy; and Cities that
were so noble, Sodom and Gomorrha. For they were Cities that were brought into
government, they had Kings, Genesis 14 2. This Doctrine is propounded, and proved,
Prove. 11 21. and in 16. 5. it is repeated.

Reason. Because the guilt of sin is not lessened, but increased by means of
societies, if they favor sins: for they pervert the end whereunto they were
ordained. For whereas the end of all societies is to restrain sin, and to
advance righteousness, 1 Timothy 2. 2. and they on the contrary cherish sin and
impugn righteousness, they do provoke the anger of God more, then if they were
not such societies. The sin of these Cities is said to be grievous, and crying,
Genesis 18. 20.

This may serve for admonition, that Citizens or Magistrates should not trust
too much to their wealth, so that thereby they should be made the more bold to
sin.

Doct. 2. The same judgments of God are executed by contrary causes.

This is gathered therehence, that whereas the old world was destroyed by
water, those Cities were overthrown by fire.

Use. This may serve for admonition, that sinners should not therefore think
themselves safe, because they have escaped one judgment; for when they are
farthest off from one evil, another is ready to fall upon them, Amos 5. 19.

Doct. 3. Extreme judgments follow extreme sins.

This is gathered therehence, that this was an utter overthrow, because that
these Cities had filled up the measure of their sins.

Reason. The reason is taken from the proportion, that is betwixt sin and the
punishment of sin.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, if we cannot altogether avoid sin, yet
with fear and trembling to shun the progress and continuance in sin.

Doct. 4. They that are unto others examples of sin, shall be also unto them
examples of punishment.

This is gathered from these words: Making them an ensample.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, so much the more to take heed, that we
give no scandal unto others, or to be an example in sin.

2. To exhort us to increase in godliness by the examples of Gods judgments
upon sinners. For that is the use and end of them, Amos 4 12.

The other part of the Analysis.

The object of mercy is Lot, who is described, 1 By the adjunct, that he was
righteous. 2 By the effect, that his soul was vexed with the wickedness of
the ungodly, which is more largely set forth, v. 8. 1 By the internal cause,
which was his righteousness. 2 By the external cause, which was their
ungodliness. 3 By the means, whereby the external cause or the object did work
that effect. And they were the senses of hearing and seeing. 4 By the occasion,
which was his dwelling amongst them. 5 By the adjunct of time, which was
continually. 6 By the degree, which was the highest, as if he had been put
upon the rack; he vexed, in Greek it is (...), tormented.

Besides those that are common unto Lot with the example of Noah, there are
these Doctrines to be observed.

Doct. 1. Men are accounted righteous or unrighteous in the sight of God, not
so much for some one deed, as for the whole course of their life.

This is gathered therehence, that Lot is here called righteous, who
notwithstanding is spoken of in the Scripture to have committed a most heinous
sin. For those that are said to be righteous in the Scriptures, are so called,
either in respect of the imputation of Christ's righteousness, or in respect of
some particular cause wherein they show themselves righteteous, or in respect
of that inherent righteousness, which, though it be imperfect, yet is it
sincere and pleasing unto God.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Papists and others, who as soon as they
read that any one is called righteous in the Scriptures, presently conclude
that a man may fulfill the whole law, and stand upon his own merits before God.

2. To comfort the godly, who sometimes fall through infirmity. For if they
continually labor to please God, God in mercy accounts them righteous.

Doct. 2. There are sometimes righteous men found in the midst of the ungodly.

This is gathered therehence, that righteous Lot dwelt amongst the Sodomites.

Use 1. This may serve to refute those, that when they sin put the fault upon
others with whom they live, as if they could not be godly because others are
wicked.

2. To exhort us, to strengthen our minds against the wickedness of the age,
and places, or men, amongst whom we live. For like as that servant deserves
well of his Master, that sticks close unto him, when all others forsake him; so
also are they most acceptable unto God, that adhere unto him, when all others
not only forsake him, but also are against him; so did Noah, Genesis 6. 8, 9.

Doct. 3. Those that are righteous, even whiles they live amongst the ungodly,
are grieved for their impiety.

This is gathered therehence, that Lot vexed, etc. So Psalm. 119. 158 Acts 17.
16.

Reason. Because when godly men do most of all desire, and take care for to
advance the glory of God and the salvation of others, they cannot but be
grieved, when they see no reckoning made of either.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that take delight in no company so
much as in the company of the ungodly. 2. Those that are not sorry for their
own sins, much less for others.

2. To instruct us, to judge of our selves hereby, in that conversation which
we have with wicked men. For if we are thus wrought upon, when we see it, then
it is a sign of a good conscience.

Verse 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished, or suffering
punishment.


The Analysis.
THis is the general conclusion, the premises whereof the former examples
make up, and it is disposed in a copulate axiom, the former part whereof is of
the mercy of God, and the latter of his justice. Where we may take notice of
the reason of this order, which may be twofold. 1 Because in the premises he
had spoken of mercy in the last place; therefore that the connection might be
evident, he puts it first in the Conclusion; and because he intends to speak
more at large of the wicked afterward, therefore he mentions Gods justice
toward them in the last place. 2. The Apostle does first of all conclude the
mercy of God toward the godly, because it was his primary intent and purpose
to comfort and strengthen the godly. The object of Gods mercy is the godly. The
act and effect thereof is, to deliver them from temptation. The object of his
justice is the wicked. The act and effect thereof is, to reserve them unto the
day of judgment. Where he adds the manner how they shall be reserved, namely
so, that they shall in the mean time suffer punishment. The cause and reason
of these acts and effects, as well of his mercy as his justice, is the wisdom
of God, or his knowledge joined together with his will; as that first word
intimates unto us, The Lord knows.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. We have need of diverse arguments to confirm our faith touching the
mercy and justice of God.

This is gathered therehence, that the Apostle was so careful to conclude
this, and by so many arguments.

Reason 1. Because faith is not, as knowledge and sense is, to have such a full
and evident assurance, as excludes all manner of doubting, but it has some
obscurity in the object, and so admits of diverse doubtings, which must be
removed by suchlike arguments.

2. The imperfection of our faith, which must be helped by these means.

3. The multitude of objections and temptations, which fight against this faith.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove the security and presumption of those, that
feel no want in this kind.

2. To admonish us, to use all diligence, and to search out all the arguments
that may be, to edify our selves in this faith.

Doct. 2. They that are truly righteous, so that they are vessels of the mercy
of God, are also godly.

This is gathered therehence, that here they are called godly, who before in
the example of Noah and Lot, were called righteous.

Reason. Because no righteousness can be pleasing unto God, which is not
referred unto him and his honor; now this is done no other way, but by piety.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to rest or please our selves in any
righteousness, that is separated from true piety toward God.

Doct. 3. The sting of every evil of punishment, whereunto men are obnoxious
in this life, is temptation.

This is gathered therehence, that deliverance from temptation is here put for
deliverance from all evil.

Reason. Because the afflictions or miseries of this life become hurtful unto
us only by that means, and as they are in us occasions or motives unto sin. For
that is the nature of temptation, whereof mention is here made, to induce men
unto sin.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to beware of the temptation that is in
the evil, more then of the evils themselves.

2. To instruct us, to judge aright of the mercy of God toward the godly; for
although they are not presently delivered from the afflictions themselves, yet
if they be delivered from the temptation of them, they have great experience of
Gods mercy toward them.

Doct. 4. God does very well know how to perform all those things that he has
either promised to the godly, or threatened to the wicked.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to judge of the event of these things,
or of the success of the godly or the wicked, according to those things that
we see, but to refer all these things unto the knowledge and wisdom of God,
resting upon the belief of those things which he has promised.

Verse 10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of
un^l^annesse, and despise government: presumptuous are they, selfe-willed: they
are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.


The Analysis.
IN this verse is contained the particular conclusion of the former arguing:
because he does particularly apply unto the false teachers of that age, that
which he had affirmed in general of the unjust, verse 9. Therefore this
particular conclusion is joined with the general, not by a bare copula, but by
a gradation from the less to the greater, as it is intimated in that first
word, But chiefly: as if he had said, that all the unjust should indeed suffer
punishment, but those most certainly, and most heavily, that are such as the
false teachers are here described to be. Now they are described both in
general, and in particular. In general the effect of their wicked walking, in
those words, them that walk. Of which effect, 1 he shows the principal
cause, which is, the flesh. 2 The administering, or next cause, which is the
lust of the flesh, that is, the vicious motions and inclinations of corrupt
nature: which is illustrated by the proper effect thereof, uncleanness,
because the motions of the flesh do spiritually defile the souls of men, so
that it makes them polluted in the sight of God. The particular description is
by a particular sin, which is, a contempt of lawful authority: which sin is
illustrated by its effect, that is, that they do contemptuously reproach
dignities; where he shows the manner of this effect which is adjoined, that
they do it boldly and selfe-willed.

The Doctrines arising here-hence.

Doct. 1. Although all sinners may deservedly fear the judgment of God, yet
there are some that may more certainly expect the severity of that judgment.

This is gathered from these words; But chiefly them.

Reason. By reason of that proportion which is kept betwixt the sins and their
punishments. Now they that may most certainly expect this severity of
judgment, are such especially, as are very much given unto those sins, whereby
we read in the Scriptures that men have brought upon themselves swift
destruction.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, most of all to beware of those sins that
do most hasten our damnation.

Doct. 2. There is no one sin so heinous, as to walk in the ways of a sinner.

This is gathered from these words; B^^ chiefly them that walk.

Reason 1. Because the act of sin does not so much condemn as the habit of sin;
like as on the contrary, the habit of any virtue does much more commend a man,
then any particular act, though it be of great note.

2. Because he that walks in the way of sin, adds impenitency unto his sins;
now impenite^cy does condemn men more then any sin, because there is no way to
escape the anger of God, but by repentance.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that please themselves therein, that
they are not murderers, nor adulterers, nor robbers, etc. when in the mean
time they walk in the way of other sins, who do either contemn the worship of
God, or neglect faith, hope, and charity, and are altogether ignorant of the
like virtues.

2. To admonish us, to take he^d unto our selves, by a timely and daily
repentance, that we walk not in sins, though we cannot abstain from all sin.
Sinners are not so much hateful unto God, as the workers of sin, and such as
walk in it.

Doct. 3. There is in all men while they are in this world, some cause pricking
and stirring them up unto so.

This is gathered therehence, that the flesh is here put as the beginning of
all those sins, whereunto these wicked men were given. Now it is called the
flesh, because it does extend it self as largely as the flesh or body of man,
being carnal: and so is in all and every particular man in common and without
any exception. This is proved first Gol 5. 17. James 1. 14. Mat. 15. 19.
Secondly, it is confirmed also by reason and experience, because when there is
no outward object or persuasion that can induce us unto sin, yet we feel such
little sparks arising in our selves, that will set the whole man on fire, if
they be not quenched betimes.

Use 1. This may serve for instruction, 1 To refute their dream, which imagine
a perfection in this present life. 2 To refute the Papists, who say that
concupiscence after Baptism is not formally a sin. For that which of its own
nature produces sin, must needs have the nature of sin. For qu^le effectum,
talis causa, such as the effect is, such is the cause.

2. To admonish us, diligently to beware not only of outward provocations, that
might lead us into temptation, but also of our selves and our own hearts; for
there lies our greatest danger.

Doct. 4. Sin does not consist only in outward words and deeds, but also in
the inward lusts and affections, which are contrary unto the law of God.

Reason 1. The first reason is taken out of the places of Scripture, wherein
God is called a Spirit, and is said to look most unto the Spirit and heart of
man.

2. The second is taken out of those places, Mat. 15. 19
where sins are said to come from the heart, For sin can come from the heart no
other way, but by the means of such vicious lusts of the flesh.

3. From the express words of God, Ger. 6. 5. and 8. 21.

4. The same is showed unto us by the contraries, because the inward affections
of men, that are good, are very pleasing unto God: Therefore after the like
manner evil affections and desires must needs displease him. The amplification
of this truth may be taken therehence, that there is no sin properly in the
outward words, and deeds, but as they depend upon the inward affection of the
heart. For if it were otherwise, then a man might be compelled unto sin, which
is altogether untrue, and contrary to common sense.

Use. This may serve to refute and condemn those, that take little or no care
at all, about their thoughts or inward affections, so that they can any way
excuse their outward words and deeds. 2. To admonish us, therefore to watch
over our inward affections and thoughts. For this is the property of a true
Christian. Those that are outside Christians, look only unto outward things;
they that do inwardly and in heart fear God, are no less careful of their
inward thoughts then they are of their outward words.

Doct. 5. Sins of this kind, like as all others also, do defile a mar.

Some sins are said in a special manner to defile a man, namely such, as
pertain unto the unlawful copulation of the flesh, and transgress the tenth
Commandment.

Reas. Because they do in their nature also defile the body and person of a
man. But all sins do also defile the soul of man, because they leave a blemish
behind them, which makes the soul of the sinner deformed, and less pleasing
unto God, Mat. 15. 20. This is it which was heretofore signified in the
Ceremonial Law by all those uncleanness separations, washings, and purgings,
which are so frequently spoken of by Moses, This also is that, which is
intimated unto us in Baptism.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that do not only take delight in their
sins* but also seem to boast of them, as if they should glory in their own
dung.

2. To admonish us, to learn hence more and more to abhor all sin, as a most
filthy and detestable thing. Besides that general defiling which is common to
all sin, the Apostle seems here to intimate that special defiling, which is
in wantonness, as it appears by v. 14. and 18. But of this we shall have a
fitter opportunity to speak afterward.

Doct. 6. It is a most heinous sin to despise government, or the superior lan
full power.

This is confirmed, Romans 13. 1, 2.

Reason 1. Because they which despise lawful power, despise the ordinance of
God. It is the Apostles reason in the same place. For although God has
prescribed unto men no special form of government, yet he has appointed,
that there should be some certain kind of governing, and so approves of all
power, which is not contrary unto nature, or unto his revealed will.

2. Because such a contempt is against the common good, and tends to the
disturbance of humane society.

3. Because it gives occasion to the overflowing of all other sins. For this is
the reason why the authority of superiors is established in the first
Commandment of the second Table, because if that be despised or neglected, all
the other Commandments, not only of the second, but also of the first table,
are quite destitute of those things that should strengthen them, as touching
those means which men can use.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Anabaptists and those that tread in the
steps of such heretics, whiles they maintain that the civil Magistrate is
clean contrary to Christian religion.

2. To reprove those, that although they confess the power in words, yet in
their deeds resist it, nor do they respect it farther then it makes for their
lusts.

Doct. 7. The effect of contempt is, to reproach a man, and speak evil of him.

Reason. Because reproaches and contumelies come properly from pride, whereby a
man thinks himself better then another. For otherwise he could not reproach
another man, but the same reproach would fall upon himself also. Contempt is
the daughter of pride, and the mother of such nephews.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish all Christians, to abstain from
reproachings and evil speakings. For there is none that dares affirm that it
is lawful for him to despise his brother.

2. To admonish us, to beware of pride and the contempt of others, if we would
not break forth into such sins, that are so unworthy of a Christian man.

Quest. Here arises a question, Whether we may not sometimes reprove the sins
of men somewhat sharply?

Answ. That this is lawful is proved by the approved practice of the Prophets,
Apostles, and of Christ himself also; but with these cautions. 1 That the sin
which we reprove be manifest. 2 That the check be so directed, that it be done
to the sin rather then to the man. 3. That there be together with it a
manifestation of our charity. 4 That we be not moved unto this vehemence
chiefly by our own private injuries, but by the zeal that we bear unto the
glory of God and the salvation of others.

Doct. 8. Amongst those circumstances of sin, mentioned in the text, there is
none whereby it is more aggravated, then stubborn boldness, and
selfe-willednesse.

This is gathered from these words: Presumptuous, selfe-willed, etc.

Reason 1. Because they are tokens of a will sinning with full consent.

2. They are tokens of a seared conscience.

3. They are most contrary unto repentance.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that account it a great praise unto
themselves, that they are bold to commit all kind of villainous acts: they
neither fear men, nor God himself; as it is said of the unjust Judge in the
Gospel.

2. To admonish us, although we cannot wholly abstain from all sin, yet to
take heed that we do not please our selves in any sin, nor to go on and persist
stubbornly, and presumptuously in it.

Verse 11. Whereas Angels which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing accusation against them before the Lord.


The Analysis.
THat the Apostle may aggravate that sin, which he had laid to charge of the
false teachers in the former words he makes a comparison betwixt them and the
Angels, such as is made, verse 9. and the 10. But in this comparison there is
contained a twofold dis-similitude, namely, of their condition, and their
actions. Their condition, because the Angels are high and mighty, but these men
were of a low mean condition. Their actions, because the Angels abstained from
speaking evil of dignities, but these men gave their minds unto it. The former
dis-similitude is set forth by a kind of Inequality, of greater and lesser,
because there is indeed a very great inequality, but this dis-similitude
arises from the inequality. Both parts of the comparison are disposed in a
discreet axiom as it were to this sense. Although the Angels do far exceed
these dignities in power, yet they do not speak evil of them; but these men,
although they be far inferior unto them in power, yet they fear not to speak
evil of them.

Touching the former part of the comparison two questions may be made.

Quest. 1. In what sense the Angels are said to be greater in power and might?

Answer. The Angels are said to be greater in power and might, not so much in
respect of the false teachers, as in respect of the dignities themselves,
whereof the Apostle here speaks. And the reason is, not only because they are
of a more excellent nature then men; but also because God has set them over
men, and commanded them to watch over Governments, Commonwealths, and
consequently over dignities. Whence they are often called in Scripture
Dominions, as Ephesians 1. 21.

Quest. 2. How this is true, that they do not bring railing accusation against
dignities, when God himself sometimes speaks evil of them, and makes the
Angels to execute his malediction?

Answer: They are said to abstain from speaking evil, 1 Because they do not
speak evil, but when God commands them, and therefore it is not their
malediction so much as Gods. 2 Though they do speak evil of the men that are
set in authority, and do evil also unto them sometimes, as we s^e in the
example of Herod, and in the Host of Sena^herib, yet they do not speak evil of
the dignities themselves, which was the sin of these impostors, of whom the
Apostle speaks.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. Their sin is the greater, who are of a lower condition, if they wax
proud and despise dignities, then if they were set in a higher degree.

This is the ground of the Apostles comparison. For otherwise it would make
nothing to the aggravation of the sin of these men.

Reason 1. Because his sin is the greater, that is drawn unto sin upon the
lighter occasion or smaller temptation.

2. Because such men are not moved by those reasons, that might and should
withold them from committing such a sin, which other men have not after the
same manner.

Use. This may serve for condemnation, to condemn the fashion of some men of
the lowest rank, who even in that condition of life are as proud, and more also
sometimes, then they that are in the highest degree of dignity and honor.

Doct. 2. The Angels are greater in power then all men.

Use. This may serve for the comfort of the faithful, because God has given
the Angels a special charge over them, so that they are said to pitch their
tents about them.

Doct. 3. These powerful Angels do most religiously abstain from all sin.

For what is here said in special, is to be understood also in general.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, therefore the more carefully to beware of
sin; both because we are bound by the Law at least as well as they, and also
because other wise we cannot have those good and powerful ministering Spirits to
take care of us.

Verse 11. But these as natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
speak evil of the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in
their own corruption.


The Analysis.
THe other part of the comparison is contained in this verse, wherein the sin
of the false teachers desp^^ng and speaking evil of dignities, is aggravated
by a new comparison of the like, so that in this verse there is both a showing
of the dissimilitute, and also a whole similitude explained by its parts. The
proposition of this similitude contains a description of natural bruit
beasts: the Apodosis contains a description of false teachers, according to
those qualities which they have proportionably with those bruit beasts. The
description of the bruit beasts contains three things: 1 Their inward nature,
which is expressed by a negation, that they are void of reason, bruits. 2.
Their acts or operations, which are said to proceed, not from counsel, but
from nature, natural. 3 Their end and destruction, that they are taken and
destroyed. To these there are three also answerable in false teachers: 1 That
they are void of judgment, they understand not. 2 That they are carried with a
naughty passion to speak evil, speak evil of the things that they understand
not. 3 That they bring upon themselves destruction; they shall perish in their
own corruption.

The Doctrine arising herehence.

Doct. 1. Sin, where it reigns, turns a man into a bruit beast as it were.

This is showed in all those places of Scripture, where wicked men are compared
unto bruit beasts, either in general, or in special, to Horses, Mules, Dogs,
Swine, Foxes, Wolves, Beats, Lions, etc. Yea, they that are in greatest honor
and esteem in this world, are accounted no otherwise of by God, then as bruit
beasts. The Monarchs, in Daniel, are always compared unto wild beasts; and the
Roman Emperors that persecuted the Church, are pointed out in the Apocalypse by
the name of the Dragon. And the Pope is not only called a beast, but is
described as a very great monster among the beasts, with seven heads, and ten
horns.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that please themselves in their sins.

2. To admonish us, so much the more to beware of sin, lest at length with
Nebuchadnezzar we be cast down from the greatest glory to the lowest condition
of all.

Doct. 2. The fountain of all this sin and misery is the want of a right and
spiritual judgment.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, diligently therefore to betake our selves
unto prayer, and other means, that are sanctified by God, for the enlightening
of our mind, and keeping it sound.

Doct. 3. A sign of such a condition, that is, of a man turning to a bruit
beast, is, to follow the passions of corrupted nature, without reason.

Use. This may serve to convict and condemn many, that seem unto themselves
to be excellent men.

Doct. 4. Such men do corrupt also whatsoever natural goodness they have in
them.

This is gathered from this word, corruption, as it is explained, Jude v. 10.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, therefore to hate and detest such courses.

Doct. 5. Such sinners are entangled in their sins, and kept unto destruction,
like as bruit beasts in their snares, wherewith they are taken.

So 2 Timothy 2. 26. Lament. 1. 14.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to fly from all corruption, as we would
from the snares of eternal death.

Verse 13. And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count
it pleasure to riot in the day time: spots they are and blemishes, sporting
themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you:

Verse 14. Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin,
beguiling unstable souls; an heart they have exercised with covetous
practices, cursed children.


The Analysis.
AFter that description of these men, which was set down in the three
foregoing verses, here in the beginning of this 13 verse, is again repeated
that just punishment which they must expect. they shall receive the reward of
unrighteousness. Then he makes a new description of the same men, that they
might wax the more fierce if it were possible. And he describes them by three
chief vices, 1 By the luxury, whereunto they gave their minds. 2 By then
uncleanness, 3 By their covetousness. Their luxury is set forth and
aggravated, 1 By the adjunct of pleasure. 2 By the adjunct of time, that it was
in the day time. 3 By the effect, that they did by this means, as spots and
blemishes, defile not only themselves, but also those with whom they were
conversant. Of which effect also he shows the cause in another effect, that
deceiving was joined with this luxury. Their uncleanness is described, 1 By
the helping causes or instruments, in these words: Having eyes full of
adultery. 2 By the adjunct of constancy, because they cannot cease from sin. 3
By the effect, beguiling unstable souls. Their covetousness is explained, 1
By the primary subject of it, in these words, the heart, there it was seated. 2
By the adjunct of custom, in these words, A heart ex-excised. Last of all, the
end and sum of this description is expressed, that they are accursed children.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. When we think of the sins of wicked men, we should likewise think of
their punishments.

This is gathered therehence, that the Apostle does ever now and then put in
this, while he speaks of these men's sins.

Reason. 1. Because these two are in Gods purpose and their own nature knit
together.

2. Because the consideration of sin does oftentimes more hurt then good, if
the consideration of the punishment be not joined unto it.

Use. This may serve to condemn those, that take delight only in the
commemoration either of their own, or other men's sins.

Doct. 2. Profuse luxury is a sign of a man sinning securely.

This is gathered out of the text, and it is expressly set down, Jude v. 11.

Reason. Because such men do either not think at all of the judgments of God,
or do labor at least to remove such thoughts out of their minds.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, not to account such men happy, as the
multitude uses to do.

2. To admonish us, to beware of such excess.

Doct. 3. Luxury, the more it is showed openly, the more it is to be condemned.

This is gathered from that Epithete, in the day time.

Reason. Because it is so much the farther off from shame, and consequently
from repentance.

Use. This may serve to condemn that impudence, which many men have gotten.

Doct. 4. There is the greatest danger in those sins, from which the greatest
pleasure and delight arises.

Reason. Because pleasure is a sign of a perfect habit.

2. Because pleasure is very hardly left.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to beware of those delights which arise
from sin.

Doct. 5. They that please themselves most in their sins, do most defile and
contaminate both themselves and others.

This is gathered from these words, spots and blemishes, as it is also Jude v.
12.

Reas. Because the more any sin appears in the Church, the greater dishonor
does it bring, not only to the sinner himself, but also to the whole Church,
whereof he is a member.

Doct. 6. The outward members also of wick^d men are full of wickedness^.

This is gathered therehence, Having eyes full, etc.

Reason 1. Because out of the abundance of the heart all our faculties, and all
the instruments of operations receive impressions answerable unto the heart.

2. Because sin, or temptation unto sin is admitted into the heart it self by
the outward senses, as by channels or gates; so that the eyes and such like
corporeal instruments are filled two ways, both in the ingresse and the
egresse of sin: Whence it comes to pass, that as the gates of a great City use
to be fuller then the other parts of the City, by reason of the frequent
ingresse and egresse of people, so also are the eyes of such like men.

Use 1. This may serve to instruct us, to see and bewail the miserable
condition, whereunto men are obnoxious by reason of sin; because they have no
part clean or void of sin.

2. To admonish us, to use all care to cleanse our selves, and all our
faculties and parts both of body and mind from such uncleanness.

Doct. 7. The uncleanness of the body is oftentimes joined with impurity of
religion.

This is gathered from these words; adultery.

Reason 1. Because the hindering cause or that which keeps it off is removed,
namely, pure religion.

2. Because this is the just judgment of God, Romans 1. 26.

3. Because by reason of these carnal affections men do withdraw themselves
from piety, or impugn it.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, so much the more religiously to embrace
purity in religion.

Doct. 8. In such men covetousness is oftentimes joined with their impiety.

This is gathered from these words, covetous practices.

Reason. Because that does chiefly pertain to the rule and sway which the
devil exercises over his servants, 1 John 2. 16

2. Because by covetousness they seek those things that serve to nourish their
impurity of life.

Use. This may serve for a general admonition, to abstain even from the least
sins, if we would not admit of others also.

Doct. 9. The exercising of the heart unto such sins, does very much strengthen
and increase them.

This is gathered from that word: A heart they have exercised.

Reason 1. Because exercising a man's self unto sin brings in and increases
the habit.

2. It is a token that a man takes pleasure in such sins. For no man does
willingly exercise himself in those things wherein he takes no delight.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, according to the counsel of the Apostle,
1 Timothy 4. 7. to exercise our selves unto godliness, not unto wickedness. For
as the Apostle there says, verse 8. that bodily exercise profits little; so
in this comparison may it be said, that the exercise of sin is not only
unprofitable, but very hurtful.

Doct. 10. They that are after this manner accustomed unto their sins, are
hardened in them.

This is gathered from these words; They cannot cease from sin.

Reason. Because by this means sin gets great strength and dominion.

2. Because every way unto repentance is stopped up.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to leave off our wicked purposes in time.

Doct. 11. Such men are most to be detested.

This is gathered from these words: cursed children.

Reason. Because they are most opposite and contrary unto that which is most to
be loved.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to show our zeal in flying from sin and
sinners.

Verse 15. Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray following the
way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,

Verse 16. But was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb Ass speaking with man's
voice, forbad the madness of the Prophet.


The Analysis.
THe Apostle here still continues in explaining and illustrating the
covetousness of these men by way of a similitude, which he makes between them
and Balaam the son of Bosor. Now the quality wherein they are compared is first
propounded in general, that they followed his way, that is, they imitated him
in the like manner of doing, and then set forth in particular, 1 By the effect,
that they forsook the right way, and went astray into by ways, that is, into
naughty and wicked ways. 2 By the proper cause of this effect, that they loved
the wages of unrighteousness, like as he loved it, that is, for the desire of
filthy lucre they gave themselves over unto impiety and unrighteousness. 3 By
the adjunct that follows upon this effect namely, Gods rebuking of him, v. 16.
which is set forth by the instrument, that he made use of to do it, namely, a
dumb Ass. The fitness also of this instrument as he was made use of at that
time, is declared by their inequality, because he shows that this Ass was in
some sort wiser then his Master. For when the Master, though he was a Prophet,
was mad, this Ass by his wisdom as it were, rebuked and corrected that
madness.

Quest. But here a question may be made concerning this Balaam the son of
Bosor, who is here called a Prophet, and yet is said to have sinned most
wickedly, Whether he were a true Prophet of God, or no?

Answ. He was sometime endued with the gift of Prophecy that God had
communicated unto him, as it appears, Number. 22. so^ 23, 24. But in a special
manner in 23. 26. the Lord is said to have put words into his mouth, so also
verse 20. and cap. 24. 2. the Spirit of the Lord is said to have come upon him,
and verse 4. he is said to have heard the words of God. Yet he was not a holy
Prophet of God, but as he was given to other vices, and especially to
covetousness, so also he was skillful in the Magic arts, by whose help, as
it is said Numb 24. 1. he used to seek for enchantments. Such an one therefore
he was amongst the Prophets, as Judas was amongst the Apostles: of which sort
also the old Prophet that dwelt at Bethel, seems to have been in some respect.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. The wicked of every latter age do in their courses imitate those
wicked men, that lived before them.

This is gathered from these words: Following the way of Balaam.

For these men did not propose Balaam unto themselves for an example to
imitate, but because they went in the same ways, therefore they are said to
have followed him.

Reason 1. Because that inbred corruption, from which such wicked courses are
derived, as from their original fountain, is one and the same. For although
it does not work always and in all altogether after the same manor, yet when
it meets with natures alike, and the like occasions also happen, then it is no
less like it self, then an egg is like an egg.

2. Because the same teacher of wickedness, the tempter and old Serpent works
effectually in his bond slaves throughout all ages.

3. Because oftentimes also the courses foregoing do not only by tradition,
but by transmission as it were also beget courses like themselves.

Use 1. This may serve to inform us, not to be too much troubled at the
wickedness of men, that live with us, because there is nothing new under the
Sun in that kind.

2. To admonish us, not to expect any singular thing from wicked men, while
they remain such, above that which we read of other wicked men before them in
ancient time.

3. To exhort us therefroe, to labor to be like the ancient godly men, that
are commended in Scripture.

Doct. 2. This is common to all the wicked, to forsake the right way, and go
astray in that which is not good.

This is gathered from these words, Which having forsaken the right way are
gone astray:

Reason 1. Because the right way is in observing the will of God, or in doing
the good works which God has before ordained that we should walk in them,
Ephesians. 2. 10. Psalm. 119. 1, 2, etc. But wickedness is another crooked way,
which men have found out themselves, clean contrary to the will of God.

2. Because that is the right way which certainly leads unto life, and
eternal happiness, Matthew. 7. 14. but wickedness tends unto death, Prove. 7.
27. and 8. 36.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, diligently to beware of this going astray,
always looking unto the right way.

Doct. 3. Covetousness, where is prevails, does most certainly produce this
going astray from the right way.

This is gathered from these words: who loved the wages of unrighteousness: so
1 Timothy 6. 17. He that trusts in uncertain riches, does not trust in the living
God; and therefore he does necessarily follow a new way clean contrary unto
that which the true and living God has showed us.

Reason. Because a covetous man is obnoxious unto all the temptations of the
devil, which have any show of gain; so that he accounts gain godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. 9. and this is it which is meant in the text, they love the wages of
unrighteousness, that is, they seek lucre, though it be joined with the
greatest iniquity.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to take heed therefore and fly from
covetousness, as from the greatest plague and enemy of godliness, Coloss. 3.
50.

2. To exhort us to labor (...) contentment, 1 Timothy 6. 6. 8,

Doct. 4. All such wickedness is rebuked by God.

This is gathered from the beginning of v. 16. But was rebuked, etc.

R^ason 1. Because the Scripture and law it self which is transgressed by sin,
does therefore rebuke that sin, Romans 7. 7.

2. The consciences of sinners do usually also check them, Romans 2. 15.

3. The very creatures do it also after their manner, Deuteronomy, 31. 28. and if they
should not in their appointed order sufficiently rebuke sinners, there should
some extraordinary miracle be showed rather then they should not be convicted,
as we see here in the example of Balaam.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, to apply our minds unto these rebukings
of God, and not to be careless of them, as desperate men use to be; but to
yield unto them, and shun all those things that are rebuked by God, either in
the Scriptures, or in our consciences, or in the creatures.

2. To exhort us, to use all diligence to seek and preserve in our selves that
testimony of God and our conscience, which may be for our comfort, and not for
our rebuke.

Doct. 5. Those men are extremely and brutishly mad, that will not be rebuked
or stopped in their impiety, unless it be by some miraculous work.

This is gathered from the end of verse 16. the dumb Ass speaking with (...)
voice, forbad the madness of the Prophet.

Reason. Because such men are deprived of common sense touching spiritual
things, and are given over unto a reprobate sense.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to beware of that hardness of heart,
which cannot believe God speaking in his word; and not to give way to that
vain imagination, which Dives with his brethren is said to have maintained,
Luke 16. 30. and Abraham refutes. verse 31.

Verse 17. These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

Verse 18. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were
clean escaped from them who live in error.

Verse 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

Verse 20. For, if, after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning.

Verse 21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them.

Verse 22. But it is happened unto them according to the true Proverb; The Dog
is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing
in the mire.


The Analysis.
IN these verses is contained a refutation of the false teachers, of whom a
description was made before. Now the sum of this refutation consists herein,
that all those things were vain, which they promised to their disciples or
followers. And this is in general showed by those comparisons which are made
verse 17. Where these teachers are said to be wels as it were, without water,
and clouds without rain, because they make show of many things worthy to be
desired, but they perform nothing at all. Upon occasion of these similitudes,
by the way he repeats the punishment which God had prepared for them, by a
continuation of the same Allegory, namely, that whereas they are wels as it
were, or clouds making show of some mist, they shall at length certainly find
the mist of eternal darkness. 2. The same vanity is illustrated by the
impulsive cause that moved them to spread abroad their new opinions, which was
their swelling vanity, verse 18. in the beginning, and by the effect thereof,
which was their crafty seducing of Christians to give themselves over to the
lusts of the flesh, at the end of the same verse. 3 The same vanity of their
promises is set forth, verse 19. at the beginning, by the great dissimilitude
and opposition that is betwixt them and their promises. For they promised
liberty unto others, when they themselves were servants of corruption. Thence
the vanity of their promises is made manifest and palpable as it were; because
they promised that, whereunto they themselves were strangers, and far remote
from it. 4. That which is put in the dissimilitude, namely, that they were
servants of corruption, because some might make a doubt of it, the Apostle
confirms it at the end of verse 19. by the general definition or description
of a servant, or that bondage which he meant, namely, that he is another man's
servant, that is overcome by him. For he that is taken by the enemy in war,
is brought in bondage to him, at least until he has paid the just price of
his ransom. 5. The misery of this bondage is amplified in respect of those,
that have made profession of faith and holiness, by comparing things unequal,
betwixt that condition, whereunto they were obnoxious before their calling, and
this which they have brought upon themselves by their Apostasy, where the
misery of the latter condition is made greater then the former, verse. 20. and
the reason of it is given, verse. 21. Because the sin is greater, which is
committed after and against the knowledge of the right way, then that which is
done through ignorance; which inequality is also illustrated by a comparison of
the like things, that is explained in proverbiall sentences, of the Dog and the
Sow, verse 22.

Quest. Here arises a Question, Whether those that were seduced by the false
teachers, were before true believers?

Answ. They had that faith which we use to call temporary faith, but they were
never soundly rooted in faith. This is proved out of the 14 verse, where all
those that were seduced by these deceivers are called unstable souls. For if
they had been by sound faith grafted into Christ, then they should have been
stable and corroborated in him also. And whereas they are said verse 18. to
have clean escaped from the wicked, this was, 1 In respect of the profession
which they had made of their true conversion. 2. In respect of the assent,
which we must think that they did give inwardly also unto the word, by which
they were called to this conversion. 3. In respect of the change which they had
made in their outward carriage. 4. In respect of some small beginning also,
whereby they tended toward holiness it self.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. They that go astray themselves from the right way, and cause others
to go astray, whatsoever they make show of, they have nothing else in
themselves or in their errors but vanity.

This is gathered out of verse 17. and the beginning of 18. For they are said
in the text to be as it were vanity it self, as Solomon faith of all things
that are under the Sun, in respect of happiness they are vanity of vanities.
Now they are said to be vain, 1. Because they have only a show of some truth or
good, not the thing it self. 2. Because they make a show of communicating some
good unto others, but they do not perform it, nor can they. For that is
properly called vain, which is void of that thing which it should have, or
which is unfit for that use and end whereunto it should serve.

Reason 1. Because they have forsaken God, who is the fountain of all true and
solid good.

2. Because they are led by Satan, who is the father of lies and of all vanity.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to beware therefore of such men, that we
be not in any wise deceived by them. For this were to embrace vanity in stead
of eternal happiness.

Doct. 2. Yet such men in their vanity are usually most puffed up.

This is gathered from verse 18. in the beginning. So 1 Cor. 8. 1. Knowledge
puffs up. Which if it be true of the knowledge of things that are true in
themselves, if they be not known as they ought to be known, as it is explained,
verse 2. Then much more must we think so of that knowledge which has a show of
some singular excellency, when there is no solid good in it at all.

Reason. Because such men seem to themselves to be wise, not only above the
ordinary sort, but also above those that excel in the Church of God, yea
sometimes above the Apostles themselves and Prophets, and therefore are wont to
boast of some depths which they have; which the holy Ghost therefore calls the
depths of Satan, Apoc. 2. 24.

Use. This may serve to inform us, always to suspect those men, that are in a
wonderful manner puffed up with their own private conceits of some part of
religion.

Doct. 3. That such men do oftentimes seduce many, and have diverse followers,
it comes to pass chiefly thereby, that their doctrine, either for the matter
of it, or the manner of their teaching, is very agreeable to the carnal lusts
of men.

This is gathered from these words: they allure through the lusts of the flesh.

Reason. Because as the flesh does easily apply it self at all times unto
carnal doctrine, by reason of that communion that is betwixt them; so
especially and most easily does it, when the doctrine is covered with a show of
religion or truth.

Use. This may serve for admonition, that if we would be safe from infection
and seducing, we should diligently labor for mortification of the flesh. For
neither are they only in danger of seducing that have not yet known the truth,
but they also that have in some fort clean escaped from those that live in
error, as it is in the text.

Doct. 4. The chief lust of the flesh, whereby men are wont to be seduced, is
the love of carnal liberty.

This is gathered from the beginning of verse 19. So Psalm 2. 3.

Reason 1. Because the flesh always seeks its peace and quietness, which it
cannot enjoy, but by giving it self over unto the lusts thereof; and hence it
is that carnal men account the command of God and his Word, a yoke, and strong
cords, and bands, etc.

2. Because in liberty there is some kind of show of that dignity and
excellency, whereof all the sons of Adam are most desirous ever since they
drank in that poison of the Serpent, Ye shall be like Gods.

3. Because it has a false shadow of that Christian liberty, whereunto we are
called, John 8. 32. 33, 34. Hence it is, that the cursed sect of Libertines,
which under a show of liberty overthrowes all religion, finds many
well-wishers thereunto, even amongst those that are Christians in name.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that always follow after liberty of
what kind soever it be. For Christians are the servants of righteousness,
although they be free from sin, Romans 6. 18.

2. To admonish us, to repress and restrain in our selves this carnal desire
of liberty, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

Doct. 5. They that most labor for this carnal liberty, are the most wretched
servants of sin.

This is gathered from these words; they are the servants of corruption. So
Romans 6. 20.

Reason 1. Because they are overcome and led captive by sin.

2. Because they give up themselves wholly to obey sin, Romans 6. 16. 19.

3. Because they remain in this bondage, although it be the worst of all, with
a kind of pleasure; so that they are the servants of sin more, then those are
the servants of men, that are gally-slaves: for these men's minds always wish
for liberty, but the others are very well pleased in their most servile
condition.

Use 1. This may serve to infrome us, how we should stand affected toward such
men. For although they seem to themselves to be the only happy men almost, yet
they are in truth objects most worthy of pity, and not of envy.

2. To admonish us, more and more to get out of this bondage, by yielding our
selves wholly unto God and his righteousness, Romans 6. 18, 19, 22.

Doct. 6. They that are brought into this bondage, after that they have made
profession and confession of the truth, their condition is more deplorable,
then the condition of other sinners.

This is gathered from, verse 20, 21.

Reason 1. Because their sin is greater then other men's. For where no law is,
there is no sin; where the law or the knowledge of the law is less, there the
sin is less: but where the knowledge of Gods law and his will is greater,
there the sin is made greater and heavier.

2. Because they do wonderfully dishonor God, while they profess themselves
to have known his discipline, and to have had experience of it in some measure,
and do afterward reject it, and prefer sin before it.

3. Because the devil the Prince of sin does more severely beset those, that
he has withdrawn unto himself from the flight as it were, Matthew. 12. 45.

4. Because the anger of God is incensed against such men, Heb. 10. 26, 27.

5. Because there is scarce any place left for them to repent, Heb. 6. 6.

Use. This may serve to admonish all those, that know the way of God, to labor
also to continue constantly in the same, in all parts of their life and
conversation.

Doct. 7. The filthiness of sin should make men to abhor a returning to
the bondage thereof.

Reason 1. Because we are called unto purity.

2. Because we have professed an abomination of that impurity which is in fin.

3. Because it is abominable unto God, and makes men abominable in his sight.

Use 1. This may serve to condemn those, that take delight in this
filthiness, and think they gain credit unto themselves thereby, by gracing and
setting out their speech with oaths, and labor to make their conversation
pleasing, by applying themselves unto the customs and vicious and filthy
courses of men.

2. To admonish us, to put before out eyes this filthiness of sin. So shall we
renew our repentance, and be confirmed in the grace of perseverance.

Chapter III.
Verse 1. This second Epistle (beloved) I now write unto you, in both which I
stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance:

Verse 2. That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the
holy Prophets, and of the commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and
Savior.


The Analysis.
THe Apostle now making haste to the end of the Epistle, 1 Repeats the scope
and aim that he had in writing, in the 1 and 2 verse. 2 He does again describe
those men, of whom he writes this Epistle, that they should beware, verse 3, 4.
3 He refutes their blaspemies, from verse 5. to verse 11. 4 He shows the use
and fruit of his doctrine, which all the faithful should make of it, from
verse 11 to the end. In repeating the end and scope of the Epistle he sets it
forth and describes it, 1 By the genus, that it is a putting in remembrance. 2
By the effect, that it stirs up. 3. By the object, that it was directed unto
them, that had a pure mind. 4 By the means how to obtain this effect, namely,
those things which were spoken before by the Prophets, and commanded by the
Apostles, verse 2. 5 By the manner how all these things might be made the more
effectual: to which purpose he uses a kind of illustration, namely, that
this putting in remembrance was iterated and repeated with an earnest
vehemence. This second Epistle I write, and that with a fatherly kind of love,
which is intimated in the title which he gives them, when he calls them beloved.
Of the putting in remembrance we spoke before, c. 1. v. 12 13. and also of
stirring up: Therefore passing over them, we come to the next.

Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. The minds of the faithful should be endued with purity, and
sincerity, that they may receive the divine admonitions as they ought to be
received.

This is gathered from these words: I stir up your pure minds. Now he does not
so much commend them by this his testimony, as show them, what thing they ought
chiefly to labor for, that they may receive benefit by this writing. So James
1. 21. and this first Epist. cap. 2. verse 2.

Reason 1. Because, as in all things that are of any moment, there is always
required some preparing of the subject, for example, as in husbandry, plowing
and harrowing of the ground: so and much more also is it required that we
should prepare our hearts to receive the word of God with benefit, Ierem. 4. 3,
4. Now there can be no fitter preparation, then by sincerity to lay aside all
those things, that are contrary to the word, and hinder the efficacy thereof.

2. Because the word of God is sincere, and therefore it requires sincerity in
those that receive it, 1 Epist. c. 2. v. 2.

3. Because without sincerity nothing at all is done aright. For sincerity is
the common affection of obedience.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that have no care at all, rightly to
dispose themselves for to receive the word of God aright.

2. To exhort us, to labor chiefly for this purity of mind, and sincerity of
heart.

Doct. 2. They that have a pure mind, do willingly receive and retain those
things that are proposed unto them out of the Prophets and Apostles.

This is gathered from verse 2.

Reason 1. Because Christ's sheep know his voice and follow him, John 10. 27.
Now his voice sounds in the Prophets and Apostles.

2. Because in the Prophets and Apostles all things agree with sincerity, 1
Pet. 2. 2. Psalm. 19. 8, 9.

Use. This may serve to inform us, to examine our minds according to this
rule: for they that care not for the words of the Prophets and Apostles, have
not purity of mind; but they that cleave fast unto them, although it be
accompanied with diverse infirmities, have always in readiness a sure argument
of their sincerity.

Doct. 3. Yet the very best have need to be often stirred up unto these duties.

This is gathered from these words; This second Epistle I now write.

So Phil. 3. 1, and this Epistle, c. 1. v. 10, 13.

Doct. 4. Such admonitions are works of Christian charity.

This is gathered from this title, beloved.

Reason 1. Because they tend to deliver men from the greatest evil, and to
communicate unto them the greatest good.

2. Because they pertain unto the communication which is exercised by charity.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those that cannot endure admonitions, and
take them for their enemies that use them. Gal. 4 16. 2 Timothy 4. 3.

2. To exhort us, to exercise our selves unto this duty with all charity.

Verse 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days,
scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

Verse 4. And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the
Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of
the creation.


The Analysis.
Upon occasion of the Apostles testimony before cited, there is in these words
a new description made of some wicked men of whom we must greatly beware. For
in that he says, that this is first to be known, what these wicked men are,
of whom he does admonish us, he does thereby mean not only to show that this is
necessary to be known for the understanding and applying of the Apostles words
with benefit, but also that this may and ought to be chiefly observed out of
the Apostles words, namely, that there shall come such men in the last days.
For so is this phrase explained, Jude, v. 18. These wicked men are described in
general, 1 By their impiety toward God, that they are scoffers. 2. By their
impurity of life and deeds, that they walk after their own lusts. Then in
special by their arguing, that the wicked scoffers used, to defend their
impiety, and to remove the contrary doctrine from themselves, verse 4 For in
those words is expressed, 1 their scoffing, which was before noted in general,
and 2 their argument is set forth, whereby they would persuade themselves and
others, that they might walk after their own lusts, without fear or danger:
namely, because the coming of God, the expectation whereof did deter men
from such a life, is not to be feared, in these words: Where is the promise of
his coming? Now this they confirmed to themselves and others by a vain
comparing the times that went before with those that were to come; that whereas
there was no coming of the Lord to judge the world since the times of the
Fathers, and from the creation of the world, there was no cause to fear that
any such thing would happen at the end of the world, in these words, For since
the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning
of the creation. Now this whole description, or rather the thing described,
that is, this impiety, is illustrated by the adjunct of time, wherein chiefly
and by a special kind of eminency or abundance it is found, namely, in the
last days.

The Doctrines arising here-hence.

Doct. 1. In the reading of the Scriptures we must give special heed unto
those things whereof we have greatest use.

This is gathered from these words: Knowing this first. For the Apostle would,
that for the present they should first and chiefly think of those things, that
the Apostles had spoken for their present use, touching those wicked men.

Doct. 2. The Scripture foretells most grievous things of the last days.

So 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1.

Reason 1. For that iniquity does abound more in the last days, it is because
knowledge does abound, which is held under righteousness: that makes the sin
the more sinful, Romans 7. 13. and does more incense the wrath of God, Romans 1.
18.

2. Because the last ages, by reason of that depravednesse and corruption which
has overspread mankind, are as it were an the sink of all the ages that went
before, to receive their d^egs.

Use 1. This may serve to inform us, not to be too much troubled in mind, when
we see as it were inundation of iniquity and impiety, flowing every where;
because such things were foretold us before, John 16. 4.

2. Not to fashion our selves to those courses, that are common in this age,
but to prepare and arm our selves rather against their contagion.

Doct. 3. Amongst wicked men they are the worst of all, that scoff at
godliness.

This is gathered from this word, scoffers.

Reason 1. Because they are not only unbelievers, but despisers of the faith
also. For scoffing is from contempt.

2. Because their consciences are feared as it were with a hot iron, that can
be wrought upon by no instruction, and therefore they are quite desperate. For
they have quenched and choked even those natural sparks, which are wont to
break out in all men's hearts.

3. Because they are the chosen instruments of the devil to turn aside others
from godliness, and to make the faithful servants of God ashamed of it, if it
were possible. For the proper effect of scoffing is shame.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to shun such scoffers as the monsters and
p^sts of mankind.

Doct. 4. They that maintain wicked opinions in their mind, are given to
impurity in their life.

This is gathered therehence, that the same men are called scoffers, and such
as walk after their own lusts.

Reason 1. Because the proper cause, why such men do labor so much to cast off
all sense of religion, is no other, then that they may with all
licentiousness, give themselves wholly over to their most filthy lusts.

2. Because such wicked opinions or imaginations do let loose the raines to all
concupiscence, and therefore are the cause of increasing that wickedness,
whereof at the first they were the effect.

Use 1. This may serve to inform us, not to think that wicked and profane and
Atheistical men do speak from any reason or judgment, when they scoff at
religion. For they are beasts in their life, and therefore they have also
beastly imaginations, which they are wont to bring forth under a show of reason.

2. To admonish us, in shunning profane and blasphemous opinions and
imaginations, to beware especially of a wicked life, because it makes way for
all wicked opinions.

Doct. V. That is proper to wicked and profane men, in some sort to deny the
coming of the Lord, and his judgment.

This is gathered from verse 4 at the beginning.

Reason. Because the expectation of judgment is a strong bridle to restrain
and keep in the wickedness of men, which ungodly and profane men do most of
all desire to shake off.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, by all means to take heed, that we be not
any way partakers of that impiety: which comes to pass not only then when we
do utterly deny his coming, but also when we do either make any doubt of it,
or apprehend it as a thing far off from us, or do ineffectually think of it,
not edifying our selves in faith and obed^ence.

Doct. 6. The fallacy wherewith wicked and profane men do deceive themselves,
consists therein, that they will believe nothing above their senses, and do
oppose their sense against the testimony of God.

This is gathered ver. 4. at the end. For since the Fathers, etc.

Reason. Because they are sensual men, Jude, v. 19. and are led by sense and
sensible things, like as bruit beasts.

Use 1. This may serve for information: hence we may understand that the
contradictions of profane men are void of all reason, and therefore are to be
contemned with detestation. Nothing can be more contrary or mad, then to
consult with nature about supernatural things, and to fetch the judgment of
spiritual things from sense.

2. To admonish us, not to attribute any thing to our senses in matters of
faith. For it is all one, as if we should seek the judgment of reason amongst
bruit beasts.

Verse 5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the
heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in the water,

Verse 6. Whereby the world, that then was, being overflowed with water,
perished.

Verse 7. But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are
kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition
of ungodly men.


The Analysis.
IN the refutation of this profane opinion, the Apostle does first reprove the
ignorance of these profane men, verse 5. 6 7. Secondly, he does instruct the
faithful touching the coming of the Lord in those things, that did most
pertain to the confirmation of them in the truth against such temptations that
might arise from such humane cavillings, verse 8. 9, 10. The Apostle reproves
their ignorance, 1 From the cause, that it was voluntary or affected ignorance.
2 From the object, namely that truth, which they willingly were ignorant of,
and did oppugn. Now that truth which is affirmed contradicts that assertion,
whereby these men would confirm their opinion. For when they had said it, and
had brought it for an argument, that all things did continue in the same estate
from the beginning of the creation, the Apostle denies this, and shows the
contrary by the history of the flood, v. 6. then by comparing things alike, he
gathers that the same also is to be expected concerning the destruction of the
world by fire at the coming of the Lord, that was before in some sort
performed by the destruction of it in water, v. 7. 3 The reason of this
consequence is taken from the common cause of creation, preservation, and both
destructions of the world, namely, the word and will of God, v. 5. 7. 4 He does
illustrate the conclusion it self concerning the destruction of the world by
the end thereof, that it may withal be applied unto those wicked ones, with
whom he now dealt, v. 7 at the end, while he calls the day of the Lord the day
of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. For in these words he threatens
eternal damnation unto those profane men, that denied his coming, which must
certainly be expected at the coming of the Lord.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. It is the property of wicked men to be willingly ignorant of all
things, that cross their lusts.

This is gathered from these words: They willingly are ignorant of. All men are
ignorant of many things, but the faithful are not ignorant of those things
that are necessary for them unto salvation, nor do they please themselves in
the ignorance of any truth, much less in the ignorance of those things that
pertain unto the practice of religion: nay they do very much labor for this
knowledge, whereby they may be brought unto eternal life: but the wicked,
although they do very much desire to know other things, yea and are too curious
in it, yet they love to be ignorant of those things that pertain to the
bridling of their lusts and reproving of their sins. This is that ignorance
which is called voluntary and affected.

Reason 1. Because they affect those vices whereunto this knowledge is
repugnant. Therefore they eschew knowledge as a thing that is evil unto them,
and makes against them; and affect ignorance as a thing that is good for them
and very well agreeing with them. For he that has resolved with himself to
give his mind unto sin, and to continue therein, seeks to have peace and
quietness in that condition, and therefore abhorres that truth which
convinces his conscience of sin, and suffers him not to sleep in it.

2. Because he is given unto those lusts that stop up the way unto saving
knowledge, and hold him ensnared and entangled so that he cannot freely
endeavor and labor for true knowledge: therefore he affects ignorance in this
respect, not so much in it self, as in the cause of it.

Use 1. This may serve to convince those, that please themselves in the
ignorance of holy things, because this is the property of a wicked man.

2. To admonish us, never to shut our eyes against the light of the truth.

3. To exhort us, on the contrary to use all our endeavor and give all
diligence to gain knowledge, especially in those things that pertain to our
own practice and life.

Doct. 2. It makes very much for the taking away or lessening of our
ignorance, to look upon the works of God that are past, that from them we may
gather the works that are to come.

This is gathered from the comparison that is here made, v. 5. 6, 7.

Reason. Because the works of God are as looking-glasses, wherein Gods
sufficiency and efficiency are proposed unto us to behold.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to look slightly upon the works of
God, nor to read the histories of them as we read humane histories, but so,
that we may always behold God in them.

Doct. 3. Those public works of God, the creation, preservation, and
destruction of the world, first by water, secondly by fire, are often to be
meditated upon, and compared one with the other.

This is gathered from the same comparison.

Reason. Because God has proposed those, as very remarkable arguments, to
work some sense at least of religion in men's minds.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to exercise our selves in these meditations,
which God has commended unto all sorts of men.

Doct. 4. In all such works of God, that is especially to be considered that
they are by the word of God, and do depend thereupon.

This is gathered from verse 5, 7.

Reason. Because we can receive no benefit by meditating upon Gods works,
unless we do behold the perfection of God in them. Now the perfection of God
in his works does very much appear therein, that all things are done by his
word and according to his will.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to turn our eyes from all second causes,
and to acknowledge God and his word in all things. For thence it comes to
pass, that men often times attribute those things unto fortune, which are done
by God, because they are ignorant of the power of Gods word. And such an
opposition there seems to be in the text, betwixt the words of the wicked,
(when they say that all things continue, making no mention in the mean time of
God, by whose power they continue; but rather closely attributing this
continuance to fortune or second causes,) and that assertion of the Apostle,
whereby he affirms that the world was at first by Gods word, and is kept by
the same word:

Doct. 5. Every consideration of the works of God should be applied to the
comfort of the faithful, and terror of the wicked.

This is gathered from v. 7. at the end.

Verse 8. But (beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.

Verse 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count
slacknesse) but is long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.

Verse 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up.


The Analysis.
IN this other patt of the refutation the Apostle propounds unto the godly
and faithful those things that might establish and confirm their hearts in
the truth, touching the coming of the Lord. 1 Therefore he persuades them to
understanding and knowledge, contrary to the ignorance of the wicked. For
whereas he had spoken before of the wicked, this they are willingly ignorant
of, now turning to the faithful he exhorts them unto the contrary. But be not
you ignorant of this one thing. 2. He propounds the thing it self, which he
would have them in a special manner to understand and observe, which contains
two things. 1 That the prolonging of the Lords coming is not with that
slacknesse, which should be a stumbling block to any man, both because it is
not to be judged of according to our sense, but by the eternity of God, in
respect whereof that space of time, which seem^s very long unto us, is but as
one day, v. 8. and also because the end of this prolonging is the conversion
and salvation of sinners: and therefore this prolonging proceeds not so much
from slacknesse, as from patience, verse 9. 2 That the manner of his coming,
(both because it shall be sudden, and also because it shall be with majesty and
great terror,) is such, that it should rather make men careful to prepare
themselves for it, then to be curious in inquiring about the time it self, or
to complain of slacknesse.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. When wicked and profane men are reproved, refuted and condemned in
Scripture, this is done for the faithful and elects sake, whose edification
and salvation God has respect unto, even when he seems to speak unto others.

This is gathered from the beginning of verse 8. where the Apostle turning
himself directly unto the faithful, shows that these wicked men were refuted
for their good. So 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Jude, v. 20. 1 Timothy 6. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 14.

Reason 1. Because the whole Scripture and all the means of salvation do by a
special kind of propriety belong unto the faithful.

2. Because God will not have his word to pass without some fruit: Now wicked
men are oftentimes so fore-lorne, that no congruous fruit can be expected in
them, but only in the faithful.

Use 1. This may serve to inform us, to judge aright of Gods intention in
those things that he does about men that are past all hope and incorrigible.
For as the Apostle says of Oxen, that God takes not care for Oxen, but for
men; so should we think that God takes not care so much for these bestiall
men, as for the faithful and elect whom he does chiefly speak unto, even when
he seems to speak unto others.

2. To admonish us, not to neglect or despise such rebukings of the wicked, as
if they did nothing belong unto us, but wisely to turn it to our own use.

Doct. 2. The faithful do then profit by the word of God, which is against the
wicked, when they are become much unlike the wicked.

This is gathered therehence, that whereas the Apostle did reprove the wicked
of ignorance, he does now exhort the faithful to knowledge, Prove. 1. 15.

Reason. Because the courses and fashions of the wicked are therefore set forth
unto us, that we might avoid them.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, not to suffer our selves to be led away by
the example of the wicked multitude. For God does not propose it as a thing to
be followed, but to be shunned and avoided.

Doct. 3. We should in a singular manner differ from the wicked therein, that
we judge of the ways of God not according to the sense of the flesh, but
according to the nature of God.

This is gathered from these words: One day with the Lord. With men it is
otherwise.

Reason. Because spiritual things are to be judged of spiritually. Now all the
ways of God are in some sort spiritual and divine.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, that in such examinations are wont to
consult with flesh and blood, and not with the word of God.

Doct. 4. The end of all Gods ways, as they have respect unto men, is the
repentance and salvation of the godly.

This is gathered from v. 9. Now here arises a question.

Quest. Whether all and every particular man be meant thereby, when it is said,
that God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance?

Answ. The patience of God according to its nature has that use and end, to
lead all sinners unto repentance, Romans 2. 4. and in that sense might their
interpretation be admitted, who understand these words and the like of all and
every particular man: But that the Apostle in this place has special
reference to the elect, it appears thereby, that he speaking of the beloved of
God, verse 8. and reckoning himself amongst the number of us, says, that God
is long-suffering to usward, that is, toward those beloved, and is not
willing that any should perish that is, any of them: because Gods principal
work toward men is the salvation of the faithful, and therefore all his ways
tend thereunto, as unto the scope and mark whereunto they are directed.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove the madness of those men that blame those
things in God, which make most for their use and good, as these men do in the
slacknesse of the Lords coming.

2. To admonish us, not to pervert these right ways of God, but always to*
apply them unto that use whereunto they tend, that is, to the furtherance of
our own repentance and salvation.

Doct. 5. The way of the Lord, when he comes to judgment, shall be with
swiftness, majesty and terror.

This is gathered from verse 10.

First, it shall be sudden, because the hour and day thereof is not revealed,
and because the most part of men expect no such thing. And it shall be full of
majesty and terror, because it is the coming of the Lord not in humility, as
his first coming was, but in glory.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, to prepare our selves accordingly against
this coming of the Lord. For this use the Apostle presses and exhorts us
unto in the rest of the chap.

Verse 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,

Verse 12. Looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat?

Verse 13. Nevertheless, we according to his promise, look for new heavens,
and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

Verse 14. Wherefore (beloved) seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.

Verse 15. And account, that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation, even
as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has
written unto you.

Verse 16. As also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these things, in
which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned, and
unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction.

Verse 17. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
steadfastness.

Verse 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: to him be glory, both now and for ever, Amen.


The Analysis.
IN these verses is contained an application of the doctrine, that was before
propounded concerning the Lords coming, to the use and edification of the
faithful. Now this application is made by an exhortation to piety and
holiness, which is first of all propounded, v. 11. Secondly, confirmed by the
doctrine that was before proposed concerning the manner of the Lords coming,
v. 12, 13. Thirdly, it is again repeated and pressed, v. 14. Fourthly it is
again confirmed by the doctrine that was before proposed concerning the
patience and long-suffering of God, v. 15. begin^which is in this place
confirmed by the testimony of the Apostle Paul: whose testimony is illustrated,
1 Thereby, that he was frequent in such testimonies, v. 16. begin. 2 By a
preoccupation, whereby the faithful are admonished not rashly to wrest any
thing that Paul spoke concerning such things, to a contrary sense, because
although he spoke some things that are hard to be understood, yet they are such
that they are not wont to be wrested, but by some perverse men, who wrest the
other Scriptures also unto their own destruction. From all these he inferres in
the last place a conclusion both of the foregoing exhortation, and also of the
whole Epistle, which is, to have a care to be steadfast, v. 17. and to labor
for growth, v. 18. The end whereof is showed to be the glory of Christ in that
doxology, wherewith the whole Epistle is closed up.

The Doctrines arising herehence.

Doct. 1. All Scripture must be applied unto a practical use, that it may
advance holiness and piety.

This is gathered from v. 11. Now not only in this place is this order of
instruction observed, but in all the Epistles and Sermons that are propounded
in Scripture.

Reason 1. Because the end of all Theological doctrine is to live well.

2. Because a bare apprehension and speculation of the truth, and a mere
assent thereunto, is nothing worth, if it be separated from the practice. For
this is found in some sort in the devils themselves.

3. Because the temptations of the Devil tend chiefly thereunto, that if he
cannot hide the truth, yet so to choke it, that it can bring forth no fruit in
the life; and thereupon he takes occasion to mock and deride men.

Use. This may serve to admonish us all, to labor for this both in private and
in public, in preaching, hearing, reading, and meditating upon Gods word; and
never think that we know any thing as we ought to know, unless we know it unto
piety and holiness.

Doct. 2. In piety and holiness we must always aim at and labor for the
highest perfection.

This is gathered 1 From the question, What manner of persons ought ye to be? 2
From the plural number, which is used in the original, (...), in your
conversations, that is, in all piety and holiness.

Reason 1. Because every degree of piety and holiness is as desirable in it
self as the first is.

2. Our desire and affection toward the highest degree of holiness and piety
is a part of the very first degree. For there is no true holiness without a
desire of perfect holiness.

3. Because we are called unto perfect holiness, neither can we see God
without it.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, that rest in a kind of lukewarm
profession, or in a partial practice of piety and holiness.

Doct. 3. It makes much for the advancing of piety; to look for and hasten unto
the commming of the day of the Lord.

This is gathered from v. 12, 14. So Phil. 3. 20.

Reason 1. Because it takes off our minds from all those things, that belong
unto this present world.

2. Because it makes us to prepare our selves for the world to come, 1 John 3.
3.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to raise up our minds, as much as may be
unto this spiritual looking for the Lord.

Doct. 4. Our chiefest care touching the coming of the Lord, should be, to be
found of him in peace.

This is gathered from v. 14. Now by peace is meant that condition which is
pleasing unto God and approved of him; whereupon not the anger, but the
goodness and grace of the Lord is showed in communicating all happiness.

Reason 1. Because the Lord is looked for, as the supreme Judge, whose anger is
to be flyed from and avoided, and his approbation and good liking greatly to be
sought for.

2. Because unless peace be then had, afterward it cannot be had for ever.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, while we live here, continually to seek to
confirm our peace with God, and in our own consciences. Now this is done by
raising up in our selves a lively faith and confidence, establishing our hearts
with all assurance of salvation, and following all those means whereby our
calling and election is made sure.

Doct. 5. From the long-suffering of God we must gather those things which make
for the promoting of our peace and salvation.

This is gathered from v. 15. For when the Apostle tells us, that we should
account, that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation, he means that we
should so think which our selves and dispute of these things, that we should
gather nothing else from thence, but that God aims at our salvation, and
therefore we also should take great care of it.

Reason. Because by these meditations we should confirm and increase both our
faith and our sanctification. For our reasonings and disputes, when they are
rightly directed either by the word, or by the works of God, as by a third
argument, to the strengthening of our faith and increase of holiness, a^ unto a
conclusion drawn from thence; they are those moral means whereby we work out
our salvation with fear and trembling.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to exercise our selves more and more in such
meditations: for being accustomed thereunto, from them we shall gather honey
and medicine, whence others suck poison; as we may see in this example, where
from the Lords prolonging of his coming the wicked men did conclude those
things whereby they might confirm their profane opinions; but the faithful
are taught on the contrary, by the same argument to conclude those things,
which make much for their salvation. Such is the Apostles admonition, Romans 6.
12.

Doct. 6. In the writings of the Apostles and Prophets, Christians must have a
special heed to those things, which do most direct them to such connexions or
conclusions.

This is gathered from verse 15. Where Paul's testimony is cited to confirm and
illustrate this connection, and not to prove other things, which might easily be
proved out of his writings.

Reason 1. Because these are most necessary for us to know, and of perpetual
use.

2. Because that was the wisdom of God communicated to the Apostles and
Prophets, that they might explain these truths unto us most frequently, and
clearly, which is the reason of that elogy which is given unto Paul in the
text, according to the wisdom given unto him he has written unto us.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, that do more willingly by far give heed
unto those things, which do little or nothing at all touch the conscience of a
man, or the practice of his life. The inward inclination and disposition of a
man appears manifestly by those things which he does chiefly heed in his
reading and hearing: As if a man be given only to the tongues, he will observe
nothing but the words and phrases: If he be a lover of Chronology, he will take
notice of nothing but the things that have been done, and the moments of time
wherein they were done: If he be a Disputer, one that seeks praise by
arguing, he will mark nothing, but those things which make for controversies:
so a godly man, although he will not neglect other things, which serve for his
use, yet he does chiefly fix his mind upon those things, which do most directly
tend unto godliness.

Doct. 7. We must understand all these things so, as if they were directly
written unto us.

This is gathered from these words, Has written unto us. So Hebr. 12. 5.

Reason 1. Because such was the wisdom of God, which spoke in these holy men,
that they wrote those things which do belong unto us, as well as unto those
that lived at that time.

2. Because God would have the Scripture to be the public instrument of the
Church, not of one age only, but of all ages. Therefore every part of it is the
rule of life both to me and thee, as well as unto those to whom it was first
given.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, not so much to meddle in the Scriptures,
as if we were in another man's ground, or in those things which belong unto
others, and not unto our selves.

2. To exhort us, to raise up our minds to receive the word of God with a
congruous affection. We may easily think with our selves how our minds would be
affected, if we should receive a letter that was written by the hand of God in
heaven; and directed unto us by name, and sent unto us by one of his Angels:
after the same manner should we be affected in reading and hearing the written
word of God.

Doct. 8. In other truths that are less necessary for us to know, there are
some things hard to be understood.

This is gathered from v. 16. He does not say this of all Paul's Epistles, nor
of any one whole Epistle, much less of the whole Scripture, (as the Patrons of
traditions, and Enemies of Scripture would have it,) but of some few things:
And he seems to point chiefly at some of those things, which Paul wrote
concerning the coming of the Lord, because he speaks of that in this place,
and therefore it is very likely that he has reference unto those things which
are spoken of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.

Reason 1. Because there are some divine mysteries so far remote from us,
that in what words soever they be expressed, they will always be hard to be
understood.

2. Because God would have some things, that are not of so general and
necessary a use, out of his singular wisdom to be more obscurely propounded:
which seems to be the proper reason, why those things of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians.
2. were in the Primitive Church hard to be understood. For God would for just
causes, that Antichrist should come, and that most men should be ignorant who
he was, until he did come.

3. God would exercise the industry and diligence of the faithful in searching
the Scriptures, and finding out the sens^ and meaning of them, not to deter men
from reading them as the Papists use to do, by wresting this argument amiss.
For Peter in this place does not discourage so much as the common sort of the
faithful from reading the Scriptures, but rather stirs them up to read all the
Epistles of Paul, although he tells them that there are some things in them that
must be read warily.

Use 1. This may serve to admonish us, not to think it sufficient that we know
the words of the Scripture, but to give all diligence and labor to find out
the true sense and meaning of them.

2. To comfort us, that we should not be too much cast down, if we do not fully
understand some things in the Scripture, because we are told that there are
some things hard to be understood.

Doct. 9. They are unlearned and unstable men, that wrest the Scripture to
maintain their impiety.

For that the Apostle means, when he says that they wrest the Scriptures to
their own destruction; not that it is such an exceeding dangerous thing to
interpret some place of Scripture otherwise then it should be, but that it is
the property of a very wicked man to argue out of the word of God against God,
or against his will. Now they are called unlearned, not because they have no
skill in the tongues or arts, wherein such pestiferous men may sometimes
excel; but because they never effectually learned or were taught those things
which pertain unto religion: And in the like manner are they called unstable,
because in that knowledge of the truth which they had and professed, they were
not grounded and rooted, but as men not grounded nor settled they are easily
turned from their profession.

Use. This may serve for admonition, that the people should not therefore be
deterred from reading the Scriptures, as the Papists would have it, (who in
this very thing show themselves to be unlearned and unstable, because they do
mischievously wrest this place, where they are expressly told, with how great
danger it is wont to be done:) but that we should labor to cast off all
ignorance and unsteadfastnesse, that so we may be made fit to read the
Scriptures with profit. For this is the scope of the admonition, as the Apostle
uses it in this place.

Doct. 10. The end and scope of all divine information and instruction in
respect of the faithful is, that they may be stablished and grow in that grace
which they have received.

This is gathered therehence, that this is the conclusion of this general
Epistle, as it was of the former; which holds good also in all other Epistles
and Sermons, in respect of those that are now faithful:

Reas. Because by their effectual calling they have faith, hope, and charity
begotten in them, so that they have the principle of all grace in them, nor can
any thing be wanting ^eli^es the continuation, confirmation, and increase of
the same grace.

Doct. 11. To obtain steadfastness in grace there is required a foreknowledge
of those things that tend to the confirming and strengthening of our minds.

This is gathered from these words: Seeing ye know these things before.

Reas. Because although our stedfastnes depends upon God* and the effectual
operation of his Spirit, as it is in the conclusion of the 1 Pet. 5. 10. Yet
God works in us not only by a real efficacy, but also agreeable to an
intelligent nature by teaching and persuading. Now nothing can be wrough^ by
this moral way, unless knowledge go before, and so i^ must be wrought by
knowledge, as it is in the text.

Use 1. This may serve to refute the Papists, who maintain^ ignorance and
commend it in the common people: they are sufficiently refuted by him, from
whom they boast that they have received the Chair, free from all error. For
Peter in thi^ place, 1 Requires knowledge of all the faithful, yea, an^
foreknowledge too of those things whereby they might b^ confirmed against
profane men and false teachers. 2 He pre^supposeth that all that were truly
faithful to whom this Epi^stle came, were already endued with this knowledge.
3 H^ presupposes that his Epistles were so clear and so ea^ie to b^
understood that all the faithful which should read them wit^ godly minds,
might understand out of them, and consequent^ly out of the Scriptures, those
things, whereby they being forewarned, might be fore-armed against those false
deceiver^ whereof he spoke.

2. To admonish us, not so to look for our confirmation and strengthening from
God, as that we should in the mean time neglect the knowledge of those things
that tend there^unto, but to use all our endeavor both in general to know
those things that are absolutely necessary unto salvation, an^ in particular,
those things that are necessary for us in our pra^ctise upon occasion of any
temptation.

Doct. 12. Besides knowledge there is required also unto the steadfastness of
grace a continual and vigilant heed.

This is gathered from this word, Beware.

Reason 1. Because knowledge is unprofitable, if it be not reduced to practice.
Now practice in difficult things cannot be had without care and heed.

2. Because many are the fallacies wherewith we are assaulted, both in the
Devil and his instruments that are without us, and in our selves also, by
reason of that mavelous deceitfulness of our hearts, such as cannot be
expressed.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, above all to take notice of our selves, and
those things that tend to the strengthening and stablishing of us in grace.

Doct. 13. It should be an argument to the faithful to beware of the errors of
some men, because they are wicked men, ungodly, and profane.

This is gathered from that title, the error of the wicked.

Reason. Because all those things that have any agreement with ungodliness are
to be shunned and avoided. Now those things that are in a special manner
approved of by profane men, must necessarily have an agreement with profane
ungodliness.

Use. This may serve to admonish us, by this means amongst others to strengthen
our selves against diverse errors, that are most pleasing to profane men.

Doct. 14. Sedfastnesse and increase of grace are joined together.

This is gathered from the connection of v. 17. with the 18.

Reason 1. Because like as trees and all plants, and also living creatures,
from which this metaphor is taken, are corroborated by growth, while they
acquire greater and perfecter strength, so also do the faithful.

2. Because the steadfastness of grace consists not therein, that it continues
in the same degree, but that it is formed in its nature, one property whereof
of is, to grow until it come to perfection.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to labor therefore to be so stablished,
that we may also grow and increase in all grace.

Doct. 15. They grow in grace, that grow in the effectual knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

See Chapter 1. Verse 2.

Doct. 16. Our (...) and desire in all things, even in those th^^ that pertain
to our own salvation, should be the eternal glo^^ God in Christ.

This is gathered from the last words.

Reason 1. Because we are the servants of Christ bo^^ with his own blood. Now
whatsoever the servants get (...) turns to the proper good and benefit of
their Masters.

2. Because God is absolutely the chiefest good.

3. Unless we do this, whatsoever we do, it is not (...) out of religion. For
it is the nature of religion to give the (...) unto God.

Use. This may serve to exhort us, to lift up our minds (...) and more to
maintain the glory of God in all things, (...) Apostle does by that closing
particle, Amen.

FINIS.

