A DECLARATION, OF SEVERAL OBSERVATIONS TO THE READER, worthy of perusal:
Concerning the Cause of the Subjects Grievances hereunder expressed.
Humbly Shows,
THat by the several Acts of Honorable PARLIAMENT, concerning what Brewers
and Victuallers are limited to observe and perform, is contained in the first
year of the late King James of blessed memory the 7th. Chapter; And the fourth
of King James the fifth Chapter; And especially, in the 21, of King James the
9th. Chapter.

Wherein it is plainly expressed, That no Victualler shall sell less then an
Ale-quart of the best Bier or Ale for j. d. If he de, he shall forfeit xx. s.
for every such offense. As by the same Acts may appear.

And by the Ordinance of the Honorable Parliament, dated the 17. day of
October, 1643. in these ensuing words; It is (verbatim expressed) That no
Brewers or Retailers of any Bier or Ale, etc. Shall take any more in the price
thereof upon sale of the said commodities, then according to the usual rate
and prizes appointed by Law for the same (excepting only the rate of Excise) as
they will answer their contempt to both Houses of Parliament.

Never thelesse so it is; Brewers contrary to the said Acts and honorable
Ordinance of Parliament, does take of the Victualler xij. s. the Barrel, for
every Barrel of Bier and ordinary Ale, which is iiij. s. above the Statute, in
lieu of the ij. s. he pays for Excise. And takes of the Victualler for
strong Ale xvj. s. the Barrel, which is viij. s. in every Barrel above the
Statute, for the two shillings he pays for Excise. And for the Ale he
retaileth at the Tun side, he takes vj. d. per Gallon, which is after the rate
of xviij. s. the Barrel, being x. s. the Barrel above the Statute, for the
ij. s. he pays for Excise.

And the Victualler, who pays xij. s. the Barrel, makes by Retayl of every
Barrel xxiiij. s. or at least xxj. s. the Barrel: That is to say, By selling
at ij. d. the Ale-quart it comes to xxiiij. s. And by retayling at vij.
Farthings the quart comes to xxj. s. the Barrel. So in the first place he
takes viij. s. besides the ij. s. he pays for Excise; besides his ordinary
gain allowed by Statute: And in the secoad place he takes v. s. in every
Barrel, besides the ij. s. he pays for Excise; besides his ordinary gain
allowed by the Statute.

And for the strong Ale which the Victualler pays to the Brewer xvj. s. the
Barrel, he sells the same at ij. d. the Wine-quart, which amounts to xxx.
s. the Barrel: So that he takes xiiij. s. the Barrel; that is to say, x. s.
in the Barrel clearly: besides his ordinary gain allowed by the Statute.

That a Barrel of Beer containing 36. Ale Gallons, And every Gallon does, or
should yield vj. Wine-quarts: So that j. d. farthing for every Wine-quart that
is retailed out of doors by the Victualler is vij. d. halfpenny the Ale Gallon,
which amounts to xxij. s. vj. d. the Barrel; whereby the Victualler tak^s
vj. s. vj. d. prosit upon every Barrel, besides his ordinary gain, and the
Excise paid, which is conceived to be a contempt against the Statute; And by
the Rates of Beer appears, and the Victuallers doings in the premises is
contrary to the Ordinance of the Honorable PARLIAMENT.

Now what the Subject or Commonalty has and does pay for Beer and Ale to them
uttered in liew of the Excise, is willingly and freely done for the good of the
State, but not with an intent to enrich, or be put into the Brewers, or
Victuallers purses; who (as before is mentioned) do in an extraordinary way
take that which is contrary to the Laws and Ordinance of Parliament, And that
the Brewer may take no more above the Statute, but that he returns for Excise,
And that the Victuallers may according to the Statute, and Honorable
Ordinance, be limited at what Rates, and what sized Measures the Subject should
be served, which will give great contentment to the Commonalty.

And for the good of the State, and in their Name, the money that has been
heretofore taken, and gathered from the Subject and Commonalty, by the Brewer
and Victualler, above the Statute and Honorable Ordinance; as in the Premises
is plainly expressed, That the Brewer and Victualler may be compelled to pay
the Arrearages in their hands since the Excise rated: which Money will amount
to a mighty sum, to discharge and give satisfaction for the necessary
Designs and Service in hand, for the good of the State.

For one penny halfpenny, the Full-Pot or Flagon retailed within the Victuallers
house, is xviij. s. the Barrel, and a penny a Wine-quart is no less.

By which Premises, the Honorable State may receive 4. s. the Barrel for
Excise; whereas they now receive but 2. s. The Victualler may sell his Beer for
a penny a Wine-quart out of doors, and one penny halfpenny their best Beer the
Full-Pot or Flagon in the house, and be great gainers, and neither the Brewer
or Victualler pay no part of the Excise out of their own gains.

But the Commonalty that pays for Beer and Ale at the Rates aforesaid, the
Excise comes thereout.

And lastly, it is most humbly prayed. That the good Laws and Ordinances
heretofore enacted and confirmed by the Honorable Parliaments in the Premises,
may take effect, And a Reformation may now in the Premises, the Subject and
Commonalty enjoy their Rights and Liberties therein, expressed in the memorable
Covenant ordained by the Honorable Parliament, and Ordinance of Excise may be
much improved.

By T. A. a Well-willer for the Public good.
LONDON, Printed for JANE COE, according to Order. 1645.


