A SERMON Preached at Sea.

Before the Honorable Sir ROBERT ROBINSON, Knight, Principal Commander of His
MAJESTY'S Squadron of SHIPS, now Riding at Spitt-Head, November the 24th, 1678.

Before the Administration of the Holy SACRAMENT, and Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy to the several Commanders and Officers of that SQUADRON, in Obedience
to the KING's Command.

By GEORGE ALSOP, M. A. Chaplain to Sir Robert Robinson.

By His Majesty's Special Order.

London, Printed for Langley Curtis in Goat-Court, upon Ludgate Hill, 1679.

To the Honorable, Sir ROBERT ROBINSON, Knight, Principal Commander of His
Majesty's Squadron of Ships now Riding at Spitt-Head.
SIR,
WHen I Consider what you are by Place, and then Consider what you are by
Grace, it makes me stand Amazed: To see a Man whose Education springs from
Noise and Tumults, Wounds and Slaughters, Religious, Upon Grounds of holy
Circumstance:

To see A Man whose Dealing is in Blood and Waves, becalmed with Pious Thoughts
for Churches good:

To see A Man that fears not Devils if he meets them in a Fleet at Sea; To lay
his Roughness by, and meekly fall upon his Knees, to Invocate his GOD for King
and Kingdoms good; Bespeaks Religion in the Soul of War.

This is a Lesson you have Learned and Practiced long, That none with Courage
brave can serve his King, without he first with Pious Care Obey his God.

Can he be fit to Fight and Die, that knows his wicked life is such, that when
he leaves this World he must to Hell.

The Christian Cause though e're so good must sink, if Christians Lives be bad.
Can he be trusted to subdue a Foe, that cannot subdue his Sin; and quarrel
strength, that is a Slave and Captive to his Lust?

Sir, Your Life proclaims you Christian, and your Courage Man: And where I see
these meet in one, I may be bold to dedicate a Piece for Churches good to such
a Man, without a Frown or Scorn.

It was your Pious Faithful Care this Sermon should be Preached; and so it was
your Zealous Care to Acquaint His Majesty with what was done, that so it might
be made Public: And now I hope your Wishes will succeed, that Heaven may be
Honored more, and Christians Bettered still, when e're it comes abroad, shall
be the Prayers of him who with his Soul does Love the King and Church's Peace.

Your most Obedient Servant and Chaplain, Geo. Alsop.

A SERMON Preached at SEA.
Matthew. Chap. XXII. Verse. 11. And when the King came in to see his Guests, he
saw there a man which had not on a Wedding Garment.
DEarly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ; these words that I have read unto
you, are part of the Parable that our Savior delivered concerning a King, who
Marrying his Son, invited diverse Guests unto the Wedding.

The King who invited the Guests, is the Infinite, and Eternal God above; King
of all Kings, Lord of all Lords, who has Power and Mightiness in himself to do
what he pleases in Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell, the bottomless Pit of
Eternal Vengeance beneath.

He is a King in Heaven by his Grandeur and Majesty; in the World by his
Grace, tender Love and Goodness; in Hell among the Damned, by his Justice and
Severity.

Now the Bridegroom is his Blessed Son Jesus Christ, by Eternal generation the
Lord and Savior of us all.

The Bride that he Marries his Son to, is his Pure, Spotless, Holy Catholic
Church.

The time of the Marriage was at Christ's Incarnation, when the Divinity and
the Humanity were United: for as we observe, the best way to reconcile two
Disagreeing Families, is to make some Marriage between them; Even so the Word
became Flesh and dwelt amongst us in the World, that he might hereby make our
Peace, Reconciling God to Man, and Man to God.

The Banquet the Guests were invited to, was no Ordinary Entertainment, but
Wonderful, the Precious Blood of the Lamb of God (slain from the Beginning of
the World) preached in hi^ Word, and presented in his holy Sacraments; the next
was Remission of Sins, Everlasting Life, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy
Ghost; oh Admirable! Oh Sacred! oh Comfortable Feast for poor Miserable Sinners
to be invited to.

The persons appointed to invite the Guests, were the Holy Patriarchs and
Prophets in old time;

The Blessed Evangelists and Apostles in Christ's time;

The Divine Pastors and Preachers in our time; These are Messengers of the
great God, who have done, and still invite poor distressed penitent Sinners,
that are in the highway to destruction, to Come and Sup with him.

The Persons more particular that are Invited, are both Jews and Gentiles: for
although the Jews were specially called, (these glad Tidings coming first unto
them, as being the Select Peculiar People of God;) yet when they refused and
rejected the same, one going to see his Farm, and another to try his Oxen; a
third having married a Wife, and so could not come; God upon their Rude and
Dis-ingenuous refusal rejects them, and sends and invites the Gentiles, Aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel; Go into the Highways, etc.

And when these, who were invited, were come, there was one intruding Guest
found at the Table without a Wedding Garment.

And when the King came in to see his Guests, he saw there a man which had not
on a Wedding Garment.

Now these words will allow us these two Parts:

First, The Author of the man's discovery; and that was the King: When the King
came in, etc.

Secondly, The Fault he is Charged with, is want of a Wedding Garment.

First, The Author of the man's discovery, and that was the King. We read but
of one among so many that was without this Wedding Garment; the Messengers let
him pass for current, but when the King came in, he makes a second Survey and
Scrutiny, and finds out this one, who had not on his Wedding Garment; he
discovers this Unworthy Guest, which the Messengers could find no fault with;
Friend, how came thou in hither?

Beloved, so true it is, that our Eternal God that dwells in Light, that no
man can approach, sees not as man sees. We read in the 1st. of the Revelation,
and 14 Verse, that the Eyes of the Lord are like a flame of fire; they search
into the secret Apartments of the Heart; not a Corner nor part, but the Lord
sees and discovers it.

But, alas! poor short-sighted man reaches no further than the outward
appearance; if that be regular and smooth to the eye, his search is at an end,
he has discovered as much as he can; but the Eyes of God go down deeper into
the very Soul, and fathom the Bottom of the Reins, View and Discover how all
stands there. We read in 1 Samuel Chap. 16. Verse. 7. that the Lord Commanded
Samuel not to look on his Countenance, nor on the height of his Stature: for
the Lord sees not as man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but
the Lord looks on the heart. We may deceive men with our Countenance, our
Grave Gesture, Pageantry and Shows; but these cannot deceive God, or put a trick
upon the Almighty.

St. Paul tells us in the 4th of the Hebrews, 13 Verse, that all things are
open and naked to the Eyes of him we have to do with; That is, God has a full
prospect upon all Men and Women in the World, let them creep under what Mask,
Disguize, Canopie of Secrecy they will: Thou may lie, dissemble, and cozen
so closely and cunningly, that no Man nor Angel can detect thee; thou may
commit Adultery in the dark, and no man privy to it; Thou may steal when no
Eye sees thee: Thou may have Treason in thy Soul, Rebellion in thy Heart,
and yet thy outward seeming Conformity may Screen this from Man. Thou may
with Judas eat of the Sop, drink of the Cup, receive the Blessed Sacrament,
swallow the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; do all what the Law requires,
and yet thou may have corrupt Popish Reservations in thy heart to betray thy
Master: But all this while remember that thou stand Naked before the
All-searching Eye of an Omnipresent God, who knows what thou art, and sees
what thou do intend. Totus Auris, etc, says St. Ciril, etc. God he is all
an Ear, all an Eye, all an Hand; He hears all, he sees all, and has a hand
that can reach all where ever we be: God Almighty the Searcher of all hearts
takes up his standing at the door of our Souls, and with his Curious All-seeing
Eye views all our actions and resolutions how secret soever.

Holy David says, That God looks down from Heaven, and beholds all the Sons of
men; as well those in the deepest darkness, as those in the brightest light;
Whither (says David) can we fly from thy presence? if we take the wings of
the Morning and fly to the uttermost parts of the Earth, thou art there; if we
go up to Heaven, thou art there; if I go down into the thick smoke of Hell,
thou art there. Is it not a madness then to say, when thou art a going about
wickedness, peradventure the Night shall hide me; when the day and the Night
are both alike to God?

God sees thee when thou go out early in the Morning; God sees thee when
thou come home in the Evening late. God sees thee when the Candle burns; God
sees thee when the Candle is out. God sees thee when thou Conversest with thy
heart, and sit in Council with thy thoughts: What can we do but God sees
it; and whither can we go, but God will discover us?

And though this Doctrine be as true as God is true, yet is it not strange, and
full of Astonishing wonder, to see how Adam, and all the Sons of Adam labor to
hide themselves and their sins from God?

Adam, after his great Transgression in Eden, hid himself behind the Bushes,
and Trees of the Garden, as if they could have secured him from the All-seeing
Eye of his Maker; but he was soon sensible of his folly: for God in the Cool of
the Evening came to the very Bush where he lay, Adam, where art thou? Alas poor
wretch! nothing could hide thee from the Discovery of thy God.

And did not Cain, Adam's Son, tread in the footsteps of his Father? for when
he had Inhumanely Murdered his poor Innocent Brother Abel, how did he labor to
cover the blood with the dust of the Ground, to hide and conceal his
wickedness! For then God called from Heaven, Where is thy Brother Abel? how
Morose and Angry does he answer God, as if he knew nothing of it? Am I my
Brother's Keeper? Yet this would not do: God saw it when no Eye else saw it,
and punished him soundly for it. Sarah thought none did see her laugh, when she
seemed to mistrust God's promising her a Son; yet God saw it, though as the
Holy Text says, She only laughed within her self. God saw Zeeb behind the
Wine Press. God saw Saul when he hid himself under the Stuff. Who would ever
have thought that the Babylonish Garment, the 200 shekels of Silver and 50
shekels of Gold that Achan conveyed away, would ever have been discovered? No
Eye saw him when he brought them out of the Camp, he Intombed them under his
own Tent, all safe and secure as he thought; and yet God discovers this fact of
his and lays it open to all Israel. How did God openly manifest and display
the Abominable Idolatry of the Israelites, together with their Idols and
Images, when they had got themselves between two Walls from all appearance of
sight? and yet see how God brings the Prophet Ezekiel to the very Entring-place
of the Door that led into the Chamber of their Imagery; Ezekiel, Chap. 8. Verse
8, 9, 10. Then said he unto me, Son of Man, digg now in the wall; and when I
had dug in the wall, behold, a Door. And he said unto me, Go in, and behold
the wicked Abominations that they do here. So I went in, and saw, and behold,
every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the Idols of the
house of Israel pourtrayed upon the wall round about.

The Devilish Plotting Powder-Traytors met together in the Vault, they thought
themselves secure; shadowed from the eye of Notice, and fenced from the hand of
Justice: But as Dark as the Vault was, and as Close as they went to work, the
All-seeing God descried their Abomination, and destroyed them, and their
habitation. The Obscurity of their Cell, Thickness of Walls, Closeness of
Windows, with the Cloak of a holy Catholic Profession, thrown over all this,
could not make their Notorious Wickedness Dark to the Eye of Heaven.

Little did this late Brood of Romish Villains ever think, that their horrid
Intended Treason to Butcher the King, and Subvert the whole Kingdom, should
have been so manifested, and laid open, as, blessed be our Gracious God, it is
at this day.

How long was the Pope, the Cardinals, the Jesuits, the Monks, the Friars,
Hatching this Bloody Mischief; and just when they thought to have brought forth
their Inhumane Design, that God, that Viewed all their Meetings, saw all their
Doings, read all their Letters, Pardons, Bulls, Commissions; Crushed the
Cockatrice in the shell: If Elisha, who was but a man, could espy all the
Design and Contrivances of the Assyrian King, which he concluded of in his
secret Chamber; what then can escape the Eye, the Ear, the Knowledge of the God
of Elisha?

The Use that I will make of this Point, shall be that of Saint Ber. de
convers. ad Cler. C. 16. Caute Ambula, Te Videt Angelus Malus, videt te Bonus,
videt and Bonis and Malis Major Angelis, Deus: Our Impieties are not without
witness; the good Angels and the bad Angels, and he that is better than the
Angels, far above all Principalities, even the great God of Heaven and Earth
sees us, caute igitur ambula. It behooves us therefore to walk Circumspectly
and Sincerely; for though we may seem for a time to hide our selves and our
sins from God, yet at length God will find us out, as he did Adam in Eden, Cain
in the Field, Zeeb behind the Wine Press, David's Adultery and Murder, the
Israelites Idolatry; as he did the Powder-Traitors; as he did the Horrid Popish
Treason of late; as he did this Unworthy Guest in my Text.

It was good Counsel that one of the Rabins gave unto his Scholar, Remember
Three Things and thou shall never do amiss. 1. That there is about thee a
seeing Eye. 2. A hearing Ear. 3. A Book, wherein all thy works, words and
thoughts are Registered. Now did we really and weightily consider this, That God
saw us, that God heard us, and that God Registered all that we do, and will one
day bring us to an account for it; Certainly, there would not be so much
private Murder, so much private Adultery, so much private Treason against the
King, so much Hypocricy, so much self-Interest, so much Deceit, so much
Couzenage acted as there is. Did we believe that God heard all our Words, saw
all our Works and Doings, we should not dare to Affront God so openly, nor
Commit those frequent Abominations in the Dark as we do.

No man will be so Impudent as to steal in the face of the Judge; no man will
be so Notorious as to be drunk, or Commit Adultery in the Eye of his Prince;
and yet how often do men steal and are drunk and commit filthiness in the Eyes
of the Judge of all Men, and the King of the whole Earth.

A man that is truly persuaded God sees him, he will take heed what he does,
and that God hears him, he will temper his Tongue with Discretion; And that God
searches every Corner of his heart, he will be very mindful of what he
meditates and thinks on. A man who is persuaded that God beholds all his
Dealings in the World, he will take heed how he Borrowes, how he Lends, how he
Buys, how he Sells, how he Wrongs his Neighbor either in his Name, or in his
Goods, or in his Life: Be persuaded then to live as those that have always God
before them.

And now to stir you up yet further to this holy Duty of Sincere, Holy, and
Honest Walking, as in the Presence of the All-seeing God, take these Two or
Three Motives and Inducements following.

First, Consider, That that God that made thee, that feeds thee, clothes thee,
preserves thee, gives thee Health and Peace, and by his Mercy has kept thee out
of Hell; This very God Commands thee to walk before him in all honesty, and
godliness of life. We read in the 17. Genesis Verse. 1. That the Lord Commanded
Abraham to walk before him, and be upright; And in Abraham, he Commands all the
Children of the same Faith to walk before him, and be upright. Remember this,
if thou would be a Saint in Glory as Abraham, thou must obey the Command of
thy Maker, walking sincerely and holily upon Earth, as Abraham did. A good
Subject will obey the Commands of his King, and a good Christian the Commands
of his God.

Secondly, As it is the Command of God, That thou should walk holily as in
his presence, so we have the Example of God's Servants who are Renowned for the
Obedience of his Commandment. Holy Enoch walked with God, that is, he looked
upon God as who saw his Thoughts, Cogitations, Actions; heard all his words,
and his life was answerable to such a prospect.

How Holy, how Pious, how Religious, how Obedient was Abraham in Walking before
God? how Exact was holy David in this way? for fear of doing ill he placed the
Lord always before him. Psalm. 116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land
of the Living. Let the Command therefore of God, and the Example of his holy
Saints, urge thee to keep God always before thee.

Thirdly, As we have the Command of God, the Example of the Saints for our
walking as in God's Presence; so he that walks as in the presence of God, it
will certainly bring him to make a Conscienee of all Sin. When Joseph was
allured by his Impudent Mistress to commit filthiness, he made her this answer,
How shall I commit this Great Wickedness, and sin against God? The bridle that
restrained Joseph, was the fear of God, in whose presence he walked. If men
walked as in the presence of God, when Lust, when Covetousness, when Pride,
when Drunkenness, when Revenge, when Treason does tempt and allure them, they
would answer, We dare not meddle with you, for that God that is in Heaven sees
us; that God that is in Heaven hears us, we dare not do this Wickedness and sin
against God. Had the man in my Text propounded this to himself, he would never
have Intruded as he did to his Eternal Damnation. Many don't care how they
appear before God, so Man don't think amiss of them. Alas! what is it to seem
good and honest before men, but in God's Esteem be a Wicked Hypocritical
Reprobate?

This Unworthy Guest in my Text made as fair, as honest, and as Religious a
show as the rest; and yet you see he was Condemned as an Unworthy Guest, and
thrown into outer darkness. Let this then be always in thy thoughts, That God
sees thy Soul, however outwardly fair thou do appear to Man.

The Second Part.
THe Fault the man is here charged with, is the want of a Wedding Garment;
where we may Note, That it is not enough to present our Souls, our Bodies
before the All-seeing Eye of God, unless we come prepared as we ought.

The man here in my Text not being prepared when he came to the Feast, was Cast
into Hell.

It is something indeed to come into the Congregation to hear the Word
Preached, to receive the Sacrament, to bow our selves before Almighty God in
Prayer; But let me tell you, these are not enough; for if we rest here, these
will be but as fuel to add fire to our further Condemnation.

Judas Repaired into Christ's presence, but being not prepared, he was
Condemned as the Son of Perdition; he eat at the Lord's Table as well as the
rest, but as the Sop went down, the Devil went after it; which was a dear
Sacrament to him, To Eat and Drink his own Damnation: for want of Inward
Sincerity, an honest an sound heart, he was Eternally Damned.

All our Fathers, says St. Paul, were under the Cloud, that is, they had the
same Sacrament, in effect, with us, though not in substance; and yet how many
of them did God overthrow in the Wilderness?

From whence we will Note, That outward Privileges and Claims to God, without
Inward Sanctification and Holiness, profit nothing.

The Foolish Virgins had oil in their Lamps, but none in their Vessels; they
had outward Profession, but wanted inward Sincerity; they wanted a supply from
within; they had not Inward Grace, as well as outward Show.

There were many that lived with Christ in the Flesh, that did not eat and
drink with him; they Prophesied in his Name, and in his Name did cast out
Devils, and did many Wonders, and yet Christ professes he knows them not.
There must be Inward Holiness and Sincerity, as well as outward Show, or else
it comes to nothing.

Here then we see, that the Collusion of the Church of Rome is blown away with
the sound of this Doctrine: for the Men of Rome say, That outward works are
available to Salvation, though there be no Inward Conformity. When as we see
this Unworthy Guest made as Glorious a show to the eyes of the World, as the
rest at the Table; and yet was rejected by him that was the Searcher of Souls.

The Romanists say, The very receiving the Bread only (for the Priest drinks
the Wine) does remit sins, confer Grace, and gives us a sure Title to the
Kingdom of Heaven: Contrary to the Doctrine of my Text, and that of St. Paul,
who pronounces the Unworthy Receiver Guilty of the Body and Blood of Jesus. We
see then, let the Romanists say what they will, it is as much as our Souls are
worth, to come into the presence of God to eat and drink at his Table
Unprepared; you know what became of this Unworthy Guest in the Text.

Should God make a strict search among us, from the highest to the lowest, can
you think he would find but one Unworthy Guest, but one Unworthy Officer among
us? I can charge none of you with Unworthiness, but out of a tender regard to
your Eternal good.

I beseech you, as you value the Blood of Christ shed for you, and the
Salvation of your own Immortal Souls, every man of you that is invited to this
Blessed Feast of the Body and Blood of Christ, strictly to Examine himself,
before he Eats of this Bread, or Drinks of this Cup.

And now to prevent the Danger which the want of this Wedding Garment may bring
upon us:

First, I will show you, what this Wedding Garment is.

Secondly, The means how you may obtain it.

Thirdly, How we must use it when we have obtained it.

First, What this Wedding Garment is; There is great difference among the
Fathers, what this Wedding Garment is, One says it is the New Man. Another,
the observing the Commandments of Christ. Another, a Pure Conversation.
Another, an Upright Heart. Another, Regeneration, consisting in Faith and
Repentance. Another, Faith. Another, Charity. Another, good Works. Another,
Humility.

But (St.) Origin says, it is Christ, and so undoubtedly it is; because
whoever will come unto God, or partake of any Mystery of Salvation, must be
Clothed with Christ as a Garment, 1 Cor. 1.30. Who is made unto us the
Faithful, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Christ, as the
Apostle says, covers all his as with a Garment. We see plain enough that there
are spots in the Moon, but there are none in the Sun: So in the best of our
Graces and Worthiness, there are stains and spots, such as God would abhor to
appear before him, did not the Righteousness and Satisfaction of his Dear Son
Jesus Christ, cover us and appear for us. Christ Jesus is the Wedding Garment,
that makes us acceptable to the Father, without Christ, what should we do? it is
his Righteousness that must cover our Unrighteousness. It Is his Humility that
must cover our Pride, it is his Obedience, that must cover our Disobedience,
it is his Faith that must Cover our Diffidence, it is his Love that must Cover
our Hatred, it is his Zeal that must Cover our Lukewarmness; and then being
Covered with Christ as with a Garment, there can be no Condemnation unto us;
because as the Apostle says, we are in Christ Jesus: for without the precious
Merits of Christ, we are but Unworthy Guests. Was ever Man or Woman saved by
their own Works, by their own Merits, no not the Virgin Mary her self; My Soul
does Magnify the Lord, and my Spirit Rejoices in God my Savior, these are
Holy Mary's Words.

The Romanists will not allow of this Holy and Righteous Garment of Christ's
Satisfaction to be sufficient; but like David concerning Readiness Armor; it is
either too heavy or too long or too short, and so they strut in a Popish Coat
of their own Merit and Righteousness.

We read that Adam and Eve made unto themselves Coverings of Fig leaves to hide
their Nakedness, but God did dislike these, and so made them Coats of Skins,
and Clothed them therewith; teaching us, if we patch our own Satisfaction, our
own Works, our own Dutys, our own Merits together, and cover our selves with
them as with a Garment, and rely upon them as having force and Efficacy to save
and help us; then are we no way fit to appear in the Presence of the Eternal
God, who accepts of no man, but through the Merits, Works, and Satisfaction of
his Son Jesus. He that looks to be saved by his own merits, will undoubtedly
fall short of Heaven through his own presumption. It is a saying of Job, My own
clothes make me abhorred, so our own Works without Christ make us Loathsome in
the Eyes of God.

Let us all then be persuaded to Cast off the menstruous Rags of our former
Conversation, may be found in Christ, not having our own Righteousness which is
of the Law; but of that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness
of God by Faith: Phil. 3. ver. 9.

This is the Garment we must Labor for, this is the Garment that we must
strive and Endeavor to get, for to cover our Poor Naked and Immortal Souls.

2. Having showed you what this Garment is, I will now show you how it may be
obtained.

A thing may be made ours by diverse means.

1. We may buy it. 2. We may earn it, or deserve it. 3. It may be given us. 4.
We may have it by way of Exchange: And now that we may obtain this holy Garment
of Christ's Righteousness, it is the Counsel of Christ himself, Rev. 3. ver. 15.
Buy of me gold tried in the Fire that thou may be Rich, and white Raiment
that thou may be Clothed, that the shame of thy Nakedness do not appear.

But some will Object and say, What must we buy Christ the Savior of our Souls
with Money as Judas sold him?

Buy him we must, Judas sold him, but as the Prophet speaks in Esa. 55. ver.
1. Without Money and without Price. The reason of the Term Buying, here
mentioned, is; because there is a near resemblance between the Spiritual, and
the Material Buying.

1. In the Buying of Material things we see a want and need of them, before we
buy them.

2. There is a Longing or Desire to be possessed of them.

3. There is a Resorting to the place where they are to be had.

4. There is a laying down of the Money, and taking up of the Ware.

The like way we may observe in our Spiritual buying.

1. Before we buy a Commodity, we see the want and need of it; so before we can
have this Wedding Garment of Christ's Merits and Satisfaction, we must see,
know, and feel, that we want it, we must know what a dangerous State it is to
be without it.

1. If we have it not, we have no Peace of Conscience in this World, nor
Heaven, nor Happiness in the next.

2. If we are not covered with Christ, as with a Garment, this Judgment will
lay hold on us, we shall be Condemned and thrust out of doors, with the Cursed
Unworthy Guest in my Text, and have our Portion with the Hypocrites, in the
Lake which Burns with Fire and Brimstone. Now till we are thoroughly
persuaded of these things, That without this Garment we shall be deprived of
the Joys of Heaven, and be made Eternally Miserable in Hell, we shall never see
the need that we have of this Holy Wedding Garment of Christ's Righteousness;
the Whole need not a Physician, but the Sick, toll vulnera, toll opus Medici;
if there be no Disease, what need is there of the Physician: He that is full,
despises the Honey Comb, it is the hungry that sees and feels the want of Food,
that craves and seeks for it: so till we see our own Wretchedness, Blindness,
Poverty, dreadful State and Danger, Sin has brought us into, we shall never be
Clothed with this Wedding Garment.

2. When a man wants a Commodity, he longs and desires after it, he is never
quiet till he is possessed of it; so these that truly see the want of Christ's
Righteousness, they long and thirst after it, and are never satisfied till they
do possess it. God gives this Garment to none but those that long and earnestly
desire it. God says his Servants shall eat, but first they shall be a thirst.
God pronounces none blessed, but those that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness; not he that cares not whether ever he has Christ or no, so he
may be covered with his Lust, or his Pride, or his Drunkenness.

3. He that wants a Commodity, will resort to the place where it is to be had;
as Jacob's Sons, when they wanted Corn, they came down to Egypt where 'twas to
be had: so if we want this Spiritual Garment, we must go where it is; that is,
at Bethel, the Church and House of God; that is the Spiritual Wardrobe, where
all Heavenly Robes are laid up; there is the very place where Christ will meet
you in his Word and Sacraments: Where two or three are met together in my Name,
I Will be in the midst of them. Do you think they deserve to be Clothed with the
Righteousness of Christ, that prefer Worldly Affairs, Sleep, Lust, Walking
abroad, before the meeting with Christ in his Holy Church about their Eternal
Happiness.

4. He that wants a Commodity, when he comes to the place where it is, he
prizes the same, lays down his money, and takes up the Ware; and by laying down
his Money, he shows that he Esteems the Ware better than his Money; even so
must we resolve to throw off all the swelling Conceit of our own Righteousness,
our own Worth, our own Merits, our own Excellency; Accounting all things dross
and dung in comparison of Christ Jesus. Now Beloved, consider, Is not this a
gainful and blessed Change for us, when we may lay down our own
Unrighteousness, and take up Christ's Righteousness? our own Disobedience, and
take up Christ's Obedience; our own Pride, and take up Christ's Humility? and
till we do this, we are no way Clothed with Christ as with a Garment.

Thus much of the Proportion which is held between the Material and Spiritual
Buying; And now I fear, if most men should examine themselves by these Points,
there would be a great Defect in most men.

For Proof.
First, Do you see the want of Christ, the Great Necessity that you have of his
Righteousness, to Cloth your Naked Wretched Souls with? You can see the want of
Money, the want of Friends, the necessity of Preferment; but how few are there
who see the true Want and Necessity of Jesus Christ? but rather like the
Profane Duke that said, If he could have Paris, he did not care whether ever
he had Paradise. Never reckon upon Christ then, till thou truly see the want
more of Christ than Gold or Silver, Preferment, Health; or what ever this World
can afford.

Secondly, Do you long, thirst, and hunger after Christ? And can you be no way
satisfied without him? Does all the Profit and Pleasure of this World look vain
and empty without Christ? Then thou art Happy. It is observed, that most men
long and covet after the things of this life, and are never satisfied until
they enjoy and possess what they long, covet and desire. Now if thou Long'st
more for Christ, than for hidden Treasure; more for Christ, than for Health and
Pleasure of this life, it bespeaks thee in some measure to be worthy of Christ.

Thirdly, Do you resort with love and holy sincerity to the place of Worship
where Christ is; And not out of a Compliance only to the Law of Man, or for
fear you should be suspended from your Employment? If you do not Conform, have
a care of Hypocritical Juggling. You may deceive Men, but you cannot deceive God;
for where Man ends, God begins. The Unworthy Guest in my Text, did Conform
outwardly, when he meant nothing so inwardly: He came as plausibly to the Table
as any, when his Soul and Resolutions were found another way: But for so doing,
he was Eternally Damned.

Fourthly, Do you, when you come before God, cast off all Pride, Meritorious
Conceit of your own Excellencies; and with the poor Publican hang down your
Heads, beat your Breasts, saying, Lord have Mercy upon us Unworthy Creatures?
It Is observed, That most men have a Mountebank-Opinion of their own worth.
Narcissus like, we are very apt to dote upon our own shadows; but let me tell
you, that none wears this wedding Garment of Christ's Righteousness but he
that is contrite and humble in his own eyes.

Now by these you may know, whether you are fit for the Table of the Lord or
no; do you see the want of Christ, do you long for Christ, do you come with
Love and Zeal to meet with Christ; can you willingly lay down your own
Righteousness and take up Christ's; then come in the name of God, and eat of
this bread and drink of this Cup, or else it is as much as your Souls are worth
to meddle with them.

Now having showed you what this Garment is, and how you may obtain it: I will
now in the last place show how you must use it and wear it.

It is the Apostle's advice, Romans 13. To put on the Lord Jesus Christ; for let
me tell you, if we don't put on Christ as a Garment, Christ will one day put
off you with a nonnovi vos: I know you not, go ye Cursed into Everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

And now Beloved, that we use and wear this Garment aright, there are these two
Offices to be performed.

First, We must put off.

Secondly, We must put on.

First, Before we can put on we must put off; we must put off all the filthy
rags of our for^^r corruption, our sinful nature, our beast-like affections,
etc.

Men, when they put on new Apparel, pull off the old and throw them by; so if
you would be clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, you must cast off the
filthy clouts of your Menstruous Conversation.

The Swearer must put off his swearing, the Drunkard must put off his
drunkenness, the Unclean person must put off his filthiness, the Covetous man
his uncharitableness, the Envious man his hatred, the Traitor his Treason, the
Idolater his Superstition: for let me tell you, that you may as well persuade
me that Heaven and Hell are reconciled together, as that Christ and Sin dwell
together in one man; therefore if thou intend'st to be clothed with Christ as
with a Garment, thou must put off, as the Apostle says in the Ephesians. 5.3. All
uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil Concupiscence, Wrath, Malice,
Blasphemy, filthy Communication, lying one to another.

Secondly, As you must put off, so you must put on; and the means to put on
Christ is faith, believing, apprehending and appropriating Christ and his
Merits to our selves, we must believe all the promises of God in Christ Jesus
made unto man, and particularly apply the same unto our own selves, which is
only done by the Act of true Faith.

Faith is as it were the hand of the Soul which does reach Christ unto us and
put him on. Would thou have Christ dwell in thy heart, would thou put him
on as a Garment? believe Christ with thy mind and heart, and thou have him.

And now Beloved, that I may leave nothing wanting of my part to put you in the
right way for Eternal happiness, you must know that it is not every Faith, or
bare Believing of Christ will put on Christ as a Garment. No, then the Devils
may put him on, for they believe all the Historical part of the Bible, from the
First of Genesis to the last of the Revelations: Hypocrites believe in God and
in Christ, and yet for all that they are thrown to the hottest place of Hell.

Now that Faith that is saving Faith, that like a Hand reaches Christ, and
puts him on, is an Operative and working Faith.

First, Faith, that is saving, as the Apostle says, Purifieth the Conscience:
so then if thy Faith be true, it cleanses thy Soul from sin; it cleanses thy
Soul from Covetousness; it cleanses thy Soul from Lust; it cleanses thy Soul
from Pride; it cleanses thy Soul from Revenge; it cleanses thy Soul from
Drunkenness; it cleanses thy Soul from Hypocrisy, it cleanses thy Soul from
Rebellion; it cleanses thy Soul from Treason; it cleanses thy Soul from
Idolatry; it cleanses thy Soul from Faction; it cleanses thy Soul from all
manner of Wickedness.

The Devils Believe, but they cannot be cleansed from their black Abominations;
Hypocrites believe, and profess and make a fair show of outward Holiness, but
their hearts are not cleansed from Oppression, Lust, Murder, Treason, and
Rebellions. Our Savior of old Compares them to Tombs, now you know that Tombs
are often usually the most beautiful Ornaments of the Church; but let a man digg
within them, and he shall find nothing but putrefaction, stink, and dead men's
bones. Never say then, that thou Believe savingly, or that thou have more
Faith than Devils, Hypocrites; while Sin and Wickedness governs thy Soul.

Secondly, True Saving Faith works by Love: So it produces Works; Show me thy
Faith by thy Works, says St. James. Where there is true Faith in the Soul,
like the Centurion, it says to one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come,
and he comeeth, it Commands all our Actions, our Hand to Distribute to the
Poor, our Feet to Walk in the Commandments of God, our Hearts to be Upright
toward our God, and toward our Neighbors, our Tongue to Declare the Loving
Kindness of the Lord.

Faith in the Soul of Man, is like Sap in a Tree that lies hid; but Holy Works
are like Fruit that shows it self; where there is true Faith in a Man, there
will be Holy Works, there will be Hope, there will be Charity, there will be
Repentance, there will be Godly Zeal: The Apostle St. Paul tells us, that the
Just live by Faith; That is, they live the Life of Holiness; they live the Life
of Religion, they live the Life of Sobriety, they live the Life of Chastity,
they live the Life of Humility, they live the Life of Godly Love. They do not
live the life of Profaneness, they do not live the life of Drunkenness, they
do not live the life of Lust, they do not live the life of Pride, they do not
live the life of Revenge and Malice; these are the Works of the Devil.

Labor therefore for a true Saving Faith, A Faith that cleanses thy Soul from
Sin, and works by Love: If a man should come and tell a Person that is Rich,
that all the Writings in his Chest, that Assured him of his Possessions, were
Forged and Counterfeit, would it not make him start and go to his Chest, take
them out and have them read and considered on by the best and learned Council?
and shall not we look after our Faith, to see whether that be Sound and Real,
which is an Evidence of our Eternal Inheritances. Without the Garment of
Christ's Righteousness to cover our Souls, we shall never go to Heaven; and
there is no putting this Garment on, without a true sanctified Faith: Faith is
the Hand of the Soul that puts on Christ.

I cannot stand no longer upon this Point, the time has over-shot me; I will
conclude all with the Blessing that Jacob gave his Sons when they went into
Egypt to carry Benjamin, God Almighty Grant you favor in the eyes of the Great
Man: So the Lord Grant us all Favor in the Eyes of the Great God, before whom
we must appear this day at his Holy Table: And that we may have Favor, let us
bring the Beloved Benjamin with us, which is the Righteousness of Christ by
Faith; that this Blessed Feast we are Invited to, may not be a savor of Death
unto any; but a savor of Life unto all that shall partake of it, etc.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant; To whom be ascribed all Honor, Power,
and Glory, Adoration and Subjection, from this time forth, and for ever more.
And let all the People say, Amen.

Let us Pray.
FINIS.

