THE LIGHT UPON THE Candlestick.

SERVING FOR OBSERVATION Of the principal things in the Book called, The
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, etc Against several Professors, Treated of,
and written by Will. Ames.

1 John 1.5. This is the Message which we have heard from him, and we declare
unto you, That God is LIGHT, and in him is no darkness at all. Ephesians. 5.13. For
whatsoever makes manifest, is LIGHT. Printed in Low Dutch for the Author,
1662. and translated into English by B.F.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1663.

The Light upon the Candlestick.
THings are not for words, but words for things: if therefore we understand
things aright and as they ought, by words, it must be by such as are fit to
imprint the things themselves in those to whom they should occur, and then it
were enough (to make known our thoughts to others as we conceive them) only to
make use of such Words.

But forasmuch as we find the matter in this case far otherwise, and that two
men speaking or writing the same words, If words are too gross to express the
refined thoughts of mortal men, how much less then can they be in truth said to
be the ineffable Word of the eternal God?
may nevertheless have different, yea sometimes contrary thoughts, the
disability of performing this fitly by words or discourse, is clearly inferred.
Nor may we at all wonder at it, seeing we know to what a perpetual change
Languages are subject, even such that the very words may be changed from their
pristine signification. And the imperfection is so great, that whosoever should
have invented them, such as now they are in use, we should certainly believe
that he had little or no knowledge of those things that are thereby intended to
be signified. So that if we would better express things unto another by words
and speeches, we had need find new words, and consequently a whole new
Language: But that would be a toil and labor indeed.

In the mean while we see what a Sea of Confusion flows from hence upon all
mankind: For although there should be none who sometimes through ignorance, and
sometimes by subtilty or wickedness might rest or pervert words contrary to the
mind (...) the Work, upon whom they may cast the whole burden? Surely no: for
he that sees but a little clearly, sees, that there is always contention behind,
and no end till a man grows weary of it: Nor is the Conquest just his that has
Truth, but that can best handle his Tongue. A miserable thing if it were thus
to be sought and found! But it is not so with the true Religion.

Go to then, O man, who ever thou art, we will not draw thee off from one heap
of men, to carry thee over unto another, it is somewhat else we invite thee too.
Lend us but a little audience: Surely thou know thus much, That as it is an
extremity to receive all things without distinction, that present themselves to
us, so it is no less to reject all things without judgment. We invite thee to
something which may be means to attain to thy own salvation and well-being:
It Is little worth that is not worth the trial: The loss is little the gain may
be unvaluable.
Be as distrustful, or rather prudent or foresighted as thou will, thou can
not in reason refuse us thy ear in this thing: All the damage thou can
possibly have by doing that which we exhort thee to, is only to have taken a
little pains in vain, if that which is promised should not ensue: Whereas on
the contrary, should it follow, thou might come to the enjoyment of a matter
of so great a worth, that would not be exchanged for all that is esteemed great
in the earth. Moreover, it is not far to seek, but at hand, it is nigh thee, yea
and in thy self. And there thou may experience the trial of that which we
declare, which is the most certain and sure that can be desired.

We direct thee then to within thy self, that is, that thou ought to turn
into, to mind and have regard unto that which is within thee, to wit, The Light
of Truth, the true Light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the
world. Here it is that thou must be, and not without thee. Here thou shall find
a Principle certain and infallible, and whereby increasing and going on
therein, thou may at length arrive unto a happy condition: It Is hard helping
him that durst not try,
Of this thou may highly adventure the trial. But if thou durst not do so
much, it is hard to help thee. And if thou happenest to be one of (...) the
enjoyment can be but single and transient, and the causes incessant.

Now where this operateth in us after this manner by education and example in
manners and customs which are regulated by Opinion, and not by the true Light,
that men live altogether therein, is it any wonder that here (in these men)
there is so little, or no operation of the Light? Not at all.

We are so involved into the desire of that which is high in the World, so
overwhelmed in pleasures, that its almost impossible for the Light to cause one
desire after Good to spring or bubble up.

Where then these so contrary operations to the Light are, there it can never
break through.

According to the nature and kind of every thing, is the operation thereof:
Where they are opposite, the one must give way unto the other, and that which
is most powerful prevails: from whence also the effects thereof become most
visible. The LIGHT notwithstanding, abides always the same, and therefore
although man by sin, through his love and union to corruptible things, comes to
perish, be damned, and miss of his everlasting happiness, the Light
nevertheless which is in every man that comes into the World, abides for ever
unchangeable.

The Light is also the first Principle of Religion. No knowledge of God without
this Light.
For, seeing there can be no true Religion without the knowledge of God, and no
knowledge of God without this Light, Religion must necessarily have this Light
for its first Principle.

God being then known by this Light according to the measure of knowledge which
the finite and circumscribed Creature can have of the Infinite and
Uncircumscriptible Creator, The Light being found, and God thereby known, a
sure foundation is discovered.
man has obtained a firm Foundation, upon which he may build all firm and
lasting things: A Principle whereby he may without ever erring, guide the whole
course of his life, how he is to carry himself toward God, his Neighbor, and
himself, and all things else, whereby he may happily attain unto his chiefest
salvation, which consists only in Union with God. And thus this Light is
therefore the first Principle of Religion.

Without this Light there is no power or ability at all in man to do any good.

This must first raise him and quicken him out of the death of sin. Where there
is nothing to work, there nothing can be wrought.
It Is folly to expect any thing, where nothing is; there is no effect without a
cause: There must be something then which must cause a man to act, if he does
any thing.

And this cause must have in it whatsoever the effect produced has in it: As
for example Where any see* there must needs be LIGHT.
, if the effects of Light be produced, Light must do it, and nothing else.

And therefore, is it not a silly thing that all men would have people do this
or that as good, and leave this or that as evil, because they tell them so,
without any more ado, or at best assigning only the accustomary motives
wherefore, and think they have reason too, just as if this were enough? Who can
see such effects as are hereby required, included in this Cause? Not I, for my
part.

Experience also teaches us the same; else how could it all pass away in a
train and custom, without any fruit? It Is folly to expect effects from
unsuitable Means.
These are therefore not the right means: But such we must endeavor to furnish
people with, Means from whence Power may issue forth to do that which they are
exhorted to. Such is the nature of man, that he is forced to choose that which
he judges to be best, before the worst, and is always willing to change for
the best.

Now if it so happens (as for the most part it does) that a man chooses the
worst before the best, No man wittingly chooses his own harm, but being blinded.
it is for want of knowledge, and contrary to his aim, and so he erreth, not
being led by the true Light.

Here then it should be begun, it is easy leading of a man to that which of
himself he is desirous of* Therefore to undeceive the judgment is the first
step.
If those now who make it their Work to teach others, were but lead themselves
by the true Light, knowing better things then those to which the multitude are
linked so fast with love, they would be able to hold them forth clearly to
others: And so making it their continual work, 'twere impossible their labor
should be fruitless, for people knowing better, would better do. Who remembers
not the play of our youth, how much we were in love therewith, and yet how
ridiculous is it new unto us but to think upon it? And why? Because we now know
that which we judge better: Herehence, not by force, but very lightly, and of
it self, they came from time to time to be worn out, and pass away, that
there is now no desire nor motion moving thereunto. How may we think then it
would be, if the Spirit came but once to apprehend those things aright which
infinitely transcend all bodily things in worth? The Judgment being amended,
the will and affections must follow.
which are durable and uncorruptible. So far as these toys then should come to
be esteemed more glorious then all bodily things, so much the more powerful
would be the annihilation of those things in which all men, If you know the
truth, the truth shall make you free, says Christ.
even to old age, yea, death it self, do take so much delight; and then we
might hope and expect that those things which are (indeed) alone worthy to be
known, would gain entrance, and being brought forth in the Light, would be also
owned and received by every one, according to the measure in which they should
stand in the same Light.

Hence, from within, the amendment and conversion is to be waited for, from
within it must begin, if with foundation, the outward then 'wil follow of it
self: The weakest must give way to the strongest No man will part with what he
judges best, till be sees something better, and then he need not be forced
, all depends but upon the knowledge of something better, to make a true and
lasting change. Therefore to hold this forth to men, is the best thing we can
give them.

This Light is the inward ear, by which alone, and by no other, the voice of
God, that is the Truth, can be heard.

By this alone must the sense and mind of him that would signify any thing by
words or any outward sign, be comprehended and understood. So that if the Truth
of God be presented to a man who stands not in the Light of Truth, it is
impossible he should understand it, although he hears and comprehends the words
after his manner, yet he is still fenced off ftom the true sense and meaning
thereof.

Hence, therefore, it is, that amongst so many hearers there are so few that
have ears to hear.

He that hears Truth aright, that is, understands it well, must not stand out
of, but in the Truth it self.

Therefore neither is it any wonder that all men do not understand and conceive
those things that are brought forth by the Light. Those only that stand in it,
are alone (and no other) capable thereof.

The case being thus, we see of how great concernment it is continually to
exhort and excite men to turn in to the Light that is in them, This the one and
first thing necessary.
that so they may go on to such a condition and measure therein, as to be fit
to understand aright the lord, that is, the Truth of God, because out of this
there can be nothing understood and concluded from the words and writings given
forth from the Light, but mere opinion, and consequently errors. This Light
Christ, etc. is the truth and word of God, as has been already said, and every
way appears by what we have hitherto laid down: For this is a living Word, and
transmitteth man from death to life, is powerful, and enableth a man to bear
witness of it self every where.

This is also the true Rule according unto which all our actions are to be
squared.

This has the pre-eminence before any Writing, Scripture, Doctrine, or any
thing else that we meet with from without. We are born into the world, and
brought up as every body knows. From the very first we hear differences, every
one pretends that he knows the matter, and has truth: One holds sorth this,
another that to us: If now the Light which is in every man that comes into the
world, There is but one thing which is uncorruptible* which cannot be
corrupted, which must be the Judge of all things that offer themselves to our
trial, which are liable to be corrupted, as are all things without us.

Therefore this one Judge is undeniably within man,


shall not be Judge, whither shall we roll? To believe all, is impossible; to
reject all, no less: Who shall be Judge here? Who else can be but the Light
within us? For whatsoever comes from without, is the thing to be judged of: Who
then fitter? seeing this is infallible.

Again, Is not this (the Light) that by which we must see and know God, and so
consequently that by which we must judge all things Divine? Certainly it is:
then it follows also, That we can judge of no Doctrine, of no Book that is
Divine, but by this Light: and judging it thereby to be Divine, it cannot but
be truly so. As for example, If we experience that the Book called the BIBLE,
in regard of the Divine Doctrine therein comprised, has such an harmony with
that in which God is known, that he must needs have been the Author of it,
there cannot rationally any more powerful demonstration be demanded. No man
farther knows the Scriptures, then he is what the Scripture speaks
With them that are thus, the Scripture may become living and powerful, and not
a dead letter, as it must needs be to those men who have no feeling of this
thing. And from hence then it is apparent, seeing this Light must stand before
all things whatsoever that we meet with from without, that then man must first
of all be directed to this* No other sure Foundation can be laid,
for without it what profit is there (I pray) to be reaped any where by any
external sign but by it. Lay the Book of the Scripture freely before any man,
let him also have all the fitness (the Universities can give him) to look into
it in its proper Language in which it may have been first written, what will
all be without the Light? Nothing. The letters, the words are not the
Scriptures, but the mind alone is the Scripture, and this meaning can never be
truly and justly hit, but by those alone that stand in the same Light, out of
which the Scriptures proceeded.

These are they then to whom the Scripture is a Co-witness, and as a seal of
their being Sons of God: while by experience they find themselves, every one
according to his measure, in the same condition in which the Saints formerly
were, who spoke and writ all those things comprehended in the Book of the
Scripture; these then have the true understanding and meaning of the
Scriptures, not those that imagine unto themselves a meaning by opinion and
guess, thorough a thousand imaginations, without the least assurance of not
erring: which becomes the very ground of all jangling and contention.

In fine, and lastly, This Light in every man is the means to come to the
knowledge of God. And seeing all external signs must needs presuppose this
knowledge: Where the knowledge of God is not, there all external things are of
no value. Therefore this knowledge must needs first be immediate, and
altogether independent to all externals.
therefore its self must needs be immediate, without any external sign: that
signs must presuppose such a knowledge, is undeniable, for these signs must
either be words or effects, works or miracles.

If Words, we see at first an impossibility in in the thing it self: for Words
are created and finite, and God who should make known himself by them,
uncreated and infinite: and therefore here is so infinite a difference, Words
too weak to give the knowledge of God.
that there is no manner of agreement, nor any thing in the world by which they
might be capable to do it. But again, if you fly to the meaning of the words,
as being fit for such a thing, then that which we say will more manifestly
appear: As put case for example sake, that GOD about to make known himself by
words, should say, I AM GOD, and that this should be the sign by which he would
make himself known, we see clearly, that it would be impossible for a man at
first to know God by this: For if he should comprehend any thing out of the
sense of the words, he must needs formerly have had the signification of the
word GOD, and what he is to understand by it: In like manner if God makes his
will known to man, the Knowledge of God (which has its original from the true
Light) must precede and convince him, that that (Manifestation) can be from
none but God alone, whereupon he is then sufficiently assured.

If by Effects, (or outward miraculous Works) it is the same thing; for these
are no less created, no less terminated: And though we might observe something
in the nature of a thing, which might be too difficult for the power of any
creature, which we know, to effect: Yet this at the utmost would be but a
demonstration taken from our impotency, Many things may seem Divine Miracles,
which are produced by a hidden concurrence of many natural causes: Therefore
without the knowledge of God precedes, no man can d^scern in this case. From
whence undeniably is concluded, That these can neither be any sure foundation,
or certain, nay nor p^ssible means to bring any to the knowledge of God.
and not from the nature and all the operations of it; and this kind of
demonstration cannot be certain and stable, till we were able clearly and
distinctly to see that there was not a concurrency of many causes to produce
such an effect, but that it must needs have been caused by an infinite and
unlimited cause, whom we call God: But who knows this? Or who can declare it?

Add to this, That the knowledge of God in all things must first be, before the
knowledge of any creature or particular thing, so no particular thing without
this, can be well known* and so consequently altogether incapable to come to
know God by, or certainly to make known himself to man by.

Go to then, Without thy self, O man, thou have no means to look for, by which
thou may know God. Thou must abide within thy sel^, to the Light that is in
thee thou must turn thee, there thou will find it, and no where else.

GOD is, considered in Himself, nearest unto thee and every man. He that goes
forth of himself to any Creature, thereby to know God, departs from God, God
considered in himself, is nearest unto every man then himself, because he
penetrates the most inward and intimate parts of man, and is the life of the
inmost spirits, as the spirit is of the soul, and the soul of the body:
Therefore is he worthy to be turned to, minded, sought, waited upon, and
feared. Let all blind Leaders that say it is not God that appears in the
hearts of the wicked, hear this; and all fools that say, In their heart there
is no God.
and so much the further, as he comes more to mistake himself by it. This thou
must then shun, and the contrary mind, viz. Mind the Light that's in thee, by it
to work, unmovably and faithfully to persevere.

THE END

