THE BELOVED CITY OR, THE SAINTS REIGN ON EARTH A THOUSAND YEARS; Asserted,
and Illustrated from LXV. places of Holy Scripture; Besides the judgment of
Holy Learned men, both at home and abroad; and also Reason it self. Likewise
XXXV. Objections against this Truth are here answered.

Written in Latin by Joan. Henr. Alstedius, Professor of the University of
Herborne.

Faithfully Englished; With some occasional Notes. And the Judgment herein
[not only of Tycho Brabe, and Carol ^^^^ltus; but also] of some of our own
famous Divines.

Si aqua strangulat, quid insuper bibendum est?
M. Antonin. Imp. (...), Lib. 4. Sect. 17. (...); Could he say of Athens, Thou
lovely City of Cec^ops? And shall not thou say of the CHVRCH OF CHRIST, Thou
Lovely City of GOD?

* Apoc. xx. 9. LONDON, Printed in the year of the last expectation of the
SAINTS. M.DC.XLIII.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir John Cordwell Knight, and Alderman, Master of
the Company of the Mercers; Mr. Lybbe Chapman -- Surveyor. Captain Thomas
Chambrelan Mr. George Burrish Wardens.
And to the Worshipful, the Assistants and Communalty of the same Ancient and
flourishing Society of MERCERS in the Famous City of London.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
MY ordinary employment being of late for some time interrupted, and the usual
course of my studies, not so much diverted, as quite stopped by the late general
and miserable distractions of the Kingdom, and especially of the place I live
in, I bethought my self of some means whereby I might mitigate my
apprehension of the miseries issuing from these present distempers; When (I
think God so directing it) this Treatise, with some others of the same nature,
came to my hands. The Author is of as general repute among us for learning, as
any late Writer we have received from beyond the Seas these many years: and
the Work is an Explanation of the xx. Chapter of the Revelation. The Subject
thereof is The assertion of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ here on earth; a
matter no doubt of great comfort, and consolation to the Church of God. And as
I am not ignorant that Apocalypticall Discourses in general are liable to many
censures, and that this Divine Prophecy it self is as yet a sealed book, in so
much that the great Calvin was forced to acknowledge, (if the Io. Bodimus
method Hist. cap. 7
reports wrong him not) that he knew not what so difficult and obscure a
Writer, as the Author thereof, meant: so I am sure this part thereof has been
subject to most diverse and contrary interpretations; that what Epist. ad
Paulinum Quot babet verb^, t^^ Sacram^nt^.
Hierome says of the whole, may well be said of this passage thereof: So many
words, so many mysteries. Yet receiving my self much satisfaction and
se^lednesse of mind from this exposition thereof, I thought that Gods people
also might reap some benefit and fruit thereby: And this is the maine cause,
that I have made it public. Now that I have inscribed it onto Your Names I
have deal^ but right and (...) therein. For owing the first grounds and
foundation of my studies to Your large bounty and benevolence, I must
acknowledge the first fruits thereof communicated abroad (and indeed I ever
intended them so whatsoever they had been) to be Yours by ^ due claim and
challenge of them. The Persians (in whose Schools gratitude was taught, as
Letters and Arts in ours, whose D^^tate exuperant latae contra ingra^os leges.
Amm. Marcell. lib. 23. (...). Themi^t. Orat. 3.
Laws punished the contrary almost as deep as we do Homicide,) had an Order
in their Xenophon (...), ^.
Colleges, which were for the education of them whose service was appointed
for the King, that after their greatest promotions, and abilities in public
attendance, they were to acknowledge all as received from the Classis of their
first institution. My natural propension to thankfulness makes me confess I
owe all that I am in good letters (I best know how little that is) to the
foundation I laid thereof in Your excellent Seminary of learning, and to your
extraordinary favor, and encouragement to good studies and endeavors. I pray
God lead You always along by the hand in all Your affairs and occasions.

I am Your very respectfull servant to be commanded, William Burton.

To those who shall light upon this Book.
TO prefix a word or two, by way of preface, may concern thee, Reader, perhaps
as well as my self.

That I might not therefore be censured for the only idle person in these
busy times, in which (GOD in Mercy look upon us!) every man, either with his
Sword, or Pen, strives to make the noise and tumult greater, I have thrust out
this book into the public, in the general crowd of those many: but with
expectation of a better blessing, I hope, from God, then some of them can look
for.

And although I am not ignorant, that there are a generation of men in the
world, Cic. Academ. Qu^st. l. 2.
(...) alabaster ^^guent is plenns putere videtur, a (...), having t^eir
understanding corrupted by their fancy, can relish and judge aright of nothing*
yet so arrogant, and self-conceited, that they (...) exterminate all learning
and kno(...) ^^^eth not just with their own (...) humors,) with far more
super(...) Plato ejected Homer out of his Commonwealth: ( Sed quid suibus cum
amaracino? They love the mi^e best?) Notwithstanding all this, I say, the
general welcome and long entertainment, which the other learned works of this
same Author have had in our Schools, as well as in those beyond the Seas,
where he professed with admirable applause, seemed to me not to deny this piece
an endenizing, or freedom, from some hands of a better note. Yet perhaps, if
thou had any acquaintance with me, thou would wonder to see a subject of
this nature to come forth into the light of learned men by my means, and
assistance.

True it is, I have under my command some Discourses, I will not say of greater
consequence, but I dare say, that cost me greater labor, and longer enquiry,
to which these times do deny a propitious birth. And having lost almost my
employment for the time, through the present distractions; and my books and I
being in a manner quite severed from one another, I thought I could do nothing
better by way of l^ffning my apprehension of these public calamities, which
Gods justice, and our own unthankfulness, by repining at his Mercies, have
brought upon us.

I had no intent hereby to impose upon any one, or abuse men's belief, by
forcing their assent to an Heresy, condemned in the Church, as some would
persuade us, so many ages ago. Yet I know well enough, Acts xvii.^^.19.
that nothing pleases the fancy, and feeds the humor of this age so much,
as novelties; men no less inquiring now after new Doctrines and opinions, then
of old the Athenians did after new Deities. L^ers. de libr^s He^selit^ Anthol.
lib. g^^p. 33.
(...) must I say to these. I took not this pains for them.

Neither indeed do I my self go about to assert, or maintain any un-grounded
Doctrine; knowing well, that opinion, that Holy Disease, how great soever her
admires, and a betters are, can never be able to stand in competition with the
holy Word of God, and the (...) O (...) dict^. vide. Ep^cterum (...). 2 Timothy
4.3. (...). 2 Timothy 1.1^.
sound and undeniable doctrine thereof.

Such is always my temper and moderation, that if by (...) Marc. Antontum
(...) lib. 6.5.10.
one conviction thou demonstrate my error, (much more it the CHVRCH shall
interpose her judgment,) whether it be in matter of opinion or action, I will
retract the one, and relinquish the other. And till thou do this in the
matter, which we have in hand, be not offended, if I stand close by my Author,
but especially to reason, and plain Scripture it self alleged by him. Truth
it is the only thing I se^ke after, for the pu^^ui^ of which, no man ought to
be blame any more, then they are to be execused, who wilfully continue in known
error, and ignorance.

By the way then, good Reader, let me tell thee, (what credit soever I gain
from thee,) that it was the constant opinion of the Church, in the very next
age to the Apostles, that there should be a resurrection before the general
rising at the last day, and an happy condition of the faithful upon earth for
CIO. years. This we may learn from Contra Matcion.
Tertullias, and Tract at contra omnes baereses.
Irenaeus: And Dialog. cum Tryphone Iudaeo.
Justin the Martyr, (who of a Philosopher became a Christian some xxx. years
after the death of John the Evangelist and Penman of this holy Prophecy) tells
us plainly, that not only himself, but what (...), etc. Iustine. ^. ^.
Christian soever in his time were in all respects Orthodox, maintained the
same, grounding their opinion upon these words of Esaias. (...), cap. 65. verse.
17.
Behold I create new Heavens, and a new Earth: and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into my mind. But be glad, and rejoice for ever in that
which I create. I know not whether so great a testimony, as this of Justin
Martyrs, may be brought concerning any opinion among Christians, if you expect
the maine articles of our Belief. And the general consent of all the
orthodox, and in the age too next the Apostles, is no small argument, or
prejudice against the contrary opinion, or succeeding ages. It seemed the
Heretics of those times, especially, or indeed only, believed it not, and
that for some private respect, because, admitting thereof, they must needs also
confess a resurrection of the flesh, and that the same God, who was mentioned
in the Law and Prophets, is also the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. I am sure
Cerinthus, that Arch Heretic in those days, whom the after-ages do make the
first Augustine. de Haeresib. cap. 8.
broacher of this opinion (and they would also have him the Author of the
Epiphanius de Heresib.
Revelation,) is never taxed for it by them Irenaeus. Tertullianus.
who have diligently noted his heresies. And perhaps if he had any sensual
conceit hereabout, (as it seems he had) he was beholding to Judaisme for it:
and he himself being a Jew it was not taken notice of in him. But for a
Christian to have any such doting imaginations, would render him more
wild-headed, and besides himself, in sober men's judgments, then any Poet of
Dithyrambique verse. Yet no man ought to be blamed for maintaining a Truth in a
Jews company, either in this matter or in any else, if with heed he pass by
those gross fancies, and stupid absurdities, which do infatuate and blemish
the same truth. More deservedly may we find fault with Dionysius of
Alexandria, and his followers, the great impugners of this opinion, who when
about the end of the third age, the dispute about it grew very hot, to lessen
the authority of the Revelation, by the evident and undeniable proofs whereof
the matter in question was asserted, (O foul shame, and impiety!) they
fathered it upon I know not whom, yet one of the same name, against the
manifest witness of Dialog. cum Trypbone.
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and all the Fathers before them, who inscrib^ it to
John, the beloved Disciple of Christ, and Evangelist: Neither can Hierome
himself be ex^used, though a very learned man otherwise, but easy to be
deceived, who with the same Dionysius does (upon an uncertain report) fals^ly
affix to the opinion of them* who according to truth believed the thousand
years happiness on earth, the Hieron. in Hierem. cap. 19. v. 10.
injury of Circumcision, the blood of Sacrifices, and rest durati^n of all the
ceremonies of the Law. Which old pieces and rags of Indaisme, or perhaps the
dreams of some Heretics, being gathered, out of a study of contention, and
ill will, were patched to this opinion of the Primitive Church But if he
certainly knew that the first Christians and holy Martyrs did expect
Circumcision, and Sacrifices in the Kingdom of Christ, how is he to be blamed,
that condemned them not for it, but Quae licet non sequamur, damnare non
possu^^u: unulquisque in suo sensu abundee. Hieron. d. l.
left every man to the freedom of his own judgment, either to approve, or
dislike thereof.

But what countenance soever this opinion has, or shall find in this age, let
me tell thee this one thing, Reader, which I will leave to be considered of by
thee, that seeing there are so manifest proofs of a glorious Kingdom of the
Saints here on earth out of the old Testament, there will be no better or
easier way, to deal with the Jews in matter of their conversion, then not to
wrest the plain prophecies of a second and glorious appearance of Christ, to
his first coming; but rather to persuade them, that they must expect no other
Messiah, who should fulfill all these promises, expecting what is to be
expected, (for we are not herein wholly to agree with the Jews, but to examine
all things according to the rules of Christian faith*) besides that Jesus of
Nazareth, whom their Ancestors crucified. And this way is every where almost
through the whole Revelation diligently insisted upon. For whilst we force
those most clear prophecies concerning things promised in the second, to his
first coming, the Jews scorn and deride us, and are more and more confirmed
in their infidelity. But for the course which I have here set down, I am much
mistaken if it be not the same which was observed among them by Peter himself,
Act. 3.19, 20, 21. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you. Whom
the Heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of all things, which
God has spoken by the ^^uth of all his holy Prophets since the World began.

But I forget my self; For indeed I think it more fit to set down and
publish, what might be safely and piously believed concerning this Tene^,
rather in another man's sense and expressions, then in mine own, being more
willing Malens aliena verecu^de discere, quam sua impudenter ingerere. Hieron.
de Platone Epist. ad Paulinam.
modestly to learn and be instructed from the abilities of others, then
impudently to obtrude mine own weaknesses upon the world. And to this end I
have also collected what some of the most eminent* Divines of the Church of
England, Dr. Hakewill, Dr. Twisse, Mr. Mede, etc. (that thou might not
think it only an outlandish toy, or a fancy of yesterday, muchlesse savouring
of Popery,) have thought, and published concerning this opinion. Besides, the
irrefragable judgment of the Divine Tycho Brahe, that singular ornament both
of the Heavens, and his own Denmark, and with him the termination herein of
Carolus Gallus, omitted by Asted, and not long ago one of the States
Professors of Divinity in their University of Leyden.

If thou find any discrepancy in their resolutions about this matter, persuade
thy self, that time, and the holy Spirit will more and more enlighten the
deep mysteries of God^ word, and of its unspeakable goodness of the Saints of
God, will yet in these latter times make us all of one heart, and one mind in
Christ Jesus* That all we that do conf^sse his holy Name, may agree in the
truth of his holy Word, and live in unity and godly love; which is the prayer
of our Church. In the mean time, good Reader, consider that it is as lawful
for men, yea for good Christians themselves, to differ in circumstances of
opinions, as it is requisite and seemly, that they should grow up together,
like (...). Anton. lib. xi. 6.
fellow branches, in matter of good correspondence, and affection, Farewell.

SCRIB. LIMNOPOROPOLI Antiquorum Saxonum, five Regiovici in Regni^ X. ab V.L.
Ad Jamissam Ptolomaei, ( si non omnes depravati cod^) In (...), quod Johannes
Loukinn LONDINI, IV. Matter. 39. Edw. R. 3. P. Elizabeth^ Regina, (...),
SCHOLPUBL. GR. LAT. LL. E. V. Regni sui III.
To the Christian Reader.
THere are three things necessary for him, who takes upon him to expound
Prophecies published by the Holy Ghost. And first, truly the light and Grace
of the holy Spirit is requisite. For seeing that Prophecy proceeds from the
holy Spirit, It is necessary that by the same also it should be expounded.
Next, Apious and diligent reading of Prophecies, and conferring them one with
another, much avayleth hereunto. Lastly, The fulfilling of any Prophecy, and
an experience in a manner thereof, is as it were the Key, with which it is
unlockt, and opened. Wherefore that saying of Irenaeus is true: Lib. 4 cap. 43
Omnis Prophetia priusquaro impleatur aenigm^ est. Quanda impleto suerit,
manifestam habet expositionem and intelligentiam.
Every Prophecy before it is fulfilled is a Riddle. But when it is fulfilled,
it has a plain exposition, and understanding of it self. These three things,
as in all holy Prophecies, so in the Divine Revelation, may be joined together,
and namely in this piece thereof, which now according to my Ability I am about
to Illustrate, and at this day too, Wherein to the light of the Gospel there is
added a great Catastrophe, or Issue, of many things foretold by God himself;
except indeed any one happily chance to be bewitched with a prejudicate
opinion. Let us set sail therefore in the Name of God, and comfort the
desolation of Germany with this pious meditation.

Revelation, Chap. 20.
ANd I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the Key of the bottomless
pit, and a great chain in his hand.

2. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the devil and
Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

3. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon
him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, till the thousand years should
be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season.

4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto
them: And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus,
and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his
image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands,
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand y^ers.

5. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were
finished. This is the first resurrection.

6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: on such
the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

7. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison.

8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four quarters of
the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the number of
whom is as the sand of the Sea.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of
the Saints about, an^ ^he beloved City: and fire came down from God out of
heaven, and devoured them.

10. And the d^vill that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever.

11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face
the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.

12. And I saw the dead, small and great stand before God, and the books were
opened: and another book was opened, which is the Book of life* and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works.

13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it: and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man
according to their works.

14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire* this is the second
death.

15. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.

PROLEGOMENA, OR THE PREFACE, Concerning The Author, and Subject of this
Chapter, and the Connection thereof, with the foregoing, and following Chapters.
1. Of the Author of this Chapter.
THe Principal Author of this Chapter is the same, who is Author of the whole
Book, namely Jesus Christ; who, as a faithful Steward of our Salvation,
received this Revelation from God the Father, and sent the same by his Angel to
John the Evangelist, Revel. 1.1. Wherefore the Principal Author is the Spirit
of God; the Minister or Messenger partly the Angel, partly John, who Chap. 1.1
and 4. sets down his name in general; but a little after in the ninth
Verse, restraining that generality, He does as it were with his finger point at
it. I John, your brother, and companion in the affliction, and Kingdom, and
patience A^^t^d follows that Greek Copy which admits (...) the preposicion,
oth^rwise th^n our English renders it. Eccles. Histor. lib. 3 cap. 16
which is in Jesus Christ* was in the Island, which is called Patmos. The
history which Eusebius relates, tells us, That John the Evangelist, and
Apostle, was banished into the Island of Patmos by Domitian. Whence it is
collected, that John the Evangelist, and Apostle, was Gods Po^-man in the
delivery of this Prophecy; and hence, That the Authority of this Book, and so
of this Chapter, which we intend to expound, is Divine. Wherefore deservedly,
we most highly esteem of this Revelation, as a part of Scripture, which has
God for it is Author. But especially this Prophecy ought in this respect to be
welcome to us, because it contains the last Divine Revelation of Gods will;
after which, no Prophecy following is to be expected; and because this Book is
very profita^le in this Age, in which the lively performance of things hitherto
abstruse and concealed, is presented before our eyes.

2. Of the Subject of this Chapter.
THis Chap^er discourses of the singular happiness of the Church, both under
it is Warfare, and Triumph. The singular happiness of the Church, during it is
warfare, or being militant, is let down in three respects; 1. In its security
from the hostile incursions of the wicked for a 1000 years. 2. In the
resurrection of the Martyrs before the general resurrection. 3. In the
wonderful d^liv^rance of the godly, from the last persecution of the wicked,
which shall happen after those thousand years. The happiness of the Church
Triumphant, is h^re described so far forth, as the beginning of its Triumph
in the last Judgment. That these things may be made more plain, I will from
the very beginning, make a repetition of the state of the Church here upon
earth; and I will say something briefly, concerning the State and condition
thereof, in Heaven. The State of the Church hereupon earth, was either that
before the fall of the first man, and that was wholly Legal; or that after the
fall, and this is wholly Evangelicall. Again, The State of the Church after the
fall is, either Internal, and perpetual; or External, and temporal. The
State of the Church Internal and perpetual, consists in the Union and
Communion with Christ, as also in the enlightening, and guidance of the Spirit,
Isa. 54.5. Hos. 2.15, 19, 20. Job. 6.56. 1 Cor. 6 17. Ephesians. 5.30. 1 Cor. 10.17.
2 Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 3.6. Gal. 3.28. C^l. 3.15. Hence it is, that the Church is
one, Holy, and Invincible. The External, or temporal State of the Church, is
as well under the Cross and Persecution; as Light and Comfort, or refreshing:
which two changes the Church undergoes here on earth by turns, as well under
the Old Testament, as the New, and that either more, or less. For Adam, and
Eve, after their most grievous fall, were raised up again by the most sweet
promise of the Gospel; and after they had begot Cain and Abel, and their
Sisters, they were comforted with this Infancy, as it were, and first
foundation of the Church. But no small grief followed hard upon this joy, when
as Cain slew his brother Abel. However this breach was made up again in Seth,
whose posterity propagated the Church, although not without grievous
persecution by the race of Cain, which had an end put unto it by the del^ge in
the year of the world, 1656. From whence the Church was enlarged to the year
1757, without any notable persecution, which at that time the building of the
Tower of Babel brought, and hence sprung the division of Languages. In the year
of the world 2023, the Church was contracted into the Posterity of Abraham
only; And here begin the four hundred and thirty years, dwelling of the
Israelites in Egypt; where Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, underwent
manifold changes both of prosperity, and affliction. And their posterity after
the death of Joseph was detained under a most horrid slavery, from the year of
the world, 2360, even to year 2453, in which the Israelites were brought out of
Egypt. From which time to the year 2493, they had experience of diverse
blessings and judgments of God in the Wilderness. Now after they were brought
into the Land of Canaan* which happened in the year of the world 2493. Iosuah
with very good success, for the six first years conquered the Canaanites,
vanquishing one and thirty Kings. After the death of Iosuah, to the year of the
world 2879, the Isra^lites were vexed with diverse slaveries and persecutions,
and rescued from the same by several Judges, namely Deborah, Ged^on, Samson,
and Samuel. And now the Kingly power being established in the days of Saul, or
year 2879, the Church presently in the very beginning thereof* suffered
persecution from Saul himself. After that it underwent diverse chance^, and
changes; namely, under David and Solomon it exceedingly flourished; under
Rehoboam it suffered a great los^e, ten Tribes falling of to Jeroboam. By
occasion whereof, a most sad rent of the Kingdom happened, the Church by little
and little degenerating in Israel, whose ten Tribes under Hoshea in the yee^ of
the world, 3228. were led away into a most grievous, and yet continuing
captivity, as far as the Col. hi, Iberi. etc. As for the Church remaining in
the Kingdom of Judah, it had several entercourses of deformation, as well as
reformation, of calamities, as well as victories, unto the year 3350. in which
began the Babylonian captivity, continuing Lxx years. In the year 3419, Cyrus
released this captivity giving the Jews free leave to return into their
Country, and to establish their own Laws, and Religion, as far as their own
Country did reach. But not withstanding, this Privilege of using their own
Laws, was many ways interrupted until the year 3527, that is, for 107 years.
From which time to the year 3781. the Church of the Jews enjoyed happy, and
Halcyonian days under the Persians; and in like manner under Alexander the
Great. But under the Successors of Alexander, especially the Kings of Syria,
they were diverse ways afflicted, until in the year of the world 3783, and so
downward; the Maccabees fought with happy success for their Religion and
possessions. From the year 3887. Judea was laid wast, and several ways
oppressed by the Romans, and Parthians, so that the whole State thereof was
exceedingly troubled.

Let us now come to the estate of the Church of the New Testament, which we
will divide into four periods. The first period is of the Church of the godly
Jews in Judea, from the time of John the Baptist, to the Council of Jerusalem;
that is, from the year of the world 3948. to the fiftieth year of Christ.

In all which space of time, Christ was born, Baptism instituted, John put to
death, the twelve Apostles, and Lxx. Disciples called by Christ; Christ himself
suffered, the Holy Ghost was powered out upon the Apostles; the Apoctles were
whipped for their bold preaching of the Doctrine of Christ, etc.

The se^ond period is, of the Church spread over the whole world, and contains
the calling and conversion of most nations, from the 51. year of Christ, to the
beginning of the thousand years. And this period has four branches.

I. Under the Henth^n Roman Emperors, till Const^ntine the Great's time,
wherein the Church was propagated under diverse Persecutions, of which, ten
were more notable, from the 64. year of Christ, to the 3^3. II. Under Christian
Emperors, from Constantine the Great, to Phocas; in which time, it was adorned
with diverse priviledg^s by Constantine the Great, and other godly Princes: yet
so, That notwithstanding it felt great persecutions by the Arians, by Julian,
by the Persians, Sandals, Goth^^, etc. to the year of Christ, 606. III. Under
the Popes of Rome, while they extended their power far and wide, from the
year of Christ 606, to the year 1517, that is, from Boniface the third* to Leo
the tenth. In all which time the Church was most miserably pressed, and only
not quite oppressed, partly by the Sarazens and Turks in the East, partly by
the Popes of Rome in the West. IV. Under the Popes of Rome, now perceiving an
inclination and decay of their Kingdom, from the year of Christ 1517, to the
beginning of the thousand years. What the condition of the Church has been,
and now is, since the year 1517, to this prsent, is known unto us partly from
Histories, partly from our own notice, and remembrance. What it shall be
hereafter, from the time wherein we write this, to the beginning of the 1000.
years, we cannot in particular determine. But this we know in general, That
the Church is to be purged, purified, and cleansed, by this persecution, which
at this day it suffers; That by this means it may be by little and little
prepared for that great Reformation, which the Epoch; or Account of those
thousand years shall bring.
The third Period of the Church of the New Testament, is from the beginning of
the thousand years, to the end thereof. And it shall contain, as well the
Martyrs that shall then rise, as the Nations not yet converted, and the Jews;
and it shall be free from persecutions. Which four things, because they are
called into question, are the more at large to be proved. And first of all, for
the Resurrection of the Martyrs, The truth thereof is demonstrated (...).
to the eye, in a manner out of the 20 of the Revelation, the 5. verse.

Then for the Conversion of the Gentiles, which are not yet called into the
Church, the Apostle describes it most lively, Romans I^.25. where he plainly
teaches us, That the fullness of the Gentiles is to be gathered to the Church.
Hitherto also appertains that which we read Genesis 48.19. that the seed of
Ephraim shall become a multitude of Nations. For it cannot be interpreted of
the numerous offSpring, of Ephraim; for therein the Tribe of Judah especially
excelled. (...) Vide Io^a^em Buxlorf in (...)
And the word Gojim is most properly meant by the Heathens. Therefore this is
the meaning, Out of Ephraim shall descend in numerable Nations, which in their
time shall flow-in plentifully to the Gospel. Moreover, Christ Luke 21.24
teaches us that the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled. So Genesis 17.4, 5.
God promises Abraham, that he should become a father of a multitude of
Nations; and Genesis 18.18. that in him all the Nations of the Earth should be
bl^ssed. To these places you may add, Psalm. 22.28. Matthew. 24.14. and Revel.
12.5. Object.
If any one should object, that the Conversion of the Gentiles was a little
after the first coming of Christ; He must know that at that time all nations
were not called. Sol.
Therefore we must understand a double Conversion or calling of the Gentiles, a
former, and a latter. The former was in the time of the Apostles, and their
Successors. This latter has not been as yet, but it shall be at length, a
little before the Conversion of the Jews. So that these two Conversions are
joined together, Isai. 11.12. Zach. 2.10, etc. For the maintaining of this
opinion see among others, Iustus Heurnius De Legatione Evangelica ad Indos
capessenda, Heurnius. Keplerus.
and Kepler De Stella nova Serpentarii, where fol. 206. he writs, That all the
contentions which are at this day among Christians, and the difference of their
worships, tends to this, That from their mutual destroying one another, an
occasion may arise, on one side of converting the Indians, on another of
converting the Jews, and Turks. Now let us enter into consideration of the
conversion of the Jews.

The promises thereof, are Genesis 49.18, 19. Number. 23.23. Deuteronomy. 30.3, 6, 8. and
chap. 32. from the 19. to the 43. Isai. 11.11, 12. and chap. 43.5. and so
forward, chap. 45.22, 25. chap. 59.20, 21. Iere. 16.14. chap. 23.3, 4. chap.
31.31, 32, 33, 34. Ezech. 36.26. and forward, Joan. Feru^ explicat. in Genesis c.
21, 27, and 38. Seraphin. Firmian Enarrat. Apocal cap. 14. Remalc de. Vaulx. in
Harpocrate Divino, fol. 339 Martin Cellar. Tractat. de Operib. Dei Coel.
Secund. Curio de Amplitud. Beati Regni Dei, lib. 1. Petr. Cunaeus lib 1. de
Repub. Iudzor. 18. Just. Heurnius de Legate Evangelica ad Indos c 4. Joan
Dobrieius in (...) seu Interpret Temparum, Christoph. Besold. in Pentade. Et
omnes Theol. v^teres and recentes super 11. cap. Epist. ad Romanos.
Hos. 1.11. chap. 3.4, 5 Mich. 2.12. chap. 4.6. and forward, chap. 5.5, 6, 7.
Zeph. 3.11, 12, 13, 19, 20. Amos 9.14, 15. Zach. 11.16. Romans 11.25, 26, 27. 2
Cor. 3.16. Matthew. 23.39. Luke 21.24. The explications of which places, look for
in the following questions, and almost every where in the author cited in the
Margin. And to them add these two reasons; 1; The Jews wander to and fro
through the whole world dispersed, scattered* and banished from their own air
and soil. God therefore without doubt reserveth them for some great, and
admirable work. 2. Christ being born of the Jews, he is promised unto them with
very many and most glorious promises. Therefore it is not to be believed, that
they should not at some time or other acknowledge him as the Messiah. Neither
can you object that the Jews were converted in the time of Christ, and the
Apostles. For they were but the first fruits of the Jews. And that Conversion
was but in part only. See concerning this Argument Iustus Heurnius, in his
Book before cited, who handles it most accurately, and is of opinion, that this
order shall happen in the Reconciliation of the Jews. That in the first place
those ten Tribes; which were carried away by the Assyrians, shall be converted,
to whom afterward the Tribes of Judah, and Benjamin shall join themselves. In
the same place also he conjectureth very probably, That the converted remainder
of the Jews, united with the converted Church of the Heathen, shall resist the
attempts of the adversaries of GOD, and beat down Antichrist. Yet I should
rather suppose that the Jews should entertain the ruin of Antichrist, as an
occasion of their Conversion. But this nothing to the main matter and substance
of the question.

It remains now that I make it plain that this Church, gathered together of
Jews and Gentiles, shall be freed from the persecutions of their enemies. This
is proved out of Deuteronomy. 32.40, 41, 42, 43. Psalm. 96. Psalm. 110.5, 6, 7. Isai.
11.1, 2.3.4. chap. 24.23, chap. 25. chap. 26.1, 2, 3, etc. chap. 33.20, 21, 22,
23, 24. chap. 34. from the 1, to the 18 verse. chap. 49.24, 25, 26. chap.
54.14, 15, 16, 17. chap. 59.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. chap. 63.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Dan. 12.1 Joel 3.1, 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Micah. 4. the whole Chapter. Zeph.
3. from the 9 ver. to the end. Zach. 11 10. to the 17. chap. 12.1. to the 9.
chap. 14.^. to the end. Mal. 4.1, 2, 3. Revel. 14.8.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
chap. 18. quite through. chap. 19.1, 2, 3.11. and the following verses. chap.
20. In these places is described the setting at liberty of the Church of the
New Testament from the persecution of the enemies of the Gospel, by an utter
overthrow of them; from whence shall arise it is continual Peace, together with
an enlightment and Regeneration greater then now it has; as also the Majesty
or glory thereof shall appear, joined with an absolute and sincere joy. All
which are here and there to be found in the places quoted, and are unfolded in
the following Questions. And this is that happy condition and estate of the
Church, which shall be in this life, and shall last for a thousand years: And
it consists of these Parts: 1. Of the Resurrection of the Martyrs, and of
rheir Reign here upon Earth. 2. Of the increase of the Church, and multitude
thereof, through the conversion of the Gentiles and Jews. 3. Of the setting of
the Church at liberty from the persecution of Enemies thereof, by the small
destruction of them. 4. Of the continual and lasting peace thereof. 5. Of the
Reformation of the same both in doctrine and life. 6. Of the Majesty, and great
glory thereof. 7. Of it is true and sincere Joy.


The fourth Period of the Church of the New Testament, is from the end of the
Thousand years to the last: Judgment. In which time the estate of the Church
shall be very miserable, by reason of the War of Gog and Magog, unto which
Christ shall put an end by his glorious coming to the general Judgment,
Revel. 20.3.7. 8* 9, 10. And thus we have described the estate of the Church of
the old and new Testament here upon earth.

The estate of the Church in heaven is of perfect glory, everlasting triumph,
absolute regeneration, exact illumination, and unspeakable joy.

And this is the full Doctrine concerning the Estate of the Church, which we
thus set forth.

The State of the Church is either On Earth Before the fall of man, fully
happy. After the fall, and is, either Internal, perpetual, and common to all
places, and times in respect of the Elect in general. External, temporal,
and proper, and it is either of the Old Testament under Patriarchs. Judges.
Kings. Diverse kinds of Government after the Babylonian captivity.
New Testament where are 4 periods 1. Of the Jews to the year of Christ, 51.
2. Of the Gentiles under Emperors Roman Heathen. Christian, until Phocas.
Popes of Rome Fully exercising their power. Suffering some abatement thereof.

3. Of Jews and Gentiles for a 1000 years. 4. Of the same after those 1000
years finished.



In Heaven, where is the Beginning of the triumph in the last Judgment.
Consummation thereof in life Eternal.



The Affections of this manifold Estate are thus delineated.
The Estate of the Church is either of One kind; to wit Only happy On Earth
Before the fall. For the 1000. years now at hand.
In Heaven.
Only unhappy by reason of several persecutions Already past before these
1000. years. To come after these 1000. years.

Diverse kinds; to wit, partly happy, partly unhappy, or temporate, and liable
to the enterchange of temporal felicity, or calamity.


Of the Connection of this Chapter with the former.
JOHN in his Revelation which he received from God, in the year of Christ 94.
after the Preface, chap. 1 to the 9 verse, describes seven general Visions in
this order.

The first Vision is of the seven golden Candlesticks, and of so many Stars,
and it is concerning the present and future estate of the seven Churches in
Asia, in the 1, 2, 3 chapters.

The second Vision is of the Book shut up, and signed with seven Seals, in the
4, 5, 6 chapters. And it is concerning the estate of the Church of the new
Testament after the departure of John, to the year of Christ 606.

The third Vision is of the seven Trumpets, in the 8, 9, 10, 11 chapters, and
it is concerning the state of the Church from the year of Christ 606, to the
year 1517.

The fourth Vision is of the woman bringing forth a child, and of the Dragon,
of the Beast, and the Lamb, in the 12, 13, 14 chapters. And it is partly a
description of the Birth of Christ, partly a recapitulation and exposition of
the second and third Visions, and concerning the estate of the Church of the
New Testament, from the Nativity of Christ, to the year 1517.

The fifth Visiion is of the seven Vials, in the 15 and 16 chapters; of which
the three former are poured forth from the year of Christ 1517, to the year
1625. the four following shall be poured forth from the year 1625, to the year
of Christ 1694. in which the 1000 years seem to begin.

The sixth Vision is partly of the punishments, as well those which are
peculiarly appointed for the Whore, and her worshipyers, before the beginning
of the 1000 years, in the 17, 18, 19. chapters, as also those which shall be
inflicted upon all the enemies of the Church: Partly of the future happiness
of the Church here upon earrh, in the 20 chapter, from the 1 uerse to the 7.
After the end of those years, chap. 20. the 7, and following verses.

The seventh Vision is of the Heavenly City, chap. 21* 22.

II. The Sum of this Chapter.
AFter that the Evangelist has related what happened to the first Beast, and
the false Prophet, and their followers, chap. 19. verse 20, 21. He tells you
now what happened to the Dragon himself. For the Mystery of Iniquity being
overthrown, and due punishments inflicted upon the first Beast, and the false
Prophet, the Angel descends from Heaven, and being endowed with great Power, he
takes order that the Dragon, that is, Satan, should not any more, by the
ministry of ungodly men, stir up those accustomed troubles in the Church
Militant. Wherefore there being no place left him any longer for his wonted
impostures, but bound up in the bottomless pit for a thousand years, the
Nations are not seduced ^y him, until being loosned out of prison, he again
makes use of his old Engines and Stratagems against the Church. Therefore for
the space of those whole 1000 years the Church shall enjoy outward peace, the
Martyrs being raised from the dead, and the Nations, together with the Jews,
being converted to the Faith of Christ. Now after the end of these thousand
years, Satan is again let loose, and the Church, by reason of the War of Gog
and Magog, made sensible of more grievous afflictions then she had suffered in
former times. At length he being again thrust into the bottomless pit,
together with all his forces and power, the Saints shall for ever reign with
Christ.

III. The Analysis of the Chapter.
ANd] that is, After that. For (...) is to be taken transitively here in this
sense: After that I had seen the Beast, and the false Prophet thrown into the
Lake burning with B^imstone, and the rest slain with the sword of him that sat
upon the horse, and all birds satisfied with the flesh of them; I saw these
things which now follow. I saw] that is, In the Spirit, or ecstasy of my mind.
Compare Revel. 1.10. An Angel] A good Spirit, a Minister of the Judgments of
God, such as were in the former Visions. Therefore neither Christ, nor any
Doctor of the Church is here to be understood. Coming down from Heaven] to wit,
The third Heaven, or the Heaven of the blessed. Who had the Key of the
bottomless pit] that is, Who had received power from God to open and shut up
Hell. We must not therefore by the Key of the bottomless pit understand any
inward light or knowledge kindled by some famous Doctor of the Church, by whose
help the Scripture may be the more enlightened; or the profound skill in
Divinity of such a one. And a great chain in his hand] The great power of
binding and tying up the enemy is here understood. This chain therefore is
falsely expounded concerning the Divine Writings of some Angel, or Teacher of
the Church, whose coherence like a chain may be such, that they may bring
Heaven and Earth together, and draw the hearts of the believers up unto God.

2. And he caught] as if he had laid hands on him- The Dragon] That monstrous,
virulent, and violent enemy of Christ and Christians. That old Sorpent] Who by
his winding and subtle kind of Oratory in the beginning of the world, seduced
our first parents, and who yet keeps his old skin. Who is the Devill] That
Slanderer, and Sophister; that mis-interpreter of all the good sayings and
deeds, as well of God and Christ, as holy Angels and men. And Satan] The
adversary, and everlasting enemy of God, Christ, and the Church. And bound him]
By hindering his wicked enterprises and attemps. A thousand yeers] Solar, and
usual years.

3. And he threw him into the bottomless pit.] that is, With mighty power he
restrained the malignity of Satan, thrusting him down into Hell. And (...)* yet
some copies have (...), he bound him. I cannot tell whether as properly, by
reason (...) follows.
shut him up] as if he should say, He laid him not only fast in prison, but
also shut up the prison upon him, with him in it. And set a seal upn hiom] Here
are four acts of the Angel; the first binds Satan, then cast him being bound
into the bottomless pit, then he shuts up the pit, and sets a seal upon it
being shut up. That he might not seduce] to wit, Partly by Idolatry,
Superstition, and the power of lies, partly by bringing War upon the Church.
Any more] As he had formerly done. The Nations] (...). The Nations, ^oth Jews
and Gentiles. This word (...) in Scripture properly signifies the Gentiles as
they were opposed to the Jews. But that in this place the signification of this
word is extended, it does hence appear: The power of the devil is so fast
bound, he can no more seduce either Jews or Gentiles, for the space of those
thousand years. Therefore this word is to be taken in a more large
signification. So that the Conversion of the Jews is described also
implicitly, in these words, Till the thousand years were fulfilled] to wit,
Until the whole course of the Churches hapyinesse here on earth were finished.
And after that he must be loosed] For these thousand years being ended, the
Devil by the just Judgment of God shall again recover his power, and indeed a
far greater. For a short time] The kingdom of Satan shall not fulfill a
thousand years, but shall remain only for a small time.

4. And I saw Thrones] Then I saw a Judicial Process prepared. And they sat
upon them] that is, Christ and his holy Angels. And Judgment was given unto
th^m] The power of Judgment was given by God as well to Christ, as to the
chief Judge, as to the Angels, as it were his Assessors. Compare Mat. 25.31.
And the souls] I saw as well the Judges, Christ and his Angels, as also them
that were to be judged, that is, To be absolved or freed in this Judgment. And
in this place souls are put for m^n. Of them that were beheaded] that is, Of
them that were slain by any kind of torment: And it is a description of the
Martyrs. For the testimony of Iesus] Whereby they witnessed concerning Christ,
that he was the only Jesus, that is, The only Savior both by merit and
efficacy. And for the Word of God] that is, The holy Scripture, which they had
learned to be the only rule both of faith and life. And which had not
worshipped the B^ast] that is, The Second Beast, of which mention is in the 13
and 19 chapters; which had arrogated to it self the divine Honors of Christ.
Nor his Image] that is, Those Kings and Princes which are the Image of the
Beast; that is, which represent the Beast in their likeness of doctrine and
life. Compare Revel. 13. v. 14. And had not received his mark in their
foreheads.] By mark in this place is to be understood some characteristicall
note, or distinguishing sign or token, which they are said to bear in their
foreheads, who publicly profess themselves to be addicted to such or such a
master, or leader. Or in their hands] that is, In their actions, Rites, and
Ceremonies. In these words therefore is contained a concealed antithesis or
opposition, whereby the Martyrs are declared contrary to the slaves and
servants of the Beast; concerning whom there is former mention, chap. 13. ^^*
14, 15, 16. that they worshipped the image of the Beast, and received his mark
on their right hand, or on their foreheads. From which words it is manifest
that the Martyrs are here described by the distinction of their sufferings and
doings. And they lived] that is. They lived again, as may be gathered from the
fifth verse, But the rest of the dead lived not again. So formerly, Revel. 2.8.
Who was dead, (...), for (...) and is alive, for, has lived again. Here then
is described the singular reward which the Martyrs have received for their
sufferings* and extraordinary performances. And reign^d] As being appointed
here on earth Governors of the Church, having now gained it is most welcome
Halcyonia, or days of calmnesse. With Christ] Who all this while shall reign
visibly in heaven, invisibly upon earth, his visible Kingdom being resigned to
the Martyrs. For those thousand yeers] Of which in the former verse* For that
the thousand years of Satan's binding, and of the Kingdom of the holy Martyrs
with Christ, are the same, and not distinct, or diverse, the Article, (...),
four times repeated in the 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 verses, does sufficiently declare, and
the term of time appointed for the loosing of Satan does fully evince. It is a
forced Interpretation therefore that some do make, taking the thousand years in
the 4 and 6 verses tropically by a Synecdoche for Eternity; in the other
verses, namely, 3, 5, 7, according to the letter.

But the rest of the dead] As well the godly, as the ungodly.

(...). But some Copies have the simple (...), as in the foregoing verse.
Lived not again] that is, Were not made partakers of that happiness and
prerogative, whereby a number of some of the faithful shall rise before the
Universal and last Resurrection, and shall reign with Christ here upon earth.
Until those thousand years shall be finished] For they being ended, Christ not
long after shall come to Judgment, which both the living and the dead must
expect. This is For the article ^^, being doubled, ought to be pressed more,
then we see it is in our English Translation.
that first Resurrection] In which the Bodies of the Martyrs shall rise, in the
beginning of those thousand years. We must not therefore understand in this
place a Spiritual Resurrection, by which we are said to rise out of the sleep,
and death of sin: For that Resurrection is common unto all good men, and
happens daily. Wherefore thus we are to think concerning the Word
Resurrection, when we find it mentioned in Scripture.

Resurrection is either of our Spirit. Flesh Read 2 King 17.22. 2 King. 4.35* 2
King. 13.21. Matthew. 9.25. Luke 7.1^, John 11.44. Matthew 27.52.28.6. Act.
9.41.^0.9.
Particularly, in the time of Elisha, whose bones raised the the dead man,
which was thrown upon them. Christ Who raised Lazarus, and the daughter of the
widow of Naim. When diverse rofe at his hanging upon the Cross, Matthew. 27.
Paul; who raised a dead man to life. The 1000. years. And this is called the
First Resurrection.
Universally, which shall happen in the end of the World; And this is the
second Resurrection.



6. Blessed.] With a special blessing, and proper only to the Martyrs. And
holy.] That is, Out of singular favor set apart by God for the privilege of
this peculiar blessing, Who hat'^ part in that first Resurrection.] Who shall
be in the number of the Martyrs, who shall rise in this first Resurrection. On
him the second death shall have no power.] The second death is the casting away
of the damned to eternal torments. Compare the 14. verse with this. Otherwise
it is called Eternal death. But they shall be Priests of God and Christ.] Not
in that common respect, whereby all the elect in this life are spiritual
Priests, who by the Spirit of Christ offer themselves up unto God: But by a
special prerogative, whereby, the Martyrs being raised from the dead, shall
obtain chief power in the Church, as it were Priests of God and Christ. as
before these thousand years the Priests of Antichrist were chief. And they
shall reign with him for a thousand years.] In the Church, the profession of
Christianity being no way hindered. See Revel. 5.10. and the Questions
following. Therefore the peculiar happiness of the Martyrs consists in the
first Resurrection in their reign with Christ, in their Priesthood; in the same
manner as we have described it.

7. And when those thousand years shall be finished.] To wit, of the happiness
of the Church, and of a free and universal profession of Christianity. Satan
shall be loosed out of his prison.] That is, he shall recover his power and
liberty to attempt and seduce without restraint, which power had lain asleep,
as it were, and been buried for the thousand years, the Angel now giving him
leave, in whose hands it was, according to the pleasure and command of God, to
bind and loose Satan.

8. And he shall go forth.] That is, out of his prison, or place of his
custody, whereof in the foregoing verse; namely, Out of the bottomless pit,
where he was detained. That he may seduce the Nations in the four corners of
the earth.] That is, Wicked men, who shall here and there remain in the World
at the end of the thousand years. These Satan shall seduce, urging them to make
war against the Saints, Gog and Magog.] That is, those Nations which at that
time Satan shall seduce, and which at the end of those 1000. years shall by
war make an attempt against the Church, and shall endeavor to destroy it,
Exek. 3^ and 39.
as in old time Gog and Magog vexed the people of the Jews. Therefore by Gog
and Magog are here to be understood all the professed enemies of the Church;
even as Gog, that is, the people of the Lesser* Asia, which environed Judea on
the North; and Magog, that is, the Scythians, which inhabited places situate on
the South of Judea, were the professed enemies of the Jews. Thus then we must
understand it: The Devil shall seduce the Nations in the four corners of the
Earth; the Nations, I say, which are endued with a spirit like that of Gog and
Magog. Object.
Read the 38. and 39. chapters of Ezekiel. But you will say; How can it be that
those wicked men should reassume their power after these thousand years? Sol.
I answer; This shall be brought to pass by the just judgment of God, whereby
not only the great Antichrist shall flourish again, but also Pagan, and
barbarous people, and other monsters of the same batch shall gain increase. And
shall gather them together to battle.] Against the profession of Christ in
general, that it being quite as it were thrust out of the world, they may
substitute in the room thereof Antichristianisme, Barbarism, and unbelief.
Whose number shall be a^ ^he Sand of the Sea.] So that it shall be a most
completely furnished army, whose like has never been heretofore. And Satan,
being con^ident in the strength of these forces, shall hope thereby to swallow
up the Church.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth.] So great an army shall be
gathered together, that no part of the earth shall be free from it. All the
ground shall be covered with Soldiers. They shall come up; that is, they shall
rely upon much force and aid. And here is an allusion to Gog and Magog the
Type, who being to besiege Jerusalem, which was placed upon a hill, were of
necessity to ascend. And they (...).
encompassed it.] The allusion to the type still holds: For the Church at that
time shall be encompassed on every side with enemies* as in old time Judea was
encompassed by Gog and Magog, those fierce and barbarous people. The camp of
the Saints.] That is, Wheresoever the true soldiers of Christ were, making
war in their own stations. And the beloved City.] The whole Church, which is
one City at that time scattered through the whole world. And fire came down
from God out of heaver, and devoured them.] Some such thing verily shall
happen, as we read of Genesis 19. concerning Sodom and Gomorrha. And as the first
world perished with the deluge of water: so Gog and Magog shall perish in ^^e
end of the world by the destruction of fire.

10. And the Devil that deceived th^^ was cast.] Otherwise then in the third
verse; for here he is so cast, that he shall not beloosed again thence for
ever. Into the lake of fire; and brimstone.] This is a description of Hell.
Where the beast was.] That is, The former Beast, which is described in the 16.
chapter, v. 13. For that beast is distinguished from the false-Prophet, who is
the same with the latter beast. And the false-Prophet.] Great Antichrist,
Apollyon, the Babylonian whore, who with his subtle wiles seduceth men,
persuading and pressing a counterfeit religion, wholly seeking after the
honors and riches of this world, no otherwise then the false Prophets in the
old Testament were wont to do. Wherefore in a special manner Antichrist is
called the false-Prophet. And shall be tormented.] To wit, they three: The
Devil, or Dragon, and his two companions, the Beast, and the false-Prophet.
Day and night.] Continually, without intermission. For ever and ever.] A
description of all Eternity.

11. And I saw a great white Throne.] By this Throne a cloud is understood; and
being termed a great Throne, the Universal judgment is figured out; and being
also called a white one, Truth, Equity and Justice are thereby signified. And
one sitting thereon.] Namely, Christ, God and Man. Now he is said to be seen to
sit there, that hereby we may be taught, That he is prepared and ready to pass
judgment. From whose face.] Being both most ref^lgent, and full of austherity.
The Earth and Heaven fled away.] That is, the fashion of this world passed
away, and was consumed with fire, which went before this Judge; and the
Creatures, the Inhabitants of earth and heaven, did all tremble at the sight of
him. And there was found no place for him.] By reason of the resplenden^y, and
Majesty of the Judge, which no creature could endure, without being changed
into some other state, and condition. Therefore there shall be an Universal
change of the whole world in that Judgment day.

12. And I saw the dead.] That is, Those who had been dead; but were now
raised, and restored unto life. Small and great.] A Dichotomy, or division,
naturally to be understood in regard of quantity; morally in regard of quality,
or dignity. So that all must be placed before the Tribunal of Christ. Standing
before God.] As expecting his definitive sentence. And the Books were opened.]
Books not devised or written by any other, then by every one in his own private
conscience, dictated according to his several thoughts, words, and deeds.
These Books therefore thus written have hitherto been reserved, shut up, and
not taken notice of, as it were in some private closet, or place of account.
But now they are opened, so that they may be plainly read by every particular
man. And another book was opened.] That only book, written by God himself.
Phil 4.3. Revel. 3 5
Which is the book of Life.] That is, The secret and hidden Decree of God
concerning our Election, which there shall in public be exhibited, and made
manifest. Now it is called The book of Life, because therein God has as it
were set down the names of them, who through his grace and favor shall become
heirs of eternal life. Compare Luke 10.20. And the dead were judged.] A
definitive sentence passing upon all; acquitting some, and condemning others.
Out of those things which were written in the Book.] To wit, In the books of
men's consciences. Now these books shall be opened after a several manner. For
the books of the Consciences of godly men shall not be so opened, that their
sins shall rise up in judgment against them, (for in this respect they are
still sealed up,) but they shall be so opened, that they may read indeed their
sins there, many and great ones, but so as they are covered by Christ, and
the power of them more and more weakened by the Spirit of Christ, through
repentance and the study of good works. Therefore the godly shall read in
their conscience the justice of Christ covering their sins, and through him
bringing forth good works. But the condition of the ungodly shall be far
otherwise; For they shall read in their consciences their sins not pardoned
by Christ. According to their works.] Which shall give testimony either of
their faith in Christ; or else of their impiety, and unbeleef.

13. And.] T^ansitively, for After that; that is, After the sentence of the
Judge now passed, and published. The sea gave up her dead that were in it.]
B^ing drowned, or devoured of fi^nes. And death.] That is, The Fire, Air, and
Beast of the Earth, and Fowls yielded up their dead, which had not been bu^yed.
And Hell.] That is, The Grave. In these words then is contained partly a
description of the general Resurrection, partly a distribution of the bodies
of them that were dead into three sorts; One of them that were drowned in the
Sea; Another of those which were not drowned in the Sea, but being dead had no
burial, as being brought to ashes either by the fire or air, or else devoured
by beasts of the earth, or by flying fowls; A third sort of those who were laid
in their graves. Gave up their dead.] By the command and appointment of God.
Which were in them.] The very same, and not others: the same in number. And
they were judged every man.] Not any one being excepted. According to their
works.] So that no man shall have cause to complain of any injury done unto him.

14. And death.] And, for But; adversatively. Death, that is, some, and indeed
most, of the dead, but not buried. And Hell.] The Grave, which is here put for
them that were buried therein. And again, not all the buried are here to be
understood, but some, and indeed most. Now by Death and Hell may be understood
men deserving both. Were cast into the lake of fire.] That is, made subject and
slaves to eternal damnation; so that the Saints for the time to come need not
stand in any danger or fear of them. Which is the second Death.] Or, Eternal.
This Relative Which may either be referred to the word Lake, or else may be
taken collectively. In the former acception, the Lake is called the second
death, that is, a sign or Symbol of the second, or eternal death. In the
latter, the judgment of condemnation committed to execution is called the
second death. Now this is called the second death, because the bodies and souls
of the damned do in very deed dye twice. For the body dies, both when it is
separated from the soul, and also, when being again joined to the body, it is
separated from God: And the soul dies, both when in this life it separateth it
self from God by sin, and when after this life it is separated from God by
everlasting punishment. Lastly, This punishment is called Death, because it
takes away the life of grace and glory, with which if the life of nature be
compared, it is rather to be called death then life.

15. And whosoever was not found.] And, for For; a copulative particle for a
declarative. Finding is here applied to God by an (...)* or by attributing of
humane actions, passions, and affections to the unlimited power, and
unsearchable operations of the Deity. Written in the book of Life.] Both in the
former book, as well through the love and election of God: as in the latter by
faith, hope, and charity. Was cast into the lake of fire.] Through the just
judgment of God, and by his own default.

2. A Logicall-Theologicall Analysis.
This Chapter is divided into five parts.

I. THe Description of the Angel, Verse. 1. II. The Effects, or operations of
the Angel; that is, what the Angel did. In part of the 1. Verse 2.3. III. The
happy estate of the Church which followed upon what the Angel had effected. In
part of the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Verses. IV. The troubled State of the Church, Verse.
7, 8, 9, 10. V. The Description of the last judgment. From the 11. Verse^^ the
end.
Of the first Part.
The Angel is described, 1. From the Person employed therein, who is John the
Evangelist, whose effect illustrated by the time added, is expressed in these
words, After that I saw. 2. From the proper Person, or Subject. An Angel. 3.
From the effect which is illustrated by the place, Coming down from Heaven. 4.
From the double adjunct, illustrated by a threefold similitude, Having the k^y
of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.


Of the second Part.
Five effects of this Angel are recited, 1. The first is illustrated by an
allegorical description of the object, thus; And he laid hold on the Dragon,
that old Serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan. The second is illustrated by
the circumstance of time. And he bound him for 1000. years. 3. 4. 5. The other
three are set down with a manifestation of the end for which this was done. And
cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceive the nations no more.


Of the third Part.
The happy estate of this Church hereon Earth is either common, or proper.

The common estate of the Church is that of all the godly then living, in these
words, That he should not seduce them any more. And it is discribed thus, 1.
From the extent of the Subject, Tha^ he might not seduce the Nations. 2. From
the adjunct of time, Till the thousand y^^rs should be fulfilled. 3. From the
destructive cause of their felicity, And after that he must be loosed. Now as
well the efficient cause of the corruption of this felicity is declared,
namely, The decree of God. He must be loosed As the manner and form, Be
loosed. And lastly, the adjunct of time, For a little season.


The Proper estate of the Church is that of the Martyr, and is consists of
their Resurrection, and Kingdom.

The Resurrection of the Martyrs is described, 1. From the Person employed.
Then I saw. 2. From the impulsive procuring cause, to wit, the Judgment of
those heavenly powers, which is illustrated from an adjunct and effect
metaphorical, thus; Thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
unto them. 3. From the recipient subjects, which is described from the adjunct
passions, as also from the its effects; And the souls of them, who were
beheaded for, etc. The procuring cause also of these passions or sufferings is
declared, to wit* Their confessing of Christ, and their refusing of Idolatry.
4. From the manner of their Resurrection, And they lived again* The Kingdom of
the Martyrs is described from the effect, conn^^, and adjunct time, And they
reigned with Christ, for a thousand years.


The Resurrection of the Martyrs is again described, 1. From the unlike
condition of others. But the rest of the dead lived not again, until etc. 2.
From it is Epithet. This is the first Resurrection. 3. From four adjunct^; of
which the first, second, and fourth are peculiar; the third common.


For the Martyrs are described from their particular happiness* Blessed. From
their particular holiness, And holy. From their holy security, On such the
second death has no power, From the dignity of their Priesthood, But they
shall be Priests.

Their Kingdom with the durance thereof, is the second time also set down in
the 6. Verse.

Of the fourth Part.
The happy estate of the Church shall be troubled by the extreme persecution of
the wicked, that is to say, by the war of Gog and Magog, the cause whereof
and the event is described.

The cause is as well efficient, as formal*

The efficient is either principal, The seducing of the Devil; or
isntrumental, The wicked Nations.

The seducing of the Devil is described, 1. From the time; When the thousand
years shall be finished, 2. From the permissive cause; Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison. For he shall be let loose by the Angel, God permitting, and
commanding it. 3. From the manner, and end; And he shall go forth that he may
deceive the Nations, and gather them to battl^.


The wicked Nations are described, 1. From the subject place; The Nations which
are in the four corners of the earth. 2. From the comparison with their like;
Gog and Magog. 3. From the adjunct; That he might gather them to battle. 4.
From the multitude added; which is set forth and illustrated by a simile; whose
number is as the sand of the Sea. 5. From a double effect; And they came up on
one breadth of the earth, and encompassed, etc.


The event of this war of Gog and Magog is in respect; 1. Of the Nations; But
fire came down from heaven. 2. Of the Devil; whose action is described; And
the Devil who seduced them: and his passion; He was cast into the Lake. And
this punishment is described from his company; Where the Beast and the false
prophet are. And from the durance of time added; And they shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever.


Of the fifth Part.
The last Judgment is described, 1. From the efficient cause, which is the
Judge; who is described partly from the limited place, to wit, The Cloud; Then
I saw a Throne, etc. partly from adjunct, to wit, His Majesty; And one sitting
thereon before whom the Earth and the Heaven fled away. 2. From the Object,
which are the guilty, or the persons to be judged; They are described both from
their past condition; The dead both small and great, as also from their present
state; Standing in the sight of God, as likewise from their future condition;
And they were judged* From a tripartite distribution also from the distinct
places. And the sea gave up no dead, and death, and hel^ gave up their dead
which were in them. 3. From the Rule observed in the Judgment, thereafter as
their works are; According to their works. This rule is declared from the
infallibility thereof, which is signified by the books, that is, the
Consciences of men; And the books were op^ned. And by the Book of life also;
And another book was opened. 4. From the execution of the sentence; of which
one part here is only mentioned, namely the casting of the wicked into the
Lake of fire. Verse. 14. the other is related in the following chapter. Now this
casting into the Lake is described partly from what went before; And Death, and
Hell. Partly from the form, and manner of it; Were cast into the lake of fire;
which is the second Death. And partly also from the impulsive cause; And whose
names were not found in the book of life were cast into the lake of fire.


If you like better of it, divide this Chapter into four particular Visions; Of
which the 1. Is concerning the Angel. Verse. 1.2.3. 2. Is concerning the State
of the Church here on Earth, as well In a most happy condition, Verse 3, 4, 5,
6. As in a most afflicted, and troubled. Verse 7, 8, 9, 10.
3. Is concerning the throne of Christ the Judge, Verse. 11. 4. Is concerning
the Universal Judgment, and the process thereof, Verse 12, 13, 14, 15.


IV. The Paraphrase of the Chapter.
THe condition and estate of the Militant Church being laid open unto me from
the year of Christ 94, together with the temptations and assaults wherewith it
was shaken; the labors, wherewith it was afflicted, the deliverances, whereby
it was freed; the Victory, whereby it was ennobled: but specially, and last of
all, the fall of Babylon being foretold and declared, 1. I saw in my ecstasy a
good Angel, the Minister of the Judgments of God, such as I had seen in my
former Visions; Him, I say, I saw coming down from the heaven of the blessed,
who had by God entrusted to him the key of the bottomless pit of hell, that
according to the appointment of God he might shut and open it; also a great
chain in his hand, wherewith he might bind some powerful enemy. 2. This Angel
laid hold of the Dragon, that infernal old Serpent* who from the beginning
vomited forth his poison upon mankind, and deceived them with his winding
Sophismes, who is both the Devil, slandering God before men, and on the other
side men before God; who is also Satan* the adversary of God and men; of Nature
in general, and of the Church. This Deceiver, being found and apprehended in
his Sophistry and Tyranny, the good Angel bound with his chain, and that for a
thousand Solar years, and commonly used in the general course of life. 3.
Neither was it enough for him to bind him, but moreover he cast him being
bound, and threw him headlong into the bottomless pit, and being thrown down
thither, he shut him up; and being shut up, he sealed the Cover of the
bottomless pit, lest breaking forth by any means, he might seduce, partly to
Idolatry* partly to the persecution of the Church, any more, as he had done
before, the Nations, as well Jews as Gentiles, until the thousand years are
finished. For afterward he must (God so appointing it) be Ie^ loose out of his
prison for a short time, which God has limited, and which shall not before a
thousand years, as the time of his binding, and his being shut up was. 4. A
joyful Catastrophe, or issue, shall follow this Tragedy of the Dragon. For I
saw Thrones set in order, and and Christ with his holy Angels sat upon them.
For unto these power was given to judge, partly by giving and executing
sentence, partly by approving thereof. I saw also the souls of them who were
beheaded, and tormented with innumerable kinds of punishments, not indeed for
their own offenses, but for the testimony which they gave concerning Christ,
the Son of God, and only Advocate of the Church; and for the Word of God,
which they had boldly maintained against the corruptions of men: and who had
not worshipped that second Beast, which I made mention of that I saw it before;
nor the image of that Beast which is twofold, both in respect of doctrine, and
life: neither had received his mark in their foreheads, publicly making show
and witnessing by their words, that they belonged to the family of the Beast:
Lastly, they had not so much (...) received this mark in their hands,
expressing the same either in their life, manners, or actions. Such at these
lived, their bodies being raised again, and restored to life. Neither did they
only live again, but also reigned in the Church, freed now from Persecutions,
with Christ, that King of kings, for a thousand years. 5. But the rest of the
dead, as well the godly who before these 1000 years received not the Crown of
Martyrdom, as the ungodly* lived not again till the thousand years were
finished. And this is the first Resurrection, due only to them as a
^rerogative, who above others have glorified the Lord Christ in their bodies,
nothing terrified with the threats, curses, and torments of men. 6. These
Martyrs therefore, who have their part in the first Resurrection, are
deservedly esteemed happy above others, as also peculiarly separated, and set
aside by God for the receiving of such a reward. For the second death shall
have no power over them. By reason that though they live the second time here
upon earth, yet they shall no more by any sin engage themselves so, that they
need to fear any danger of an eternal death. For they shall be here upon earth
Priests of God, and of Christ, not of this world: and they shall reign with
Christ, not as the kings of the Nations, but in the Majesty of the Spirit, for
these thousand years. 7. Now when these thousand years sh^^^ be fulfilled, the
happiness of the Church shall on the sudden begin to fail here on earth. For
Satan in an instant shall be ^et loose out of his prison, in which he was most
carefully kept for those thousand years. 8. But being thus set at liberty, he
shall not rest so, but shall return to his old game, and so he shall go forth,
that he may the more freely seduce the Nations, which are in the four corners
of the earth, toward the East, and toward the West, toward the North* and
the South. Now he shall not only by heresies of all kinds* lead on the blind
world to Apostasy, or falling away from the faith; but also he shall behave
himself as a Captain, or Leader, to bring on a grievous Persecution upon the
Church, stirring and raising up against it Gog and Magog, the sworn enemies
thereof, and of God himself; such as were of old those people* who under these
names were bitter enemies to the Jews. Ezekiel. 38. and 39. chapter
And having thus stirred them up, he shall gather them together to Batte^^,
far more cruel and bloody then has been from the beginning of the world.
For men shall enter into this Battle barbarous in their monstrous cruelty, and
monstrous cruel in their barbarousnesse, whose number shall be as the sand of
the Sea. 9. Wherefore these vast forces, under the conduct of Satan, shall come
upon the earth, and shall cover the breadth thereof with their multitudes. And
straightway, they shall encompasse the Camp of ^he* Saints, wheresoever it
shall be; and with their utmost diligence and devices, shall endeavor quite to
deface the Church, that beloved City of God. But however, in the very midst of
this their rage and fury, being greater then that either of the Cyclops or
Giants, on a sudden a fire shall come down from Heaven, God himself sending
forth lightnings and flashings of fire upon them, and shooting out his Arrows
against them. This fire shall devour those his innumerable enemies, like
stubble. 10. But neither shall their Leader, the Devil, who conducted, and
seduced them, carry it away so without his due punishment for opposing the
Church of God, by the seduced Nations. For he shall be cast into the Lake of
fire and brimstone, that is, into hell it self, where his companions, the first
beast, and the false Prophet, who is the great Antichrist, being thrust down a
little before the beginning of the thousand years, do endure their punishment.
There they shall be tormented day and night without intermission, for ever and
ever, that is, For all ages; so that for the time to come they shall never
escape forth again. 11. I saw also a great cloud like a great white Throne, and
Christ, the Son of GOD, the Judge of the living and dead, sitting thereon with
great Majesty, and prepared to give Judgment. From before his face the Earth
and the Heaven fled away, and there was no place found for them. For this
earth, and this heaven shall pass away at the coming of Christ, and all things
shall be made new. 12. I saw also all the dead, small and great standing before
God, and ready to hear the sentence of the Judge. What happens then? The books
of men's Consciences are opened, the counsels of all mortell men, and the
secrets of their hearts, being brought to light. Now lest the elect children of
God should be disheartened, every one by the particular survey of his own book,
or conscience, behold another book is opened for them, I mean the Book of Life,
in which according to the fatherly acceptance of God in Christ, their names are
written from everlasting. These books being thus opened, the d^ad are judged
out of those things which are written in the books, according to their works;
and that after such manner, that the works of the Saints are judged out of the
book of life, which contains the books of their Consciences, washed and
cleansed with the Blood of Christ; But the works of the ungodly are numbered and
surveyed; and so judged, out of the books of their own consciences, not
cleansed from sins, nor purged with the Blood of Christ. 13. Hereupon then the
Sea gave up its dead, which had been concealed in the bosom thereof. Death
also and the Grave, that is, The fire, air, and the earth, and indeed all the
Elements d^livered up their dead, which having received formerly, they had
partly consumed, partly yet preserved. They were therefore all judged, and
every one in particular, none at all excepted; and they were judged justly; for
the judgment was according to every ones works, of which their consciences
bare them record. 14. And this being performed, ungodly men, Death and Hell,
that is, Men deserving both, were cast into that lake of fire, that there for
ever they might swallow up waters running with fire, and there suffer the
second death, that is, by dying the second death never to die. 15. For whose
name soever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into that lake
of fire, both by the just Judgment of God, and by the heynousnesse of his own
deservings.

V. The Questions arising in this Chapter.
THe chief Questions of this Chapter are these: 1. Whether these thousand
years, several times here mentioned, are always to be understood literally.
2. Whether they be already finished. 3. What year ought to be put for the
beginning of them. 4. What is to be understood by the first Resurrection. 5.
Who are to be understood by Gog and Magog. 6. Whether the Martyrs with Christ
shall reign here on Earth.


All which Questions I will bring into this one; Whether there shall be any
happiness of the Church here upon earth, before the last day; and of what
kind it shall be? This question I will handle somewhat more largely, both by
way of confutation, and confirmation. I will in the first place therefore by
certain Classes, (...).
or ranks of Arguments, confirm the truth to be maintained herein: After that I
will confute the Objections of the adversary part.

I. The Confirmation of the Truth.
THere shall be three Classes, or ranks of Arguments for the maintaining of
this Truth, which we comprehend in the following Thesis. or Position: The happy
estate of the Church in this life shall consist of the Resurrection of the
Martyrs, and their kingdom here on earth; of the freedom of the Church from
the persecution of the enemies of the Gospel, by an utter overthrow of them; of
a lasting peace which shall arise from thence* of the increase of the Church,
or the multitude of the believers by the conversion of the Jews, and Nations
not yet converted; of the Reformation of Doctrine, (or a greater enlightment)
and life, among all estates of men; of the Majesty also, and great glory of the
Church; and lastly, of the sincere joy thereof. Now this happiness shall begin
in that very year, wherein it shall come to pass, That the kingdom of that
great Antichrist shall be destroyed: and it shall last for a thousand years.

The truth hereof we will make good, 1. Out of the Context, and Coherence of
this Chapter. 2. Out of other sayings of the Scripture. 3. Lastly, by Arguments
taken from reason, and the consent and agreement of some holy and learned men.

The first Classis of Arguments.
From the Context of the Chapter we draw these Arguments:

THe first Argument is taken from the connection of this Vision with the former,
which is described, chap. 19. verse 19, 20, 21. For John says in the first
verse of this Chapter, And I saw, that is, Afterward; to wit, After I had seen
the Beast, and the false Prophet cast into the Lake of fire. Now lest any one
should think that this casting of them in shall be in the end of the world,
John does presently add; and the rest were slain with the sword of him that
sat on the horse, and all the fowls were filled with their flesh. From which
words it is manifest, That it is spoken here concerning the destruction of
Antichrist, and his followers, which shall not happen in the last and
Universal Judgment, but shall be a particular Judgment by it self: which is
thus demonstrated: The coming of Christ to the last Judgment shall at length
happen after the War of Gog and Magog; which is a distinct War from that
which is described, chap. 19. ver. 19. For the War of Gog shall be against
the Saints, having now enjoyed a long-lasting Peace. But the War of
Antichrist shall be against the Saints, being now brought almost to nothing by
some great persecution. Again in this 20^h Chap. verse. 10. it is said, That the
Devil should be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone after the War of
Gog, where the Beast and the false prophet ERAT, says Alsted. The Original
wa^rs the verb set down. But our English uses the present are. The Vulgar
edition is most dissonant from the Greek, -- in stagnum Ignis and sulphuris,
ubi and bestia and pseudoprop^e^a cruciabuntu^ di^ a^ nocte. The Author thereof
qui^e mispl^ced (...) the Copulative before (...), putting it before (...)
collectively, omitting also the interpun^^ion after (...). Notwithstanding he
is followed by the Geneva Translators. Rob. Steph^n. Vbi ERAT and bestia, and
ille Pseudopropheta: and cruciab. The Oriental* Translation, both Arabique,
and Syriaque, (...) not from the received Greek; The latter of which, in this
(...) and some other places of the ^.T. we owe to an old copy in the Library of
that (...) of all Learning and Piety, D^ Usher, and to the exact pains of M^
(...) of the Arabique in Oxford, who from thence supplied the former defects in
this Transl^^ion.
WAS; which words have a plain respect to those, chap. 19. ver. 20. These both
(the Beast, and the false prophet) were cast alive into a lake of fire burning
with Brimstone.

The second Argument is from the Connection of this Vision with the following,
which is set down in the 21* Chapter. For, says John in the first verse
thereof. After that I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth; that is, The thousand
years being finished, the War of Gog and Magog being ended, and the execution
of the last Judgment, of which in the 20^^ chapter, being accomplished: As if
he should say, Hitherto I have seen and declared the estate of the Church
Militant, and beginning to triumph in the last Judgment: Now follows the
Vision and Declaration of the state of the whole Church going on in it is
progress of Triumph in life eternal.

The third Argument is from the often repetition of those words, (...), [ a
thousand years] and withal the addition of the Article (...), [ the, or those
thousand years,] whereof the former is once only used, the latter four times
from the 2 verse to the 8. which repetition argues that these words are to be
understood Historically, and according to the letter; except you had rather say
that John is a Al^^eds word is Battalogus, from the verb used by Christ, Mat.
6.7. Of the various interpretations thereof, see the most learned Fuller.
Miscell Sa^ror. Lib. 2. cap. 16.
babbler, or a vain repeater of the same words needlessly again and again.

The fourth Argument is from the comparing of this Vision with the History of
what has hitherto happened. For it cannot be proved out of any History, That
those things which were treated of in this Prophecy, have yet come to pass.
For as yet the D^vill was never so bound for a thousand years, as that he was
cast into a bottomless pit, and there shut up, and withal a Seal set upon
him, that he might not seduce the Nations any more, till the thousand years
should be fulfilled; which being expired, he should be let loose for a little
season.

I require then that some age of the New Testament may be produced, wherein the
Epoch, or beginning of these years may be said to have been.

Again* The Resurrection of the Martyrs is proved from the Antithesis, or
opposition expressed in the 4. and 5. Verses; where it is expressly said, That
the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were expired.
Therefore, when as it is said that the Martyrs lived, they are to be understood
to have lived again. Now let it be made appear when this living again happened.

Lastly, The war of Gog and Magog has not been yet, as many would have it:
For after those thousand years shall be finished, in all which time no Nations
shall be seduced by Satan; then, I say, shall this new seduction begin over the
whole face of the earth, and from the four corners of the world an innumerable
army shall be gathered, which shall bring great trouble to the Saints, and
shall be consumed with fire sent down from God. Seeing therefore these three
things, which I have mentioned, are not already fulfilled, it is most certain
that they are yet to be fulfilled.

The fifth Argument is from the absurdity that will follow: For except we keep
close to the letter, and apply it to the happiness of the Church which shall
be hereafter on earth, both the explication and application of this whole
Prophecy will prove very empty, unsavory, and wrested. Let us take one of
many. Some say that these thousand years here mentioned began with the
overthrow of the Temple, This is called receptior sententia, by Dr. Prideaux.
in Orat. 3.
and Jewish Worship; because then the Jews, who hitherto never ceased to
trouble the Nations, and to turn them aside from the Gospel, being now
scattered and cast off, the Nations now by whole troops were brought in in
their stead to the Church of Christ, and that then Satan being bound* it was
made apparent that he ceased from seducing the Nations. Now let us see what a
fine exposition this is. Jerusalem was overthrown by Titus in the 69. year of
Christ: Here then let us begin the Epoch of these thousand years, so that they
may end in the year of Christ 1069. Now let there be conferred with this whole
course of time the Conversion of the Nations, the sinck of Heresies, the
defection and seduction of Mabomet, the Mystery of Iniquity, and lastly the
persecution of the Godly; and then let it be shown how Satan reigning all this
while so powerfully, was bound for a thousand years, and seduced not the
Nations. Let it be shown also how any Martyr ever reigned with Christ from the
year of the Lord 69 to the year 1069. Certainly none have yet reigned with
Christ, because none have yet risen from the dead. Now the reign of the Martyrs
with Christ must follow their Resurrection. So that if these thousand-years
were expired in the year of Christ 1069. It follows, That these 573 years,
which have passed from that time to this present year 1643. is a little season
in respect of a thousand years: because it is said, That after those thousand
years the Devil shall be let loose for a little season, that he may again
seduce the Nations, Verse. 3, 7, 8. But 573 years cannot be said to be a little
season in regard of 1000 years, seeing they contain a great deal more then half
thereof. Neither does that make void the truth hereof, which they bring out of
2 Pet. 3.8. that a thousand years with God are but as one day: Psalm. 90.4.
For there it is spoken concerning God's estimate, or account; who as he
esteems a thousand years but as one day, so again he esteems one day as a
thousand years, as it is plain out of the place now cited. But here it is
spoken concerning man's estimate, who makes not the like account of a short, as
he does of a long time.

The sixth Argument is ab implicito, as they use to speak; employed and
necessarily deduced from another truth. John writes, that for the space of
those thousand years the Nations should not be seduced, Verse. 3. where not
only the Heathens, but also the Jews are to be understood. For Satan is so
bound, and committed to Hell, that he cannot at all seduce any one. Therefore
neither the Jews. Now it plainly appears to every one, that the Jews ever since
the Passion of Christ, even to this very age of ours, have been most miserably
seduced. Therefore these thousand years are yet to come. Again, It is very
probable, That the Persecution of the Church has been a great occasion, among
other things, to hinder the Jews gathering of themselves to the Church.
Therefore if the Jews should but see the wonderful overthrow of Antichrist,
without doubt it would afford them a great occasion of their Conversion. Upon
this ground, the overthrow of Antichrist shall immediately go before, not the
last judgment, but the happiness of the Church which shall happen in this
life.

The second Classes of Arguments.
OUt of diverse places of Scripture we will bring several Arguments, which
shall all have dependence upon this Syllogi^m^.

What things soever are by God foretold in the Old and New Testament, and are
not already fulfilled, shall of certainty be yet fulfilled.

But the great happiness of the Church here on earth is foretold by God in the
Old and New Testament, but not as yet fulfilled:

Therefore, It shall be yet fulfilled.

The Assumption, or second proposition, we will demonstrate out of diverse
places of Scripture, in which the parts of this future happiness, which a
little before we have decl^red, do either severally, or more of them together,
occur.

The first place is Genesis 17.4, 5, 6. Where God thus speaks unto Abraham: As for
me, behold I make my Covenant with thee, and thou shall be a father of many
Nations. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be
Abraham: for a father of many Nations have I made thee. And I will multiply
thee abundantly, and I will make Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of
thee. In these words is promised unto Abraham, that he shall be a father, not
only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles. For it is plain, That diverse
people had their original and descent from Abraham. For besides that Isaac was
born of him, Ismael also grew into a great people, and the Edomites also
descended from him were scattered far and wide. Of other sons also, which
he had by Keturah, very large families were spread abroad. But what? Moses had
a farther respect in these words, namely, that the Nations by faith were to be
inserted into the kindred of Abraham, though they were not begotten of him
according to the flesh, as the Apostle witnesses Romans 4 11. The Jews of all
kinds, and Gentiles shall be the sons of Abraham in Christ. But this is not
yet brought to pass; Because the ten Tribes carried away by Salmanassor have
heard nothing concerning Christ, and the two Tribes, Judah, and Benjamin, have
hitherto wandered in their own ways, as also the Indians, and the like unto
them. It must be therefore that they also at length be brought into the
Covenant made with Abraham.

The second place is Genesis 18.18. Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a
great and mighty nation; and all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed in
him. Compare Genesis 26.4. Hence I thus reason. In the seed of Abraham, which is
Christ, all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed; But this has not yet
come about, as it appears out of the illustration of the former place. This
therefore must be yet done. Compare Genesis 21.13. where God promises Abraham,
that of the son of the Bondwoman Hagar he would make a Nation, that is, he
would cause that of him many people should be born, because he was his seed. As
if he should say; This seed of Abraham also shall not slip out of my
remembrance, but in it is due time it shall know that I am the God of Abraham.

The third place is Genesis 27.40. When thou (Esau) shall have the dominion, thou
shall break his (thy brother Jacob's) yoke from of thy neck. This shall then be
done, when the posterity of Esau shall grow together into one body with the
Israelites. Which is not yet done.

The fourth place is Genesis 48.19. Notwithstanding his (Manasse's) younger brother
(Ephraim) shall grow greater then be, and his seed shall be the fullness of the
Nations. These words receive light from the 11 chapter to the Romans, where the
same manner of speaking is used. This therefore shall be the meaning. Out of
Ephraim indeed no numerous offspring shall arise according to the flesh (for
in this respect the tribe of Judah exceeded the tribe of Ephraim,) but this
shall be his prerogative, that his seed shall be the fullness of the Gentiles:
that is, shall put a conclusion to the Conversion of the Gentiles, and so
together with the rest of the Jews shall be turned unto Christ.

The fifth place is Genesis 49.10. Which is spoken of Shiloh, that is, the
Messiah: And unto him shall the gathering [or, obedience,] of the people be.
That is of Jews, and Gentiles; as also of the Turks, and Indians, and of the
ten Tribes.

The sixth place is Genesis 49.18. Here Jacob breaths forth his griefs for the
tribe of Dan: I have waited for thy salvation, o Lord. As if he should have
said; yet at length I shall be saved, o God, however thou meanest to scatter me
with the other nine tribes of Israel. For it is a very hard censure utterly to
exclude those ten tribes from the Communion with Christ.

The seventh place is Genesis 49.26. Here Jacob thus speaks unto Joseph. The
blessings of thy father have prevailed with the blessings of my progenitors,
unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills. That is, They are not only
temporal, but eternal. For he joins together spiritual promises, with
earthly; because the one are but the resemblances, and figure of the other.
Therefore those last words are a circumlocution of Perpetui^y. I demand then,
where in the whole world were the posterity of Joseph made partakers of Christ?
It is necessary therefore that this promise should yet be fulfilled.

The eighth place is Numb. 24.17. Where Balaam thus prophecieth concerning
Christ. I see him, but not now: I behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a
star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall arise out of Israel, and shall smite
all the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Seth. Here by the
children of Seth are understood all the children of this world: because we are
all sprung out of Seth, who succeeded into the place of Abel, who was slain.
For the posterity of Cain perished in the Deluge. Noah had his descent from
Seth. And from Noah was the reparation of mankind. Wherefore the sons of
Seth, are as much as the sons of Adam; that is, all mankind. This is the
meaning; Christ who shall come out of Jacob as a star, and whose scepter
shall rise out of Israel, shall bring to nothing the Moabites, the enemies of
the Israelites, and shall destroy all the sons of Seth, that is, all men, by
subjecting them to himself by his own Spirit. Which yet, as experience it self
may be witness, has not been brought to pass. Now in this place I translate
it, the sons of Seth, following the Lxx. Interpreters, and Vatablus: because
the Antithesis between Moab, A (...) paries. The Participle of the Verb in this
place is also used Isai 22 5. (...) Dellruens parietem.
and Seth so required. To say nothing that that Translation, He shall destroy
all that are behind, is forced. Now in the word, he shall destroy, there is an
extraordinary Emphasis, or significancy; for the Hebrew word denotes as much
as to break down a wall: as if he should say; he shall break in pieces their
walls, that is, whatsoever all men have of their proper holiness, or worth,
this Star shall make dim, and obscure, and shall weaken all power, that
lifts it self up against God.

The ninth place is Deuteronomy. 30.3, 4. Then shall the Lord God turn thy captivity,
and shall have mercy on thee, and will return and gather thee from among all
the people, whither thy Lord God had scattered thee. If any of thine be driven
out unto the utmost parts of heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather
thee, and from thence he will fetch thee. This truly is not fully performed in
the bringing back of the Babylonian captivity. For neither were the ten
Tribes then brought back. See also the 6. and the 8. Verses. For what is spoken
there concerning the circumcision of the heart is meant of the faith in
Christ, without which no man's heart is cleansed.

The tenth place is Deuteronomy. 32. to the 44. verse. Here from the first verse to
the 40. diverse passages occur concerning the Conversion of the Jews, as
Heurnius does learnedly expound them. Then from the 40. verse to the 44. is the
prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles. De Legatione Evangelic^ ad Indes. fol.
144.
For the Apostle Romans 15.10. alleges the first part of the 43. verse to this
purpose. Now here it is prophesied of the destruction of the enemies of the
Church, and of the spilling of their blood in fight. Which destruction has not
happened yet, as is plain by this Syllogism. If the Destruction, here
prophesied of by Moses, agrees with that* which is prophesied of Revel. 19.
verse. 20.21. it has not yet happened out, but is to come. But the Antecedent
is true; Therefore also the Consequent. The Assumption is made good by the
comparing of these two places. And here it shall not be amiss in brief to call
into our memory, how many d^structions of the enemies of the Church after the
Babylonian captivity, we meet withal in the Prophets. And they are in number
three. The first Destruction is, of the enemies of the Church of the Jews in
the time of the Maccabees. Dan. 11.34, 35. The second Destruction is of the
enemies of the Church of the Gentiles. Dan. 11.34, 35. Revel. 19. verse. 20, 21.
The third Destruction is of the enemies of the Church of both Gentiles and
Jews, a little before the end of the world. Revel. 20.4.

The eleventh place is Nehem. 1.8, 9. Here the promise of God, Deuteronomy. 30.3, 4. a
little before explained, is repeated: and is applied to the bringing back of
the two tribes from the Babylonian captivity, which was a type of the
deliverance of them all, which is yet to come. For God promised the twelve
Tribes, that he would gather them together whither soever they were scattered
among diverse Nations, although they were driven to the utmost part of Heaven,
that is, into the most remote Countries: Which cannot be interpreted of the
Babylonian captivity alone. For neither then were all the Tribes brought back;
neither was their bringing back from the remotest Lands.

The twelfth place is Psalm. 22.27, 28. All the ends of the earth shall
remember, and be converted unto the Lord. And all the kindreds of the Nations
shall bow down themselves before him. Compare Psalm. 86.9. All Nations whom thou
have made, shall come and worship before thee* O Lord; and shall glorify thy
name. So Psalm. 117.1. O praise the Lord all ye Nations; praise him all ye
people. Let us search through the Monuments of Hictories, and then let us
examine whether this has been, or no. We shall find indeed in some new found
Lands, detested in ours and our fathers memory, that the works of the
Conversion of the Nations has had some beginning and small progress: But in
many parts of the East to this day, we shall find so little progress, that
not so much as a beginning thereof will any where yet appear.

The thirteenth place is the whole 97. Psalm. This Psalm contains a Prophecy
of the Kingdom of Christ in his Church of the New Testament, as may be gathered
out of the 7. verse, the latter part of which the Apostle Heb. 1.6. alleges
concerning Christ. Again, Many Islands are bid to rejoice, which cannot be
accommodated to the Church of the Old Testament. Whence by the word Sion, verse
8. the Church of the New Testament is to be understood, as almost every where
in Isaiah. Moreover in the 6. verse, it is said: All the people see his glory.
Lastly, the judgments of God upon his enemies, and the Joy of the Church,
which both are here described, have not as yet been accomplish^d.

The fourteenth place is Psalm. 110. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike
through Kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the h^athen, he
shall fill the places with dead bodies. He shall wound the head over many
Countries. That these things are not yet come to pass, will appear to any one,
that will take into his consideration History, and Experience. But that is
especially to be taken notice of, which he speaks concerning the Head over many
Countries. For without dou^t it is to be understood concerning that Great
Antichrist, whom many Countries acknowledge for the HEAD of the Church.

The fifteenth place is Isai. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Here is mention made of the last
times; and four things are prophesied of, which then shall happen out. 1. The
Mountain of God shall be placed on the top of the Mountains. 2. All Nations
shall flow in unto it. 3. The Law shall come out of Sion. 4. They shall beat
their Swords into Ploughshares, etc. Nation shall not lift up a sword against
Nation, etc. Of these the first and the third are fulfilled: The second will be
brought to pass more and more every day: The fourth is not yet accomplished;
as experience has hitherto taught us, and does yet teach us.

The 16. place is Isai. 11.10* 11, 12. Two things are here prophesied of. 1.
The Conversion of the Gentiles a little after the first coming of Christ by the
preaching of the Gospel, Verse the tenth, For it shall come to pass at that
time (of the coming of Christ, of whom is the foregoing Prophecy from the
beginning of the Chapter hitherto) that the Nations shall seek unto the root
of Jesse. 2. The Conversion of the Jews and Gentiles together, Verse 11, 12.
See H^urnius upon this place. Fol. 175.
Compare this Prophecy with the sixteenth Verse of this Chapter, and with the
following twelfth Chapter.

The 17 place is Isai. 24.23. Where there is foretold that the Lord shall reign
gloriously in the mount of Sion, and in the City of Jerusalem: and in that
manner, That the Moon and Sun shall be covered with shame at this glory of the
Kingdom of God in his Church; so great shall be the glory and splendour thereof.
Now this so great glory has not as yet been seen, either in the Church of the
Old, or New Testament. Therefore in it is due time it shall be seen.

The 18 place is Isai. 25. from the 1 to the 13 verse. Here is contained a
Prophecy concerning the Church of the New Testament, as it appears by the
comparing of the 8 verse with Rev. 7.17 and chap. 21.4. as also by comparing
the 2 verse and the 1^, with Revel. 16.19, etc. and chap. 18. ver. 2.10.18.19.
Now here it is prophesied concerning the deliverance of the Church from the
persecution of enemies, ver. 3, 4, 5. concerning the destruction of the enemies
thereof, verse. 10, 11. and namely, the destruction of the City of Rome, ver. 2
and 12. Lastly, concerning the joy of the Church, being now delivered from them
that persecuted her, verse. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. And here you must take notice, That by
Moab, or the Moabites, the enemies of the Church of the New Testament are
signified, and indeed those, who are joined unto true Christians, by the bond
of the name Christian, as the Moabites were joined to the Jews by the bond of
Consanguinity, whom notwithstanding they persecuted with most hostible minds
and affections.

The 19 pl^ce is Isai. 26.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. where part of that song is set down,
wherewith the Jews were to praise God for their deliverance from the Babylonian
Captivity; wherewith the Christians also were to praise him for their
deliverance from the Tyranny of Antichrist; as may be gathered from the
comparing of Revel. 14.8. and chap. 18.2. with the 5 and 6 verses of this
Chapter.

The 20 place is Isai. 27. That this Chapter does treat of the Conversion of
the Jews; this may serve for a most certain Argument, because the Apostle
alleges some part of the 9 verse, Romans 11.27. consider also diligently the
two last verses.

The 21 is Isai. 33.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Where the City it self Jerusalem, so
commonly called, cannot be understood, by reason that after this Prophecy it
was overthrown by the Romans. Therefore the Church of the New Testament is
signified, which every where in the Prophesies of Isaiah is mystically and
typically, or metaphorically called Jerusalem. Now the things prophesied
concerning it are Peace, Defense against enemies, and Victory. All which have
not yet happened; and therefore certainly shall.

The 22 place is Isai. 34. from the 1 to the 18 verse. Where you may collect
that a Prophecy is here contained of the overthrow of the enemies of the New
Testament, by comparing the 4 verse with Revel. 6.14. and the tenth verse with
Revel. 19 3. and the 11 verse with Revel. 18.2. Now by the Edomites, the false
brethren of true Christians are set forth; and by Bozrah, the chief City of
Edom, Rome, the chief City of Antichrist, is figured out, whose ruin is most
feelingly described in the 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17 verses.

The 23 place is Isai. 43. the whole Chapter. The discourse whereof is
concerning the conversion of the Jews. Especially consider the 5 and 6 verses.
I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from the West. I will say
to the NORTH, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back: Bring my sons from
far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth.

The 24 place is Isai. 45.22. and 25. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth. 25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified,
and shall glory. This is spoken of the Universal vocation of the Gentiles, and
Jews: which two things have not yet come about.

The 25 is Isai. 49.24* 25, 26. Which words agree with the foregoing Prophecy
of the calling of the Gentiles, from the 18 ver. and therefore are to be
interpreted of the Church under the Gospel, which complains of the power of her
persecutors, ver 24. and is strengthened again by Christ with promise of
deliverance, verse 25. and with threats of the ruin of those which persecuted
her, ver. 26. Compare Revel. 16.6.

The 26 place is Isai. 54.14, 15, 16, 17. That this Prophecy does speak of the
Church of the New Testament, is from hence made plain, by reason that in this
chapter a Prophecy is contained concerning those benefits which God would
bestow upon the faithful under the Gospel, whereto it makes also, That Christ,
Ioh. 6.45, alleges the first part of the 13 verse. Now in this place of the
Prophet cited by us is contained a Prediction of the defense of the Christian
Church against enemies, which is not yet fulfilled.

The 27 place is Isai. 59.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, That here also is contained a
Prophecy of the Church under the Gospel, appears by comparing the 16 verse
with chap. 63.5. as also the 20 verse with Romans 11.26. Now there are three
members of this Prophecy: One of the destruction of the enemies of the Church,
which shall happen before the conversion of the Jews, verse. 16, 17, 18, 19.
Another of the Majesty or glory which shall accrue to the Church by the ruin
of her adversaries, verse. 19. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the
Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against him. The third is of the
conversion of the Jews, verse. 20, 21.

The 28 place is Isai. 60. Which whole chapter treats of the happiness which
is yet to accrue to the Church of the Gospel* as will appear to them that
consider of it.

The 29 place is Isai. 63. the first six verses. It will be made plain to any
one, that this Prophecy does speak of the deliverance of the Church of the New
Testament from the ministers and followers of Antichrist, if he do but compare
it with Revel. 14 19, 20. and chap. 19.13, and 15. Who are signified by the
Edomites, and Bozrab, appears by looking back to the 22* place.

The 30 place is Ierem. 16.14, to the end. This Prophecy discourses of the
conversion of the Jews, ver. 15. The Lord lives, that brought up the Children
of Israel from the Land of the NORTH, and from all the Lands whither he had
driven them: and I will bring them again into their Land which I gave to their
fathers. Also concerning the vocation of the Gentiles, ver. 19. The Gentiles
shall come unto the^ from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our
fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit.

The 31 place is Ierem. 23.3. where the conversion of the Jews is treated of.

The 32 place is Ierem. 33. ver. 3. and the following. For ^, the days come,
says the Lord, that I will bring again the Captivity of my people Israel, and
Judah. And a little after, But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David
their King; or as the Chaldee Paraphrase has it, Christ, the son of David
their King. Behold again a most sweet prophecy of the conversion of the Jews!

The 33 place is Ierem. 31.1* 3. Where in like manner the conversion of the
Jews is prophesied of. Heurn. de legit. Evang fol. 157 and Seqq. ^^^m ^ol. 165.
See Heurnius in his Book formerly cited by us.

The 34 place is Ierem. 31.31, 32* 33, 34. That a Prophecy concerning the
Church of the Gospel is contained in this place, may be perceived by the
alleging thereof in Matthew. 3.18. and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap.
8.8. Now the conversion of the Jews is there promised, in as much as God
promises the people of Israel, that he would make a new Covenant with them, by
means of which he would forgive their sins, and write his Law in their hearts.
Which conversion of the Jews is not yet brought to pass, because since the
Gospel began to be preached, the greatest part of the Jews have continued in
unbelief. Wherefore it shall be brought to pass in it is good time.

The 35 place is Ierem. 32.37, 39. Behold, I will gather them out of all
Countries, whither I have driven them in mine anger. And I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear (...) for ever. Here again is promised
the conversion of the Jews; which alike belongs to the happy condition of the
Church of the New Testament.

The 26 place is Ezekiel. 36.26, and the following. Where the Prophet says, that
it should come to pass, That God would give them a new heart, and put a new
spirit within them. By which words no doubt the conversion of the Jews is
signified ^ which having not been, it remains it shall be.

The 37 place is Dan. 11.33, 34. And they that understand among the people,
shall instruct many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by
captivity, and by spoil many days. Now when they shall fall, they shall be
^olpen by a little help. This Prophecy is to be understood according to the
letter, of the affliction and deliverance of the Church in the time of
Antiochus, and the Maccabees; typically and mystically of the affliction and
deliverance of the Church under Antichrist. Which deliverance indeed: is part
of the happiness of the Church under the Gospel. Now that Antiochus was a type
of Antichrist, appears by comparing Dan. 11.36, and 2 Thessalonians. 24.

The 38 place is Dan. 11.44, 45. But rumors out of the East, and out of the
North shall trouble him. Therefore he shall go forth with great fury to
destroy, and utterly to make away many. And he shall plant the Tabernacles of
his Palace between the Seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to
his end, and no^e shall help him. These three things are unfolded in this
Prophecy: 1. The Protasis, or beginning of these tumults, wherewith Judea in
old time, and Europe at this day is most grievously afflicted. 2. The Epitasis,
or busy part, so wondrous full of troubles and contention. 3. Lastly, the
Catastrophe, or issue, of these tumults, so much desired, and wished for by the
Church. How every one of these severally are fulfilled in Antiochus, as a type
of Antichrist, it is nothing pertinent to our purpose to enquire. Neither
indeed is the matter so obscure, or unknown. Let us examine how they will suit
with Antichrist. The Protasis, or first Act, as they say, is in these words: At
length rumors from the East, and from the North shall trouble him. The rumor
from the East sounded loud in the year of Christ M.CCCC.LIII. when
Constantinople was taken: also in the year, M.CCCC.LXXXI. when Hyd^nutum in
Apuliaiurat caesis millib. Christian^(...).
Geduces the Bassa broke into Italy. The same rumor was renewed* when the
House of Othoman, having quite overthrown the Sultans power, turned his Arms
the second time upon Europe; and taking Belgrade taken by Soly^an, A. 1522. It
is plac^d by Pliny in the utmost bounds of Pannonia. So called in the
declining time of the Eastern Empire. (...) Constantino Porphyrogen de
Administr. Imp. (...). 40. Of late also called AlbaGraec^, but most anciently
Taur^num, as appears by old Coins found there, mentioned by Busboquius, Ep. 1
Leg. Turcicae. In Antoninus the name is corrupted in some Copies to Au^inum, in
others, Taurinum; as it is likewise in Ptolomie, where you have (...), for
(...). Plurima antem apud Ptolemeum corrupta Urbium nostrarum nomina, ^em apud
(...), in Xrquae ad Britanniam pertinent Itineribus foede lux^^a loca, atque
pessime a libr^lis habita, restituta, and nostris Annotationibus explicata,
publico, jamdudum exhibuif^emus, nisi dulciffimae patriae intesti^ae tu^bae
paratam editionem praevortissent. Deus malum, quod immi^e^ averruncet. (...)
Belgrad^, and the Island Rhodes also taken by (...), An. 1525, cum 400
t^i^emibus, and 200000 hominum.
Rhodes, began to invade the Territories of the Latin Church. This rumor from
the East, was followed with a rumor from the North, in the year of Christ,
Renascentibus bonis literis Religionis eti^m (...) contigle M.D.XVII. Lather^
per G^rmaniam Leo^i^ ^ Indulgenti^s impugnante.
M.D.XVII, and so forward. The Epitasis, or busy part, is in these: Therefore
he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.
And he shall plant the Tabernacles of his Palace between the Seas in the
glorious holy mountain. At this day Antichrist in the performance thereof, goes
on under full Sail, wanting no favor of winds. For after he was troubled with
the rumor out of the North, with great and high Spirit he assaulted all them
who either began this rumor, or since favored it, or do at this time any way
cherish it. Neither does he slack in these his attempts; for he has destroyed,
and utterly made away with many of Gods people. Moreover he has planted the
Tabernacles of his Palace between the Seas in the glorious holy mountain, that
is, He has propagated his Religion among those people, who had a long time
professed the purity of Religion. But it is well that the Catastrophe, or last
act, is not answerable to the Epitasis, or middle part of the Tragedy. This
brave Planter in the midst of his Plantation, will have some unlucky chance
befall him. For when he shall come to his end, none shall help him. On the
sudden a tempest shall arise, which shall bring shipwreck upon this bold
Steers-man. Conradus Graserus.
But see more of this in Conrodus Graserus his History of Antichrist.

The 39. place is Dan. 12.1. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince which stands for the children of thy people, and there shall be a time
of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same time:
and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
Written in the book. I interpret this prophecy of the last persecution, or the
war of Gog and Magog, which shall immediately go before the last Judgment. I
am persuaded hereto by these two Reasons. 1. Because the time of this trouble
is said to be such, as has not been Matthew. 14.21. (...) Mar. 13 19 (...).
since there was a Nation. Which Not^ of time cannot agree with any
persecution, but that which was most grievous; such as was that of Gog. 2.
Because in the 2. verse of this Chapter, after that time of trouble, verse. 1.
the Resurrection, and the last Judgment are immediately treated of.

The 40 place is Dan. 12.11, 12. And from the time that the daily sacrifice
shall be taken away, and the abomination, that makes desolate, set up, there
shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that waits,
and comes to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days. Here these
words; But from the time, etc. are to be understood of the last destruction of
the City Jerusalem by TITUS: because then the daily sacrifice was taken away,
and the Some refer this to the Statue of Adrian the Emperor placed in the
Temple, and ^^ken away from the (...) by those Jews who escaped from the
destruction of the City by (...). See S^idas in (...), etc.
abomination of desolation was set up, as appears by comparing this place with
the 9. chap. of Daniel, verse. 26, 27. Again, prophetical days are here to be
understood, that is, years: Because these days are homogeneall, or of the same
kind with the weeks, chap. 9. But those weeks are prophetical; therefore also
these days. Now Daniel carries us on to the end of the world, by proposing two
Periods, or limited times, of the New Testament, and by joining them to his
seventy weeks* in this manner. The 70. weeks are terminated with the
destruction of the City, that is, with the year of Christ, 69. Here begins the
Epoch, or account of 1290 days, that is, of so many years: So shall we come
to the year of Christ 1359 Quo ^e^pore incipient pii contradicere impierati
Antichristianae quae t^* ad tempus a liqued perdurabis, verum ita, ut semper
^int^uturi pii, qui se oppon^n^ voce, scriptis, martyri^ Et sane usque ab hoc
anno ad hanc (...), and (...) Nam circa An 1359. Pet^archa qui obiit 1374
Taulerus qui ob. 13^9. Wi^^^fus qui ob. 1387. caeperunt in os contradicere
Antichristo Romano. Alsted. Cl^^nol. Tit. 12. Sect*
1359. At which we must begin the Epo^^^ of 1335 days, or years: And so we
shall be brought to the y^^^ of Christ Su^duc annos mill, relinquitur A. Chapter
1694 Epoch millenarii Apocalyptic^ (...) A^^^^d.
2694. in which the Thousand years in the Revelation shall have end: and they
being ended the war of Gog and Magog shall begin, to which also the last
Judgment shall put an end. See more in my Thesaurus Chronologicus page 51
Perhaps the number is false printed. In the edit* 1637. (which I use) it is
(...) 1^6.
. Compare also the Annotations of Lucas Osiander on Daniel 12.

The 41 place is Hos^. 1.11. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the children
of Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves as head, and they shall
come up out of the Land; for great shall be the day of Jezreel. This truly is
not yet brought to pass.

The 42 place is Hos. 3.4, 5. For the Children of Israel shall abi^^ many ^^yes
without a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an
Imag^, and without an Ephod, and without This word T^raphim, observe ^it by the
way for them, who meeting with it in this, and other places, know not what so
make of (...) which by the (...), they here (...) Theod (...) by the same (...)
which they express (...) the high Priest* had in (...) of Judgment. (...) of
what was to come. Moses blessing the Holy tribe (...) Syris. cap. 2.
Teraphim. Afterward shall the Children of Israel turn, and seek the Lord their
God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the
latter days. The Chaldee Paraphrase turns it thus: A long (...) the Children
of Israel shall remain without a King of the posterity of David, neither shall
there be any to bear rule in Israel, or to perform acceptable sacrifice to God
in Jerusalem: Neither shall there be any Statue in Samaria, nei^^^r any Ephod,
or Prophet. Afterward the Israelites shall be turned, and they shall be
diligen^ in the ^orship of the Lord their God, and they shall obey CHRIST the
Son of David, their King; and they shall yield themselves to the worship of
the Lord, and then his goodness shall be infinite, which shall happen un^^
them in the last days. This Prophecy, above all that can be said, the ancient
Interpreters in general do expound concerning the Conversion of the Jews, in
the end of the world, to the Christian faith. And indeed the words are very
plain: Because the Israelites, which were carried away captives by Salm^nassar,
and scattered into several Countries, are prophesied of that they shall return
to God, and to David their King* that is, CHRIST, whose type David was* Which
returning of theirs* seeing it has not yet been, it is certain that in it is
own time it shall be. Now this belongs to the happiness of the Church under
the Gospel, which the Revelation defines in the Period, or limited time of a
Thousand years.

The 43 place is I^^l. 3.1, ^. and from the 9. to the 14. Which Prophecy, that
it speaks concerning the Church of the New Testament, appears plainly by
comparing the 13. verse with Revel. 14. the 15.19. and 20. verses. Now what is
here spoken of the Valley of I^^oshaphat, is to be taken mystically, or
typically. For as God in old time, in the Valley of Iehoshaphat overthrew the
A^^o^ites, and the Moabites, and that by his Angels. 2 Chronicles. ^0. so in his
good time he will slay the enemies of the Church in a like place, which Revel.
16.16. is called Armageddon. Theodor. in locum. Hac quidem Zo^^ (...) I
attributerunt ^i (...). Propheti^ autem ae^e^norum bo^^rum continet
promis^^onem, and omn^^ gentes cognitur^n (...).
This also makes hereto, That the Valley of Iehoshaphat is called the V^lley
of threshing, because the Moabites, and the Ammonites were, as it may be said,
threshed by the Angel of God in that place* by whose threshing the destruction
of the enemies of Christ's Church is signified, Isaiah 25.10.

The 44 place is Amos 9.14, 15. I will bring again the Captivity of my people
Israel: and they shall build the waste Cities, and inhabit them. And I will
plant them upon their Land; they shall (...) more be pulled up out of their
Land. Which Prophecy speaks of the Conversion of the Jews.

The 45 place is Mich. 2.12. I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of the^; I
will surely gather the re^^^nt of Israel. As if he should say; I will gather
unto the Messiah that blessed se^^ of Abraham, and full storehouse of (...),
all and every tribe, (...) they are the seed of Jacob.

The 46 place is Mich. 4. The whole Chapter contai^^ a Prophecy of the Church
under the Gospel, as may be gathered from these words, In the last times, or In
the end of days, verse. 1. Also from the description of the Vocation of the
Gentiles, Verse. 1, 2*3. Compare with this place, Isai. 2. But besides the
Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, Verse. 1, 2, 3. which by the preaching
of the Apostles, and their successors was accomplished, here is also contained
a prophecy of the happy condition of the Church, which yet remains to be
fulfilled: namely, concerning the Peace of the Church, in the end of third, and
4 Verse. Then of the Conversion of the Jews, Verse. 5, 6, 7. Of the Majesty, and
glory of the Church, Verse. 8. Lastly, Of the victory of the Church, which it
shall gain over it is enemies. Verse. 9. and the following.

The 47 place is Mich. 5.7. and the following; where he treats of the
Conversion of the Jews.

The 48 place is Zephan. 3.9. I will turn to the people a So Symmachus (...).
But Aquila and Theodo^. (...) a chosen Language.
pure Language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, etc. to the
end. Here is contained a threefold prophecy. 1. Of the calling of the
Gentiles, which was done by the preaching of the Apostles, Verse. 9.10. 2. Of
the Conversion of the Jews. From the 11. to the 20. 3. Of the destruction of
the enemies of the Church. Ver. 14. to these words, Verse. 19. I will save her
that halteth, etc.

The 49 place is Zepha. 3.10. From beyond the rivers of (...) Sym.
Ethiopia my suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed shall bring mine
offering. The Chaldee thus expresses it: From the Countries beyond the Rivers
of INDIA by my mercy the banished of my people, which were carried away, shall
return* and they shall bring them as Offerings.

The 50 place is Zach. 2.10. and the following. It appears plainly, That this
prophecy speaks of the Church of the New Testament, by the 10. and 11: Verse.
where the Jews are commanded to go out of the Babylonian captivity, which was
now at that time finished. Whence it is gathered, that mention is made here of
the mystical Babylon, Revel. 18.4. Now here is promise made to the faithful
under the Gospel of their protection against their enemies; Also of the
Conversion of the Gentiles, and of the Jews; and of their joy which shall arise
from the defense and dwelling of God with them.

The 51 place is Zach. 12.1. to the end. It may hence be perceived that the
prophecy in this Chapter does speak of the Church of the N. T. because
experience it self opposes the litterall sense here* in the 2. verse. and
following* concerning the protection of Jerusalem. For from the time of this
prophecy, which was published to the Jews newly returned from Babylon, Mat.
17.11. As well the old Jewish Church, as the Christian, believed that Elias
should be the fore^unner of the Day of Judgment as appears by Tertull.
de(...). cap. 2^. As John was fore^unne^ of Christ's first coming, so Elias of
his last. The Jews talk idly of restoring his soul to his body. What need
that, seeing he was taken up into Heaven with both? Therefore Tertullian (...)
Anima, cap. 35. says Elias shall come, (...), de quo non est exemptus, sed
mundo reddendum, de quo est translatus. Quod ut ver^ (...) divinitus dictum;
says the learned Ios. Scaliger.
the City was not so protected, as is here promised; but contrariwise
overthrown by the Romans. Whence it plainly appears that by Jerusalem here is
mystically understood the Church of the New Testament. Which mystical manner
of speaking is not unusual in such kind of prophesies. Now of the Church of
the N* T. partly the victory thereof which it shall gain over Antichrist is
declared; partly the Conversion of the Jews. Compare Revel. 19.11. and
following verses.

The 52 place is Zach. 14.6. and following. It may be from this manifestly
understood that this prophecy is of the Church of the N. T. in that our
experience contradicts the sense of the letter concerning the plague wherewith
God would smite all the people that fought against Jerusalem, verse. 12, 13,
14. when as from the time of this prophecy the enemies of Jerusalem were
never stricken with such a plague; nay, on the contrary, it self was overthrown
by the Romans. It remains therefore that by Jerusalem we understand the Church
of the N. T. whose enemies shall be punished with no single plague, but many,
as is here severally expressed. Here then the destruction of the enemies of the
Church of the New T. is prophesied of: and moreover the illumination, and
enlargement thereof; of which in the 6.7. and following verses.

The 53 place is Malach. 3.19, 20, 21. according to others, chap. 4.1, 2 3.
That this prophecy speaks of the Church of the New Testament is clear out of
these words; The Sun of righteousness shall arise. Now two things are promised
here to the Church of the N. T, which are not yet fulfilled; namely, the
destruction of her enemies, v. 19. and her own deliverance from persecution.

The 54. place is Mal. 4.4, 5. Where the coming of Elias is spoken of, Before
the great and terrible day of the Lord come. Which prophecy indeed has a
double fulfilling: one, in John the Baptist; another, in some other great
person, who is yet to come. This appears thus: Christ teaches us, Mat. 11 and
17 Chapters, that this Prophecy was fulfilled in John the Baptist, to wit, in
regard of his zeal and fervency. But what else is spoken concerning Elias, both
in Malachy and Matthew, does not suit with John the Baptist. For Malachy says,
Matthew. 17.11. That Elias should restore all things which John the Baptist did
not. Therefore we must necessarily determine, That this Prophecy will have a
double fulfilling. Whereto belongs that also of De considerat. Evangel lib. 1
cap 21. Theodoret in his own language (not yet printed) out of the M. of the
public Lib^ary in Oxford is this: (...). Paulo post. (...). Where by the way
take na^ion, That in this Ma. s. the (...): Hosea, Hab(...) (...) Mit^^, are
Theo(...): the (...) upon the other vii are Theodoret. When at the printed
La^ine of (...) Gillius (whose Translation Alsled made use of) they all go
under Theodorets name. And yet which I wonder at) the Inscription of the Gr
Copy in the beginning of the book is (...) I owe the Transcription to my
learned and worthy friend (...) Henry (...) of Oxford.
Augustine. Elias shall restor: all, that is, in the end he shall confirm the
Saints troubled by the persecution of Antichrist. And the rest of the Fathers
also have thu^ interpreted Malachy. Theodoret in his Commentary, writes thus of
this place: He speaks of his second coming; and he likewise teaches us what
the great Elias shall do, when he shall come. And a little after; Elias shall
first come; and he will persuade you, O Jews. That, without doubting, you would
be joined to the faithful of the Gentiles, and be brought together into my
Church being become one.

The 55 place is Matthew. 23.39. Where Christ speaks thus to the unthankful
Jews: For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say,
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. By which words Christ
declares, That at length the Jews should see him, not meaning in the last
Judgment, but before it; because at the last Judgment they shall not cry out
unto him, Bl^ss^d, etc. (for then they shall tremble, that have not been
converted unto him) but at that time, when he shall show himself to them, that
he may convert them to the true faith.

The 56 place is Mat. 24.14. And this Gosp^l of the Kingdom shall be preached
in the whole world, for a witness unto all Nations; and then shall the end
come. See now, before the last Judgment the Indians themselves, and others
which yet acknowledge not JESUS CHRIST, shall be brought unto the Church!

The 57 place is Luke 21.24. And they (the Jews) shall fall with the edge of
the sword, and shall be led captives into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be
trampled on by the Nations, until the times of the Gentil^s shall be
fulfilled. This place shall receive light from the next following. Our Savior
here teaches us, that the Jews shall be vexed along time by the Gentiles; and
that being ended, they shall be converted to the Faith.

The 58 place is Romans 11.25, 26, 27. The Apostle teaches us in this place,
that the Jews should so long remain in their blindness and calamity, till the
fullness of the Gentiles should come in* that is, till the rest of the Nations
of the world should flow in unto the Gospel. For then it should come to pass,
that all Israel should be saved. And this he calls a See D' Frideaux, Orat. de
Vocations Iudeorum. Sect. 6. concerning this place.
Mystery, and that no^ unfitly. For this is that Prophetical Secret so often
pressed by the Prophets; of which Paul would not have the ^entiles ignorant,
lest they should despise the Jews, as cast off for ever.

The 59 place is 2 Cor. 3.15. Therefore unto this very day when Moses is read,
the Veil is upon their heart. Neverth l^sse when they shall turn themselves
unto the Lord, the Veil shall be taken away. The Apostle here teaches us two
things concerning the Jews: 1. That their minds Read, were hardened (...) Out
English Interpreters as well as others, confound these verbs (...) and (...)
^ut none of the ancients, exci^^ Su^^^ (whose authority, as learned men know,
in many things is to be suspected) use (...) for (...). See (...) ^.4. Romans 117.
were blinded, as he speaks in the foregoing verse. 2. That at length they are
to be converted by the Spirit of Christ.

The 60 place is Revel. 22.5. And she brought forth a man-child (Christ) who
was to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron. Compare Psalm. 2. You may gather out
of these two places, that Christ shall be Lord and King of all people, Jews and
Gentiles, when he shall gather them into his Church, and there feed and rule
them.

The 61 place is Revel. 14.8. Where the ruin of mystical Babylon is declared;
which belongs to the happiness of the Church. But seeing it has not happened,
it shall most surely happen.

The 62 place is Revel. 14.14. to the 21. Where is (...) blown the destruction
of the enemies of the Church of the N. T^^.

The 63 place is Revel. 18, the whole Chapter. Wherein i^ contained a glorious
Prophecy concerning the destruction of the the City of Rome, and the overthrow
of Antichrist.

The 64 place is Revel. 19.1, 2, 3. Where in like manner is contained a
prophecy of Rome's downfall, and Antichrist's ^^^dition.

The 65 place is Revel. 19.11. to the end. Where is a clear prophecy of the
vanquishing of Antichrists Army.

And these are the testimonies of Scripture, in number Either Alsled forgot
him^self, or else the Printer oversaw the 43. Place in* this number. For that
being left out, as it appears it is there are in all but Lxv.
Lxvi. in which the happiness of the Church, whereof we took upon us to treat,
is prophesied of promised, and set forth. I make no doubt, but the attentive
reader rather will easily observe a notable harmony, and concent, in these
places of Scripture, and from his own private reading add also others.

The third Classis of Arguments.
THis Classis, or rank of Arguments offords certain reasons, and the consent of
some learned men.

Reasons, or Consequences.

I. All persecutors of the Church have at length been punished by God.
Therefore at length the great Antichrist also, shall certainly be punished. The
Antecedent, or foregoing proposition is proved partly from the nature of God,
partly by Induction of examples. II. After long and grievous persecutions the
Church has ever felt some rest and refreshment here on earth: Therefore also
she shall have some breathing time after the persecution of Antichrist, and
that here upon earth; because God himself has made her such a promise. III.
Where the aid of man fails, there the assistance of God begins; as Philo the
Jew said long ago both quiently, Philo Iudeus lib. (...)
and piously. This is most certainly witnessed by the examples of the Church of
the Old T. miraculously delivered out of the Egyptian bondage, Exodus 12. and
14. by the deliverance of Jerusalem from the siege of Sennacheri^, 2 Kin. 19.
by the deliverance from the hostile invasion of the Ethiopians under King Asa.
2 Chro. 14. by deliverance from the invasion of the Moabites and Ammonites,
under King Iehosaphat. 2 Chronicles. 20. And lastly, by deliverance from the
oppression of Antiochus Epiphanes. 1 Mac. 1. and following chapters. Add unto
these diverse examples of the Church of the N. T. which, when it is condition
has been granted as desperate, and quite lost, has had deliverance by the
(...).
unexpected handywork of God. See the Ecclesiastical History at large. From
hence we may very well gather, that the Church, at this time oppressed on every
hand, and left destitute of all humane assistance, shall by the power of God be
asserted, and vindicated, when Antichrist, in the full course and carrere of
his happiness, shall little think of any such matter. IV. The downfall of
Antichrist, and the binding of Satan for a thousand years, do without any
intermission meet together. It is very probable therefore, That the beginning
of these thousand years is at hand. For Antichrist, at that very time, wherein
he shall make the greatest boast of his victories, shall suddenly fall. Revel.
18.7, 8. V. The several Phenomenon, See Tycho ^r^he^ Judgment concerning this
life Revolution of the Fiery Trig on which you have in the beginning of this
book.
or Apparitions in the Heavens; namely, new Stars, and Cometes; also
Earthquakes, and the like, taken notice of in these latter times, do without
doubt portend and manifestly foretell some notable, and extraordinary change.
VI. The Period or limited time, for the Kingdom of Antichrist to continue, is
almost expired, and at an end, as appears by the Revelation and History. VII.
Daniel Chap. 12. declares an end of his prophecy, when he expressly sets
down, that 2625. years shall be finished after the end of his Lxx. Weeks, that
is from the year of Christ 69. which years, if they be added to the other, the
sum of 2694. years is made up. In which current of time all things shall happen
out, which are foretold, except the last Judgment, and what follows thereon.
Wherefore if from 2694. years, 1000 be subducted, we shall come by the year of
Christ 1694. In this year then, or sooner our THOUSAND years shall take their
beginning.
The consent of Godly, and learned Men.
Esdras.
IN the forefront we place the fourth book of Esdras. For there many passages
occur concerning the conversion of the Jews, and the deliverance of the
Church of the N. T. from Antichrist* Especially, That is a notable place, Chap.
13.39, 40. And whereas thou saw that he gathered another peaceable multitude
unto him. Those are ten Tribes, which were Whither these ten Tribes were
carried is at this day a great question. Esdras tells us that they entered
Euphrates by the narrow passages of the River, and so traveled a vast Country
of a year and halfs journey; and that the Countries called A^sareth. I find
indeed in Ptolemy lib. 5. (...); a City of the Greater (...), not far from
the place where Araxes exposes (...) self into the Caspian Sea: Perhaps an
Israelitish Colony. But how all this can stand good compared with a King. 17.6.
and Geography it self, viderine (...). See Doctor Reinold De libri^ Apocryphis,
ad locum. Bretowoods Enquir. cap. 13. The Sibylls* (...). The Sibylls verse
runs thus, (...) -- The former verse in Tertullians Latin is Nulla jam Delos,
harenae Sa^^os, ut Sibylla non mendax. Lib. de Pallio, Vide Joan. Obsopai edit.
Sibyll. Carminum, Gr. lat. Parisus.
carried away prisoners out of their own Land, in the time of Hoshea the King.
What the same Author writes concerning the Eagle, and Lion, is severally
expounded by several interpreters.

Out of the Sibylls also some things are brought about the downfall of
Antichrist, and the happy estate which the world shall enjoy after that shall
come to pass. Very much mention is made of that: Rome shall become a street,
or high way.

All the Fathers were of this opinion, that Elias should come, and restore all
things.

Some, as you may see in Alfonsus Conradus in his Commentary on the Revelation,
between the coming of Christ in the flesh, and his coming in Majesty, do
maintain a certain middle coming, which they call his coming in the power and
effiency of his Spirit, to destroy the great Antichrist, and to reform his
Church. This coming they say shall be in the end of the sixth Millenary, or
1000 years; of which coming they make Enoch and Elias the forerunners. They say
that Antichrist shall be destroyed by their preaching, and his Kingdom
abolished. After whose downfall peace shall be granted to the Church, and Satan
shall be bound, so that he shall not be able to disturb the tranquillity
thereof. Now this peace and happy progress of the Church they say shall last
for the whole seventh Millenary, till the last time of her troubles, by the
persecution of the Nations Gog and Magog; because Satan, who they say, shall
then be set at liberty, shall stir them up against the Godly.

From hence it appears, That our opinion concerning these 1000 years is not
new, and unheard of.

Alfonsus Conradus of Mantua in his Commentary on the Revelation, Alfonsus
Conradus Mantuanus.
published at Basil. An. 1574. writes as follows.
IN his Preface. This one thing perchance will offend the ears of some, because
I seem to promise a more plentiful peace to the Church, then that likeness of
the Cross will allow of, to which in this world it must be made conformable to
Christ it is head. But let them bethink themselves, I entreat them; that this is
not so contrary to the Scripture, that it should be objected against me, or
laid to my charge, as fit to be reckoned in the number of those, which are
termed either impious, or absurd: Especially, when as I cannot perceive, by
what means that happiness, which John writes the Church shall enjoy, Satan
being bound, can be made good, except we acknowledge some rest of the Church,
her enemies being overthrown. Which I think indeed ever happened, as often as
the enemies of God's people have been removed out of the way. Now because the
enemy which John tells us shall be taken away, is more dangerous then all that
ever yet infested God's people, it ought not to seem strange to any one, if, he
being once overcome, the Church enjoy a more plentiful peace then usually.

Upon the 20. Chap. of the Revel. Verse. 1. God being about to bestow a more
plentiful peace upon his Church, then hitherto he had granted to it, it
suffices him not to have removed out of the way the Beast, and those Kings of
the Earth, with a horrible slaughter, who favoring the Beast, had wholly
disturbed his Church's peace, except also he restrain Satan, the beginner of
all these mischies, So that he may not any more raise those usual contentions
and strife among men. Wherefore the Angel comes down from Heaven, who
repressing the fury of Satan, shuts him up in the bottomless pit, and there
forces him to remain so long, as he pleases not to have the peace of the Church
to be taken away.

And a little after. Now he binds him, and shuts him up into the bottomless
pit for a thousand years, that is, for that whole time, wherein God has
determined that the peace of his Church shall not be disturbed by Satan. See
more there to this purpose,

Lucas Osiander.
Lucas Osiander upon Daniel. 12. I think the end of these years will fall in
with that time, in which the Popedom of Rome shall bodily be overturned:
although in some men's minds it shall hiddenly remain even until the last day.

Matthaeus Cotterius.
Matthew Cotterius in his continued and demonstrative Exposition of the
Revelation, upon the 20 Chap. Satan began to be tied in bonds, when the
restored Truth of the Scriptures began to take place on earth, the witnesses
being raised, and the dark miste of lies being dispelled. Then shall Satan be
bound for a thousand years, which must be expired, before he scatter new
errors through the world, and by them seduce the Nations. This, this is the
imprisonment; this is the liberty, or setting free of Satan.

In the same place upon verse. 2. But when began Satan to be bound? In the year
1517. when the witnesses were raised. From that time ALL people generally have
not drunk any new poison of heresy, which might weaken, or overturn their
faith.

In the same place. To 1517. add 1000. years. So you shall make 2517. at which
time Satan shall again draw the Nations into abominable heresies.

In this Exposition of Cotterius, the thousand years are rightly urged
according to the letter. But his Epoch, or beginning of his account is not
well placed in the year 1517. For then began only the praeludium, or proeme,
of this Millenary.

Ioannes Piscator.
John Piscator in his Commentary on the Revelations. The happiness of the
faithful, who shall live upon earth after the downfall of the Papacy, is their
security from the hostile invasions of the wicked for 1000 years.

In the same place. The singular happiness of the Martyrs of Christ, who
before these thousand years endured persecution, is their Resurrection which
shall be before the general Resurrection, and their reign in Heaven with
Christ for a thousand years before the Resurrection of the rest.

In this Exposition the literal interpretation is rightly urged. But that he
says the Martyrs shall reign with Christ in Heaven for those thousand years,
cannot be proved out of the Text. Nay, the contrary may thence be proved;
because the Resurrection of the Martyrs is part of the happiness of the Church
here on Earth. Again, (...). On the earth
The Kingdom which is limited by a certain number of years, cannot suite well*
with eternal life. See also Revel. 5.10. where the Saints in Heaven among
other things, sing thus: And we shall reign upon the Earth. But moreover the
same John Piscator maintains this opinion of the thousand years in his German
translation of the Bible: and a little before his death he wrote a short
Treatise Of the future happiness of the Church in this life. Io. Piscatoris De
futura in tertis Ecclesie, ^elicitate Tractatus (...).
Out of which I have made use of many things, which I have transcribed into
this Meditation; for that Treatise of his has not as yet seen the light.

Many Writers of the former, and this present Age, have published many things
concerning Elias the Artist, who is to come; Of the Lion of the North,
Theophrastus Paracelsus.
who is near at hand; Of a fourth Northern Monarchy; Of a great Reformation; Of
the Conversion of the Jews; and the like. See Theophrastus Paracelsus, Michael
Sendivogius in his Treatise of Sulphur, Michael Sendivogius.
Stephanus Pannonius Of the circle of the Works and Judgments of God; where
among other things he writs thus: Yet it shall come to pass that the pure
Gospel of God shall be preached to the Americans before the end of the world.
Stephanus Pannonius.
Again, Nothing is more sure then that, the Reformation of the East and South
drawing on, some famous Emperor, whose types Constantine, and Theodosius, b^th
entitled Great, were, shall openly show himself, and granting liberty of
Religion to them, who profess the name of the Holy Trinity, shall do some
great matter in the world, for the glory of God, for the building up of the
Church, and for the downfall of Antichrist. In the same place; The Eastern
Christians fired with the zeal of Christ, shall make their way into Asia it
self, and provoke the Jews to jealousy, Romans 11. And the spiritual Babylon
shall be a pray unto all Nations. In the same place, A refining of the
Soldiers of God; whereof there is mention, Ioannes Dobricius.
Zach. 13.8. that is, temptations, and trials shall go before this
Reformation, that the light of God may arise out of the Cross of Christ. This
Treatise was published in the year 1608. John Dobricius also in the year 1612.
did set forth a notable book, entitled (...), that is, The Interpreter of
times; wherein, both out of the Holy Scripture, and from the new Star which
appeared in the year In Serpenta^^ De qua scrip sit Joan Keplerus* (...) quem
vide, and nuperum item, tractatum apud nos editum Nuncius Propheticus
inscriptum, page 14. Petrus Molinaeus.
.DC.IV. and the great Conjunction of the Planets, many things are discoursed of
concerning the reformation, and future happiness of the Church.

Peter du Moulin, in his French Book, entitled Du Combat Christien: that is,
The Chrictian Conflict, page 256. This persecution is a cruel tempest, which
cannot last awayes. Either it will take us out of the world, or God will take
it away from us.

Page 353. Every one has but a short journey, whereby he must come to God, and
the time is at hand, that we must commit our bodies to the earth, our Souls to
God, and to the Church peace and the blessing of God. For it shall come to
pass even in our times, that God shall be glorified in the great
Congregations: Yea even in those places, where are horrible ruins, the Word of
God shall ^ound forth, and God shall afford us matter of praise and
thanksgiving.

Page 450. After that God shall have shown us his deliverances on earth, he
will also show us his riches in Heaven.

A CONFUTATION Of the Objections.
I. Object. IS taken out of Matthew. 24.14. If after the Gospel preached in all
the world, the end of all things shall come, that happiness of the Church in
this world shall not happen out between the end thereof, and the preaching of
the Gospel. For the Gospel is already preached through the whole earth. I
answer. 1. The Consequence is to be denied: for although this happiness do
come between, yet it hinders not, but that the end of the world should come
after the Gospel preached over the whole earth. Secondly, The pro-syllogisme is
to be denied, because the Gospel is not already preached over the whole earth.

II. Object. Is taken from Matthew. 24.29, 30. If presently after the destruction
of Jerusalem. Christ shall come to Judgment, then this happiness of the
Church shall not be before his coming to Judgment. Answ. The matter it self
speaks, and experience witnesses, that this word Immediately, (...).
or Presently, is not here properly, or simply to be understood, but
hyperbolically, and according to what went before, namely in relation to the
foregoing Prophecy concerning the overthrow of the Jews, which they were to
receive by the destruction of Jerusalem; So that this is the meaning; that
between this desolation of Jerusalem, and the coming of Christ, the Jews
should receive no other overthrow.

III. Object. Is out of the same Chapter, verse. 37, 38, 39. If a little before
the coming of Christ to Judgment, the State and condition of the world shall
be such, as it was in the time of No^h before the Deluge; and that such a state
of things is to be seen at this day: It may be hence gathered, that such a
condition of the Church, as is here described, shall not happen out before the
coming of Christ, to wit, in which a great number of believers for a thousand
years should worship God. But rather that this coming is at the doors, or else
indeed cannot any long time be delayed. Answ. With that State of the faithful,
which shall last for a thousand years, the relics and remainders of those
conquered enemies of the Church shall be joined, who about the end of this
millenary shall recollect their strengths, and make war against the
faithful. And then the state of the world shall be such, as it was in the
days of Noah. As in his days therefore the deluge came upon the wicked: so
these thousand years being finished, the last judgment shall come in the time
of the war of Gog and Magog. And so it will be brought about, that this
prophecy of Christ, notwithstanding that happiness of the Church, shall be
accomplished in those wicked and ungodly men.

IV. Object. Is taken out of Luke 18.8. If at the coming of Christ to
Judgment, none, or indeed very few believers shall be found in the world, it
is not probable that so great a number of believers shall be for those thousand
years immediately before the coming to Judgment. Answ. He shall not find
faith indeed adeo frequentem in cordibus justificatorum, quam natantem in
libris hypocritarum, as Doctor Prideaux Orat. de Vocat. Iudaerum, where he
explains this place. Sect. 7.
Christ does not mean by these words, that simply he shall find but a few
believers on earth, at his coming to Judgment: but a few in respect of the
enemies of the Church, who then shall make war with the Saints; The number of
which enemies shall be as the Sand of the Sea. Revel. 20.8.

V. Object. Is taken out of the Acts 14.22. We must through many afflictions
enter into the Kingdom of God. Therefore the Church in this life shall not be
freed from persecution. Answ. Paul and Barnabas speak in this place of the
condition of those present times, not denying in the mean while, that there
shall be certain times also wherein the Church shall be delivered from
persecution; as it happened in the times of Constantine the Great, Theodosius,
and others.

VI. Object. Is taken out of 1 Cor. 10.11. where the Apostle says, that the
ends of the world were come upon him, and the other faithful of that time.
Wherefore if the ends of the world were at hand in Paul's time, much more are
they now at the doors, seeing from that time near sixteen Ages are expired.
Whereupon, it is not probable that a thousand years and more should remain to
the end of the world. Answ. These words of Paul have not this meaning, as if
the day of Judgment were then at hand: for he himself rejects this opinion, 2
These. 2.2, 3. Thus therefore we must intrepret it; That Paul by the (...),
secula, ( per Enallagen pro (...)) in this place, as also in the Hebrew^, chap
1. verse 2. and chapter 11. verse. 3. is used for (...), because in Hebrew (...)
signifies bat.
ends of the world does understand the state of the New Testament, or the last
age of the World, which began from the promulgation of the Gospel over the
whole earth, and shall be terminated with Christ's coming to Judgment, Now
part of this Age are those thousand years, which are not yet begun.

VII. Object. Is taken out of 2 These. 2.8. where the Apostle witnesses that
the Lord shall at length consume Antichrist by his glorious coming. Wherefore
if Antichrist shall be consumed by the coming of Christ to Judgment, he shall
not then be consumed a thousand years before that his coming. Answ. The Apostle
speaks of the full and final consuming of the kingdom of Antichrist, whereby
it shall come to pass that it shall have end together with the state of this
wo^ld. Yet in the mean while for these 1000 years there shall always be some
relics of Antichrist* which at the end of this Millenary shall again gather
together their strengths, and shall join themselves to the other Nations, to
make War against the Saints; and then they shall be finally consumed. Revel.
20.8, 9.

VIII Object. Is taken out of I Ioh. 2.18. Where the Apostle says, It is the
last time. Answ. John by the last time, means the state of the New Testament,
or the last Age of the world, of which also these thousand years are part. Now
the state of the New Testament, from the promulgation of the Gospel through the
whole world, to the second coming of Christ, is called The last time, because
it is the last time of Grace, after which we must expect no other. For Christ
came in the fullness of time, and substituted in the place of the Old Testament
such Order, and Form of Government, as no other is to be looked for hereafter.

IX Object. Is taken out of Revel. 19.20. If this Text be to understood of the
last Judgment, it is not therefore to be understood of the downfall of
Antichrist, as which shall be before the day of Judgment a thousand years. Now
the former Proposition is true; therefore also the latter. The assumption is
proved: Because there the description of the last Judgment is described; in
which close all the foregoing Visions, except the first, are terminated. Answ.
I deny the assumption; because from the following verse, which is joined to
this by a Conjunction Copulative, and by reason of this word, the rest, it
manifestly appears* That mention is here made of the downfall and destruction
of Antichrist and his followers. (...).
These are the words; And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that
sat upon the horse; which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the Fowls
were filled with their flesh. But that Christ shall not presently come to
Judgment after this destruction, is evinced from hence, That that coming shall
not be till at length after the War of Gog and Magog, chap. 20. verse 8.9. Now
that War shall be a distinct War from that which is mentioned in this place; as
appears by comparing both places. Rev. 10.20. Rev. 20.10.

X Object. Is taken out of Revel. 20.2, 3. Where it is said, That Satan was
bound for a thousand years, that he might not any more seduce the Nations, till
the thousand years were expired; namely, That he might not seduce them to
Idolatry. Now this has been done, by the preaching of the Gospel, from the 70
years of Christ, after that Jerusalem was destroyed, the Jews rejected, and
the Nations brought into the Church in their room. Then truly was Satan bound,
that he might not any more seduce the Nations. Not that he might not hurt any
one any more, but that he might not any more make mad the Nations with a gross
do^age upon the Worship of Pagan Idols, and hinder the belief of the Gospel
among them. Hence we may easily collect, where we are to fetch the Epoch, or
the beginning of this account of 1000 years. Answ. The Text does not only
speak of seducing to Idolatry, but also, and especially concerning the
seducing, wherewith Satan formerly enticed, and shall about the end of the
world entice the Nations to make War against the Church. Again, it is false
that Satan from the year of Christ 70. was bound for a thousand years; because
from that time innumerable and horrible heresies, fallings away, and scandalls,
etc. have been. Indeed Satan was bound at that time, but not in that manner,
and measure, as he shall be bound for the thousand years. Again, by Nations, in
the place quoted, we must understand not the Gentiles only, but also the Jews;
who truly are yet seduced; as also the Indians, Turks, and others.

XI Object. Is from Revel. 20.1. Where it is said, That the Angel which bound
Satan, came down from Heaven. By this Angel therefore we must understand
Christ, who came down from Heaven, See Plutarchs profound and learned Book, De
defectu O^^cul^rum
Ioh: 3.13. Hence we may conclude, That these thousand years began about the
time of Christ's Birth. For at that time the Grae^es ceased from given Answers.
Whereupon Apollo being enquired of by Augustus Caesar, answered thus: Me puer
Ebraeus, Divos Deus ipse gubernans,
Codere sede juber, See for the Greek of of these verses in Io Obsopaeus his
Edition of the Ancient Oracles. The book is not now under my hands.
tristemque redire sub Orcum:
Ergo dehine aris tacitus discedito nostris.
The Hebrew Child, himself a God, that rules the gods,
Bids me give place, and back unto sad Hell return.
Silent therefore, depart from hence, mine Altars leave.


See, the devil himself confesses, That he is bound from this time. Answ. 1.
As in the former Visions good Angels were the executioners of Gods Judgments,
so it is likely that a created Angel was used also in this Vision. 2. Christ in
the 3 of John is said to have come down from Heaven, that is, To have assumed
the humane Nature. But the Angel in this place, who has the key of the
bottomless pit, came down from Heaven by a local motion, that he might bind
the Devil for a thousand years, after the downfall of Antichrist. 3. It is
true, the devil was bound at the time of the Nativity of Christ; but not after
that manner, as is here declared* Look before in the Analysis. For there are
many measures and degrees, whereby the devil is bound.

XII Object. Is this. This Interpretation, concerning the Resurrection of the
Martyrs, seems to oppose the Article of our Faith, I believe the Resurrection
of the flesh. For so a double Resurressiion of the flesh is maintained,
contrary to the Apostolic Faith. Answ. That Article speaks of the final
and universal Resurrection, which shall be in the last day, and in which all
the dead shall rise again. Now this Resurrection is not contradicted or denied
by the Resurrection of the Martyrs, which is to go before it, no more then by
the Resurrection of the Saints, who rose again, when Christ breathed forth his
Spirit hanging upon the Cross, Matthew. 27.50, 51, 52.

XIII Object. Is taken out of Revel. 20.6. Where all, and only they, are
proclaimed blessed, and freed from the second death, who have their part in the
first Resurrection: Whence it follows, That either there shall be no
Resurrection after the first, or that none in the second Resurrection shall be
blessed; both which are absurd. Answ. 1. Nay the latter is only absurd, being
granted from the antecedent, or foregoing. 2. The antecedent is false, neither
is it in the Text. For it is not said there, They only are happy. Now that
they are in particulars said to be blessed, that is in respect of their
Prerogative, in that they are blessed above others of the faithful, as being
to reign 1000 years with Christ before the last day. And this is intended by
the word Holy being added, whereby is signified that they should be separated
from the other faithful believers, and set aside for this happiness, in that
they are to rise again to reign with Christ before them. 3. Thirdly, this
blessedness consists of three parts; the first of which being considered
apart, suits also with the other believers. But as it is joined with the other
two parts, it cannot be expressed but of the Martyrs only, as it will appear to
any one that will examine the Context of the 6 verse.

XIV. Object. Is taken out of Revel. 20.6. Whence it is gathered, That the
first Resurrection has opposed to it the first death. Therefore by the first
Resurrection, the second Life, or living again of the soul from the death of
sin, by Faith, and Repentance, or, in a word, Regeneration, is to be
understood. Certainly all and only the truly regenerate, are delivered from
the second, or eternal death, and certainly obtain heavenly happiness: Whence
it may be sufficiently proved, That the first Resurrection is not particular,
or bodily. Answ. The first Resurrection, as it is spoken of in this place, is
not opposed to the first death, of which there is here no mention; but it is
opposed to the second Resurrection, as appears out of these words; But the rest
of the dead lived not again, until the thousand years were finished. This is
the first Resurrection,

XV Object. Is this. The first Resurrection is not a bodily Resurrection;
because if it be bodily, it is not the first: For the Resurrection of others,
namely, of those Saints who rose again while Christ hung on the Cross, went
before it. Answ. That Resurrection of the Martyrs is called the first by way of
Excellence, by reason also of the multitude of them, in respect of which that
Resurrection of the Saints comes not within reckoning of, by reason of the
fewness. For although many bodies of the Saints are said then to have risen,
yet in regard of the Martyrs they were but few; as which came forth of the
Graves only, which were near unto Jerusalem.

XVI Object. It is a usual Axiom in the School of Divines, That the first
Resurrection is the living again of the Souls from the death of sin, by faith
and repentance, which otherwise is called Regeneration; and it is opposed to
the first death, which is a defection, and a casting a way of the soul from
God. But the second Resurrection shall be the raising of the bodies, to be
united to the souls to eternal life; to which the second death is opposed,
which shall be the casting a way of the damned to eternal torments. Ans.
Resurrection is termed to be the First, ambiguously. For either it is opposed
to the first death, and so it is spiritual, and is proper to all believers; or
it is opposed to the second Resurrection, and so it is corporeal, and of the
Martyrs only.

XVII Object. The thousand years of Satan's binding contain an obscure mystery,
and hidden from us. In vain therefore, and too boldly we labor in so
scrupulous an uniting thereof. Ans. 1. There are many Mysteries in the
Revelation: which in success of time receive light more and more. 2. We
dislike all boldness; but we commend holy diligence and industry.

XVIII Object. From the end of Satan's binding, the Epoch is to be collected of
the thousand years in the Revelation. Now the term of his binding expired in
the year of Christ 1073. wherein Some begin these 1000 years at Christ's
Incarnation, and end them in S^^^ester 2. Some at his Passion, and end them in
Benedict 9* Some at the destruction of Jerusalem, and end them in Hildebrand,
or Gregory 7. which is receptio feutenti^, as D. Prideaux (...), Orat de Gog
and Magog. Sect. 1. Others begin them in Constantine the Great, and terminate
them in B^nisa^t 8. about the year 1300.
Gregory the 7, that devilish Juggler and Cozener, possessing himself of the
Popedom, confounded Heaven and earth together, and filling the Christian world
with Wars and slaughters, declared himself to be a singular instrument of Satan
let loose from his bonds. Hence it appears that those thousand years began in
the year of Christ 73. Answ. Satan indeed in the year of Christ 1073 was let
loose, as he is always to be conceived let loose, when he troubles the Church.
But that letting him loose, which shall be after the thousand years, shall be
far of another sort. For then Satan shall be loosed, that he may stir up
the Nations to the War of Gog and Magog: and indeed he shall be so let loose,
that he shall not long go on to destroy. But now from the year of Christ 1073
to this present, some whole Ages have passed.

XIX Object. This Opinion little differs from the error of the Chiliasts, or
Millenaries, which long ago has been exploded for this reason, Because, after
the downfall of Antichrist, they feigned, out of this very 20 Chap. a
corporeal Resurrection of the Martyrs, and Confessors, and their reign with
Christ for a thousand years. Answ. The opinion of the Chiliasts ought not to
have been exploded for this reason, because it maintained a double
Resurrection, one in particular, Cerinthus being a Jew, had his fond conceits
concerning these 1000 years from I^d^isme. Yet observe this, That I renaus and
Tertullian, who professedly wrote of Cerinthus Heresies, make not any mention
of this his opinion to be one.
another Universal; for truly in Christ's time, when he hung upon the Cross,
there happened a particular Resurrection of the Saints: The Resurrection of the
Martyrs has also a foundation upon this Text; whereon also our judgment for
their Kingdom of a thousand years is grounded. 2. The Chiliasts erred in this
respect, in that they maintained an eternal life here on earth, and in the
City Jerusalem. That this life should consist in the enjoyment and use of all
bodily pleasures, which should last only for a thousadd years. And of their
opinion they made this the foundation, because that in the 20 chap. of Rev.
there was mention made of a thousand years. Let us hear Lib. de Haeresious, cap
8. vide Epithanium and* Philastrium.
Augustine concerning them. The Cerinthians devise also to themselves a
thousand years after the Resurrection which shall be in an earthly kingdom of
Christ, according to the Which thousand years of pleasure we no more maintain,
then those 1000 years mentioned in Virgils Purgatory. Aen. 6.
carnal pleasures of the belly and their lust: from whence also they are
called Chiliasts. So the Chiliasts. But our opinion maintains not a thousand
years of carnal pleasures, but of Spiritual joys.

Has omnes, ubi mill rotam volvere per annos,
L^thaeum ad fluvium Deus evocat agmine magno;
Scilicet immemores sup^r^, ut convexa revisant,
Rursus and insipiant in corpora velle reverti.
But they urge; The opinion of the Chiliasts in following times also has been
revived again. in a new trim or dress; and this exposition of yours differs
not a whit from it: which they prove thus. Alfonsus Conradus.
Alfonsus Conradus of Mantua, whom several times you have before alleged,
writes thus upon the 20 of the Revel. But how are these thousand years to be
interpreted? shall they be said to be already past, or yet to be expected* Here
you will not easily clear your self, seeing the expositions of this place are
wondrously diverse; and yet I make a question of it, Whether any either of the
ancient or latter expositors, have ever touched the genuine and true meaning of
the place. In the first place indeed were the Chiliasts, who Iudaizing, and
entertaining carnal conceits concerning divine matters, did carnally also
interpreted this place; Concerning this seventh Millenary, and what the Jews
thought thereof, see Hierome upon the 65 of Esaias, and Camerarius in Alcinoum
Flitonis; Carpentarius also upon the same Dialogue. page 322.
and say thus; When six Millenaries, or 1000 years, shall be accomplished from
the Creation of the world, then Antichrist with all his forces, that is, the
wicked, and whosoever have obeyed his commands against Christ* shall be
destroyed. Again, say they, For the whole 7th Millenary, Christ with his elect,
shall reign here on earth, in all tranquillity and peace, and without any
affliction at all* Satan in the mean while being bound in the bottomless pit,
that he might not any way disturb their peace. Now the thousand years of peace
and tranquillity being accomplished, Satan shall be let loose again, before
Christ's coming to Judgment, and shall stir up Gog and Magog against the
Godly* until by the coming of Christ, the Militia or strength of Satan shall
be repressed, and Satan shut up for ever into the bottomless pit. But this
Doctrine, because it has many absurdities, is to be avoided by all Christians.
So Alfonsus, in the place cited. Hence it appears then, That the exposition
hitherto brought and maintained, is nothing else but the opinion of the
Chiliasts, in another dressing, or at least the error of new Chiliasts. Answ.
1. In this opinion that is to be approved of which has foundation in the
Scripture, as these three things in it have: 1. That Antichrist shall be
destroyed before these thousand years. 2. That the Church shall be for these
thousand years free from persecutions. 3. That after these thousand years the
War of Gog and Magog shall begin. 2. In the same opinion we dislike, and
disprove, That it allows carnal security, That it affirms that no ungodly men
shall be remaining for those thousand years; That it maintains that Christ
shall reign visibly here on earth; lastly, That it does precisely join this
Millenary with the end of the sixth Millenary of the world, which conceit is
taken from the Traditions of the House, or Family of Elias. 3. He is not rashly
to be accused of See the stupid (...) of the T^rks opinion hereabout in the
Alcoran Az^^^a 28. and 31. Some rejected the authority of the Revelation,
because it seemed to favor the heresy of the Cerinthians, or Chilias^s But
here de 1000 a^nis nihil little narratur que Cerin^hus (...). Vbi enim luxus
ille: ubi cibus and poius? ubi nuptie and (...) sacrificia and di^sfesti
Jerusalem again. says Trem. Besides, Cerinthus affirmed Christ to be begotten
at other men; he denied God to be creator of the world; he separated Christ and
Jesus, as two distinct persons. Et que nescires melius.
Turcisme, or Iudaisme, who affirms any truth which a Turk or a Jew, does
likewise maintain: as for example, That there is but one God. See the stupid
(...) of the T^rks opinion hereabout in the Alcoran Az^^^a 28. and 31. Some
rejected the authority of the Revelation, because it seemed to favor the
heresy of the Cerinthians, or Chilias^s But here de 1000 a^nis nihil little
narratur que Cerin^hus (...). Vbi enim luxus ille: ubi cibus and poius? ubi
nuptie and (...) sacrificia and di^sfesti Jerusalem again. says Trem. Besides,
Cerinthus affirmed Christ to be begotten at other men; he denied God to be
creator of the world; he separated Christ and Jesus, as two distinct persons.
Et que nescires melius.
So in like manner he is not straightway a Chiliast, who defends the truth of
any thing which the Chiliasts also do rightly maintain out of Scripture. For
this they do not hold, and teach, as Chiliasts.

XX. Object. The Kingdom, which Revel. 20.4. is granted to the Martyrs consists
herein, That their souls shall reign in Heaven with Christ. For although the
holy Martyrs and Confessors, who poured out their lives, and lost their
fortunes, under Tyrants, and Antichrist, for Christ's sake, were judged by the
world as miserable, and wretched men; yet the Spirit of God declares otherwise
of them, That they shall live and reign in happiness with Christ in Heaven.
Answ. 1 This Resurrection is granted to the souls of the Martyrs
Synochdochically, or totally; because their souls shall so far rise, or be
restored, that they shall again be united to their bodies. For the dead bodies
shall not rise again without their souls; but every body again united to it is
own soul. And to the souls, the rest of the dead are opposed: of whom it is
said, That they lived not again till the thousand years were finished.
Therefore, whereas it is said of the souls of the Martyrs, That they should
live, it is to be understood of their Resurrection in their bodies resumed, or
taken to them again. 2. This is proper to the other elect Saints, as well as to
the Martyrs, That their souls should reign with Christ in Heaben. But in this
place some prerogative is bestowed on the Martyrs, which consists in this, That
in the beginning of the thousand years they shall rise again, and reign with
Christ. 3. It is said, This particular Kingdom shall continue for a thousand
years; which cannot be understood of eternal life. For the thousand years of
Satan's binding, and of the kingdom of the Saints with Christ, are the same; as
we have formerly proved.

XXI Object. The War which Satan, after his thousand appointed years being let
loose, has made by Gog and Magog, that is, by the Turk, Christoph. Angelus, a
Grecian, whom I have been acquainted withal here in England, some years ago
wrote a Book in Greek, to prove that Mahomet was that Antichrist mentioned by
S. Paul. 2 These. 13. under the terms of the Man of si^ne, and son of
Perdition. His book is ent^tu^ed (...) etc. I cannot blame the poor Greek for
thinking so, considering the horrid Tyranny and slavery his Countrymen live
under, being vassals to the Great Turk, the admirer of Mahomet: I rather
wonder that there should be found among us learned men, who are ab^tters of
this opinion, when as the Apostle Paul teaches us expressly, that Antichrist
shall sit in the Temple of God as God; 2 These. 2.4. and Dominus DEUS noster
Papa is a thing taken notice of in the world before yesterday.
that Eastern Antichrist, against the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City,
that is, The Christian Church, for 500 years and more, with great success even
unto this day, took it is beginning from the Holy War, first raised by Gregory
the 7, Pope of Rome, by them who wore the Sign of the Cross; the end of which
indeed shall not be before the last Judgment, wherein the Beast, with the
false Prophet shall at length be cast into the Lake of fire: And the
Catastrophe, or issue, shall prove lamentable to all the enemies of the Church,
because the fire shall devour them. Answ. This idle Gloss, or Exposition, may
be confuted out of what I have said in the Analysis, or unfolding of this
Chapter, and in answer to the 9 Objection. This in brief. The Beast, with the
false Prophet, is thrown into the Lake of fire before those thousand years: and
those thousand years being finished, the War of Gog begins. Compare Revel.
19.20. with 20, 7. Again, Gog and Magog, do not signify the Turk: But by this
manner of speaking are figured out enemies of all kinds, who by their
incursions annoy, or trouble, the Church; as before we have made it plain.

XXIII Object. The XXII Objection, it appears, is left out. I know not by what
chance, if not by the Printers negligence.
In every vision, except the first, the description of the last Judgment is
set down in the Revelation; more obscurely indeed in the former, but in the
latter more clearly; because all the visions are terminated in the end of the
world, that the godly being injured may expect the day of their deliverance,
and occasion of security may quite be taken away from the mockers. Wherefore it
makes nothing which they say, that Revel. 19.21. The peculiar destruction of
Antichrist is described, which shall not be in the last judgment, but before
those thousand years. Answ. 1. The Antecedent is denied. For in the second
Vision, which ends with the 6. chapter, a description of the last judgment is
not set down, but some particular judgment to be executed about that time,
which figures out the last judgment. 2. The Text of Revel. 19. and the last,
manifestly argues, that that vision is not terminated with the last judgment.
3. If however in every vision, except the first, a description of the last
judgment were set down, yet it would not be otherwise then by interruption, or
breaking of the present discourse, and so no essential part of the matter in
hand: and consequently no way contradict, or weaken, this our opinion.

XXIV Object. The 20 Chapter of the Revelation contains a Vision* which is
the sum of all the foregoing visions, and a succinct and brief iteration of
the whole prophecy so often repeated; which is divided into three parts. In
the first is the blessed state of the Church for a good space of time after the
first coming of Christ; which is expressed in the first Seal. In the second are
described the painful labors, and calamities. wherewith the Church shall
afterward wrestle; Of which in the third and fourth Seals; and in the third,
fourth, fifth, and sixth Trumpets. In the third is set down the joyful
deliverance thereof, and the destruction of her adversaries, with the end and
Consummation of all; as before, in the sixth Seal, and the seventh Trumpet, and
seventh Vial. But especially in this Vision the punishment of the Devil
himself is expressed; when as in the former the destruction of his Ministers
only, and his followers was set forth. Hence therefore we may perceive, that
they are wide, the whole Heaven, as they say, who out of this Chapter do erect
I know not what happiness of the Church, which is yet to come here on earth
for a thousand years. Answ. This whole distribution, or disposition, of the
Revelation, and namely of the 20 Chapter, which is here proposed, is absurd,
and manifestly obscures the Revelation. See what we have formerly discoursed up
and down, and namely the 1. Sect. Of the connection of this 20 Chapter with the
whole Systeme, or entire body of the Revelation. Briefly, let this Maxim be
observed: The Divine Revelation, from the departure of John, to the end of the
world, distinctly figureth out the State of the Church, and the Ages thereof,
by Se^ls, Trumpets, Vialls, and the following visions; So that all these
succeed one another in a most beautiful order; and not one and the same thing
is represented by diverse visions. For it does not suite with that Majestique
manner of teaching, which the Holy Ghost observes, that in one and the same
Prophecy he should propose so many visions of one and the same thing.

XXV Object. No where in Scripture i^ there any mention of these thousand
years, but in this place only. Therefore it is very likely, That these
thousand years signify merely a Great time; so that a certain number is put
for an uncertain. Answ. 1. Here is no consequence: It is but once mentioned in
Scriptures* Therefore it must not be taken literally. For also she Lxx. weeks
of Daniel are but once mentioned; and yet that number Lxx. is literally
expounded; so that it is taken for a certain, finite, and determined number. 2.
This phrase, (...), [ the thousand years,] is several times repeated in this
place. Which repetition is not without some cause. 3. From many testimonies of
Scripture a a little before propounded, and expounded; from diverse Arguments
recited in the first Classis, or distribution, and compared with them places of
Scripture, it manifestly appears, That the happy state of the Church for these
thousand years, is described in this Chapter.

XXVI Object. The number of a thousand is the number of perfection; Therefore,
these thousand years in this place do denote the fullness of time; but are not
to be taken literally. Answ. 1. This is an Argument from a particular. A
thousand sometimes denotes perfection; Therefore in this place. 2. That the
letter is here to be retained, it is more then abundantly already proved.

XXVII Object. The division of the Church into Militant, and Triumphant,
opposes this opinion of the future happiness of the Church here on earth for
a thousand years: where by the Militant Church is understood that part thereof,
which in this life is subject to the Cross and Persecution: By the Triumphant
i^ meant the whole Church, in as much as after this life it shall reign with
Christ in Heaven. Answ. 1. The Warfare of the Church is not to be restrained to
the persecution to which now it is subject: but it is to be extended to the
Spiritual combat and wrestling, which, while it lives here, it has trial of
from the lusts of the flesh. Although therefore for these thousand years it
shall have no Warfare under the Banner of the Cross; yet the Spirit will have
need to strive and War against the Flesh. 2. The Triumph of the Church is
either in part, or total; particular, or universal; begun or consummate. For
oftentimes it happens, That we triumph in this life over the flesh, the
world, and the devil. Neither are we therefore said to be in the Triumphant
Church; as which is so called from her total, universal, and consummate
Triumph. So although the Church for a thousand years have some kind of Triumph
here on earth, yet it shall not be sincere and perpetual, and therefore by
many degrees inferior to that Triumph, from whence the Church in the life to
come is called Triumphant.

XXVIII Object. The maintainers, and Patrons, of this opinion do Iudaiz^, that
is, follow the Jewish Traditions; therefore to be found fault with. Answ.
Therefore also the Scripture does Iudaiz^. See the Places a little before
brought out of the Scripture. Moreover, we generally entertain too mean a
conceit of the conversion of the Jews, because being overmuch addicted, and
carried away with Scholasticall trifles, we weigh not at all the Mysteries,
which are propounded in the Scriptures.

XXIX Object. The Church, as long as it is here on earth, is under the Cross.
Therefore no such happiness thereof can be expected, as may last for a
thousand years. Answ. The Antecedent is a vulgar Axiom, or Position; but not
proved, neither indeed is it to be proved, as appears by what we have urged in
several places of this our Discourse.

XXX Object. These thousand years begin in the year 1517. For then began
Antichrist to be revealed. Then also were the two Witnesses raised. Finally,
from that time the light of the Gospel has been spread abroad far and wide,
and Satan bound up more and more. Answ. The Proeme, or Prologue, is confounded
with the principal Act; as it will appear; if the History of that time be
compared with Revel. 20, and our Exposition.

XXXI Object. It is the common opinion of Divines, That the last Judgment is
even at the door. That opinion then of a thousand years is dangerous, because
it makes people secure. Answ. 1. It is not the opinion of all Divines. 2. This
supposition is erroneous: And therefore I may use that saying; (...). v.
Arislot. Analys. Post lib. 1. cap. 16 M. Cotterius
Not to enstave our selves to suppositions. 3. No place of Scripture teaches
us that the last Judgment is at hand: Nay, some places of Scripture teach
quite the contrary. Hereto belongs what Cotterius says upon the 20 chap. of
the Revel. To the year of Christ 1517, add 1000, so you shall make 2517* at
which time at length Satan shall the second time draw the Nations into
abominable heresies. Neither is there any reason why this should trouble any
ones mind, as if we put off the day too long. For I demand out of what place
of Scripture we have search it, That this day shall be within these two or
three Ages. Surely we have but persuaded our selves so, because we would have
it so. But I will believe the Revelation, which verily not in one place puts
the last day off for a thousand years. In the 16 chap. you have Vialls, the
first of which leaves behind it the Epoch of the year 1517, as not finished.
And these Vialls require some Ages for their pouring out; and not sewer then
ten. In which words of Cotterius I do mightily approve of it, that he weakens
that vulgar opinion concerning the end of the world, That it is at hand. But
what is there said concerning the Epoch, or beginning of our account of 1000
years, as also of the Vialls, may be confuted out of what has gone before* It
is an evil kind of teaching, either by way of exhorting, or dehorting, which
is grounded upon a ruinous, and false foundation; as this which is drawn from
the day of the last Judgment, as if it were even at the door. Neither indeed
do we read, That the Apostles ever argued in this manner.

XXXII Object. This Opinion of the thousand years, as it is here explained,
does, as it were, l^ade us by the hand to the day of the last Judgment: yet
notwithstanding Christ in the 13 of Mark, v. 32. affirms, That of that day, and
that hour, no man knows, (...) not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither
the Son himself, but the Father only. And Act. 1.7. It is not for you to know
the times, or seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. Answ. 1. No
man can exactly set down or define the day of the last Judgment. For although
by comparing Daniel, and the Revelation, it may appear, That the last day shall
not come before the 2694 year of Christ; yet by no means or way possible can it
be found out, in what year after this Period, or set time, it shall come. 2.
What God has reserved to himself alone, we cannot, nor ought not to search
after, or determine. But this Period of 2694 years, he has expressed in his
Word.

XXXIII. Object. It is absurd to think that the Martyrs shall rise again to
this mortal life: for this will be but an ignoble change, and for the worse,
as it is in the Proverb, (...) He alludes to Glaucus, changing his golden
Armor with * Diomedis for brass Armo^r, in 1. of the Rhapsody of Ho^^s Ilias.
(...). Besides the Ancients, Iustim^n uses it proverbically, P^o^m. F.
gold for brass: by reason that the souls of the Martyrs do now reign in
Heaven, and their bodies rest in the earth free from their labors. Now if they
rise again to this mortal life, they must endure the enterchange or
vicissitude of times, as of day, and night, Summer, and Winter, and must be
made subject to the necessity of eating, drinking, and the like. Answ. 1.
Lazarus and those Saints who rose again at the time of Christ's Passion, were
brought again after long absence here, from life eternal, into this mortal
life, notwithstanding they lost not their happiness hereby. 2. The state of
the Martyrs shall consist of a happy Kingdom in this life, which shall not any
way be discommodated by those things which formerly are objected, as we see the
like things no way hindered Adam in the state of his innocence, from the full
enjoying of perfect happiness.

XXXIV. Object. Christ in the end of the world shall burn up the ^ares:
therefore still in the Militant Church, there s^^ll be the bad mingled with the
good, which is to be denied in so happy a condition of the Church, for these
thousand years. Answ. Nay rather not be denied. For neither shall the men, who
for all that time shall live on earth, be so blessed* that either they
themselves shall be void of sins, or separated from the company of sinners.
It shall not be so. There shall be a great difference between the happiness of
these thousand years, and that of everlasting life. The godly men then, (except
the Martyrs) for the whole space of these thousand years, shall be subject both
to sin and death, and shall have the wicked intermix't with them. But there
shall be no such matter in the life Eternal.

XXXV. Object. The Church is sufficiently reformed. Therefore no other
reformation ought to be expected. The Antecedent may be proved from hence,
because the Doctrine of the Fundamentalls of our Salvation is proposed so, that
it cannot be done more clearly, or with greater light. Answ. The great
Reformation which we declare shall come to pass, shall concern matter of
Life, as well as Doctrine. As for matter of Doctrine, the foundation thereof
shall remain. But as for those infinite contentions, whereby the Body of Christ
is torn in pieces, an end shall be put unto them. Again, many places of
Scripture, whose expositions have hitherto troubled the most learned men, shall
more clearly and better be understood. As for matter of life, what should I
say? The matter it self speaks loud enough, that in the whole course of our
lives, as good, and as great as we are, we have little or no Divinity at all.
There is great need therefore of a Reformation.

XXXVI. Object. It was an ancient Distinction, that the kingdom of God is
either of Power, Grace, or Glery. But this Distinction is taken away by this
Millenary, so much pleaded for: because it cannot be referred either to the
Kingdom of Grace, or to the Kingdom of Glory. Answ. It belongs to the Kingdom
of Grace, which does consist of diverse degrees. Neither is this opinion any way
prejudiced, because in the former discourse I have sometimes made mention of
glory and Majesty, as part of the happiness of this Millenary. For this glory
is only inchoative or in it is beginning, and shall be broken off by the War of
Gog and Magog. But the Glory of the Life Eternal is perfect, and never at all
to be interrupted.

V. The Doctrines arising out of this Chapter.
1. According to the Order of the Heads in the Catechisms.
I. THe XI and XII Articles of the Creed, concerning the resurrection of the
flesh, as also concerning the last Judgment, and eternal life, are treated of.

II. The first, and third precepts of the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, are
here illustrated in the 4 verse, where mention is made of Godly Confessors, who
worshipped not the Image of the Beast.

III. The second and sixth Petitions of the Lords Prayer may be explained out
of this Chapter.

2. According to the Order of Common-places.
This Chapter makes mention of Gods Providence; of Angels; of Predestination;
of the Church, and it is enemies; of Martyrdom; of the Resurrection of the
flesh; of the last Judgment; of Life, and Death Eternal.

3. Doctrines out of the several Verses.
Verse. 1.
1. God instructs men sometimes, and teaches them extraordinarily by
Visions, as also by divine Ecstasies, or Raptures.

2. The Angels are ministering Spritis, who receive their commands at God's
hands.

3. Good Angels are endowed with great power, and strength.

Verse. 2.
1. Good Angels have power over evil Angels, or Spirits.

2. The Devil is strong, and crafty: as being both a Dragon, and a Serpent.

3. The only, and continual work of the Devil is to calumniate, and falsely
accuse both God and Man; and to endeavor the hinderance of the Glory of the
one, and the Salvation of the other.

4. The Militant Church has several and differing times here on earth, namely
both of oppression, and refreshment, after the diverse degrees thereof,
according to the dispensation, and good pleasure of God.

Verse. 3.
1. The Devil is bound, and tied up by the reins of God's Providence.

2. The Devil is the author of the general seduction of mankind.

3. Wars shall cease for a thousand years.

4. The War which shall begin after these thousand years shall not last long.

Verse. 4.
1. Christ is a Judge appointed by God, to whom the holy Angels are joined as
Assessors, or inferior Judges.

2. The Professors of the Gospel are hated in the sight of the world.

3. Constancy is required in the Profession of the Truth.

4. They are Idolators, who worship Antichrist, and follow his doctrine.

5 The Martyrs shall reign with Christ for a thousand years in the Militant
Church.

Verse. 5.
1. The general resurrection shall be in the end of the world.

2. The first resurrection and particular of the Martyrs is the proeme unto the
second, or universal resurrection.

Verse. 6.
1. As the children of God in this life have one above another prerogatives of
gifts, works, and sufferings: so shall they also have prerogatives of
blessings, both in this life, and in that also which shall be hereafter.

2. The common happpnesse of the godly, among other things* consists in this,
that the second death has no power over them.

3. We must certainly resolve, that there is a second, or eternal Death.

4. Though all Christians are Kings and Priests: yet in a more special manner
the Martyrs raised at the beginning of these thousand years shall be Kings and
Priests in the Militant Church.

Verse. 7.
1. The happiness of the Church, which shall continue for the^^ thousand
years, must not be confounded with or mistaken for the happiness of life
eternal.

2. Satan can do nothing, except, by Gods leave, he be let loose out of his
prison.

3. God alone can restrain Satan, as if he had him shut up in some prison.

Verse. 8.
1. Satan, when soever he gains power, plays over his old pranks again.

2. Satan is delighted with the shedding of man's blood, especially of the
Godly* and therefore uses to seduce, and entice men to War.

3. Whatsoever is said in the Old Testament of Gog and Magog, is to be
understood partly literally, partly typically.

4. The Enemies of the Church are in number many.

Verse. 9.
1. Men seduced by the Devil set slip no occasion, so watchful herein they
are of persecuting the Godly.

2. The Church is the beloved City of God.

3. It is the duty of Christians continually to be exercised in Christ's
warfare.

4. God executes wonderful judgments against the enemies of his Church.

Verse. 10.
1. The Devil, and his Instruments are cast into Hell, and shall be tormented
there for ever.

2. Eternity is nothing else, then a continuation of Age to Age for ever.

3. Hell is a place full of horror.

Verse. 11.
1. The Majesty of Christ coming to Judgment shall be very great.

2. Heaven, and Earth, in the day of the last Judgment, shall pass away, in
respect of the fashion of this world.

Verse. 12. and 13.
1. The last resurrection shall be universal.

2. Men in the last Judgment shall be judged according to their works.

3. The Conscience of a man is like a book, in which all his thoughts, words,
and deeds are as it were set down.

4. The book of life, or Predestination shall be opened in the last Judgment,
for then shall it appear plainly who are the Elect, and who the reprobate: who
have truly believed in Christ, who hypocritically: who have truly worshipped
God, who according to appearance only.

5. The last Judgment shall be universal, infallible, and just. Universal,
because it shall be of the dead, and living; of great, and small. Infallible,
because God is all-knowing* and has chosen his own from Eternity. The
Omnisciency, or all-knowledge of God is signified by the books, in which the
works of every particular man are written. His Election is signified by the
book of life. Just, because God shall judge according to every man's works,
without acceptance of persons.

6. God knows in what place the particular body of every dead man is reserved.

Verse. 14.15.
1. Hell is a place full of horror.

2. Reprobation from life eternal is nothing else, but a not-writing in the
book of life. Election to eternal life, is a writing of our names in the book
of Life.

An Appendix.
BEcause in the handling of this Chapter, I proposed to my self not only to
maintain that which mine own Conscience witnessed with me to be true; but
withal to furnish these times also with this, not the least Consolation; it
was needful for me to use this Method, which in the Explanation of holy
Scripture, without doubt exceeds all others. It will not be amiss therefore,
if I set down this Method in the following Table.

In every Chapter, yea Verse, of holy Scripture, there are to be considered.

The Prolegomena, or Praecognita, that is, the foregoing matter, or things to
be known before hand; and they are either of the Author, and authority thereof.
Subject, or matter. Connection, or Coherence.
The Text it self, in which are to be considered the Argument, or Sum
thereof. Analysis, or Resolution, either Philologically, and Theologically, or
Logically, and Theologically.
Paraphrase, or larger upholding thereof. Questions, either Fundamental;
proper to that place, and necessarily arising; or, Less principal; common
with other places, and honorary, or accessory,
Doctrines, according to The order of the Heads in the Catechism. Common
Places. The order of the Context.


Of these the Argument, Paraphrase, and Doctrines, belong to the handling of
the sacred Text in the way of Preaching; the Analysis, or Questions, to the
Scholasticall part of Divinity.

Glory be to God alone.

FINIS.
Testimonies concerning this work of Alstedius. Dr. Hukewill in his Apology,
etc. lib. 4. cap. 12.5.6.
ALstedius a famous Professor at Herborne, Concerning Elias coming.
in his Diatribe d^ mill annis Apocalypticis, published about two years
since, is of this opinion; as also that the thousand years mention^d in the 20.
of the Revel. (during which time Satan should be bound) is yet to come, which
assertion he first builds upon a litterall interpretation of the number, in as
much as it is five several times repeated within the compass of seven verses,
and the four last with a special article added, (...) (the thousand year^s.)
Secondly, upon a supposition that Satan as yet has not been bound up a
thousand years together, since the delivery of that Prophecy by the Angel to
St. John, and by him to the Church; considering that ever since, much and
gross idolatry has reigned among the Pagans, obstinate blindness among the
Jews, since the rising of Mahomet, pittyfull defection, and seduction among
the Saracens, strange errors and heresies, sects and schisms among the
Christians, and since the rising of Antichrist, wonderful ignorance
sup^rstition, and persecution of the ^aints, together with a general
profaneness, and corruption in matter of manners; all which says he, cannot
stand with the binding up of Satan, (the principal actor of all these) for a
thousand years, and consequently, that the performance of that promise is yet
to be expected: and for confirmation of this opinion (though the book it self
be but little (he alleges 66. passages of Scripture, inforceth many reasons,
answers 36. Objections, p^oduceth the testimonies of sundry learned men,
either expressly defending it, or at least wise favoring ^t. And they are,
Iustus Heurnius. Ioannes Keplerus. Petrus Curaeus. Ioannes D^bricus. Ioannes
Piscator. Petrus Molinaeus. Ioannes Ferus. Seraph Firmianus Remalcus d^ Vaulx.
Martinus Cellarius. vid apud Alst^dium. Christoph. B^soldus. Cael Sec. Curio.
Alf. Con Mantuanus. Lucas Osiander. Matthaeus Cotterias. Michael S^ndivoga^^.
Stephanus Pan(...) Quos^mnes su^si(...)


The Auth^r of a book, lat^ly published in latin, and inscribed Nunc us
Proph^icus, who in modesty conceales his name. page 34.42. Diatribe de mill
^nnis, Ap^ca^ quem tractatum, etc. that is, the treatise of Alstedium
concerni^g the thousand years in the Revelation, ^ est^eme above the value of
gold and precious stones, it being full of secret wisdom.

Parvum sed magnae sedulita is opus. Als^edius. Sedalitas*
And page 42, Als^ed in his t^uely golden little work of ^he th^usand years in
the Ap^calypse.

Which work though small, yet full of great sedul^tie* takes away all scruple
of doubt herein; And it is much to be de^ired, that some one or other that
delights himself in Theological mysteries so we^ worthy of our knowledge
would translate it out of the Latin, and make it speak English. (...)* Thou will straightway think Reader, that this was no small inciteme^t to me to go
on with this Translation, having before the edition of this book taken it into
mine hands.

Testimonies concerning the Opinion it self, approved by some famous English
Divines. And first Dr. H^kewill of Oxford in his Book entitled, An Apology of
the power and providence of God in the government of the world. Lib. 6. Cap.
12. v. 6.
AS we need not doubt that Antichrist is long ^ince come into the world, so
many passages of holy Scripture and testimonies of learned men, make us more
then hope that (notwithstanding his late victories, and triumphs) his downfall
is not far off, and that thereupon the Church of Christ shall flourish more
in peace, and power, in doctrine and manners, in luster and glory, then
hitherto at any time in former ages it has done To instance in all the
passages in Scripture, which to this purpose are alleged, would prove, I
doubt me tedious, and in some perchance impertinent, mine endeavor then shall
be to pick out the choicest, and among them specially those which seem to
point at a fuller calling as well of the Gentiles, as the Jews, then heretofore
has been.

The particular places for brevitie I have set down, which, Reader* p^ruse at
thy leisure. Psalm. 22.27. Esaias 2.2 Matthew. 24.14. Romans 52.26. 2. Cor. 3.15.
Micah ^.3. Esaias 30.26. and 54.11. But you shall have them all in this treatise.

The Doctor goes on.
ANd all this peace and glory shall arise from the subversion of Rome and
Antichrist, and his adherents, so eviden^ly described in the 14.18. and 19. of
the Revelation, that the very Jesuits themselves, Ribera and Vegas cannot
possibly devise any juggling conveyance how to shift i^ off. And if for the
effecting of this great work, we should grant, (that which all antiquity both
Jewish and Christian much beats upon) that Elias shall come and restore all
things, I cannot see what great absurdity can from thence be inferre^, or what
Article of Christian faith it imp^gneth. Indeed our Savior te leth his
Disciples that Elias was then come meaning John the Baptist, whom he tear^eth
E^ias in regard of his zeal, his aust^rity of life, his suffering for the
Truth, and his preparing a way to reformation; but how the Baptist restored all
things he tells them not, neither can those words (as I conceive) be prop^rly
u^derstood of him, nor yet those of the Prophet Malachy, that Elias the Prophet
for the turning of the hearts of men each to other, and all to God, shall be
sent before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; where by
the day of the first coming of our Lord in the flesh cannot well be mea^t, in
as much as that was rath^r good and gracious, then great and dreadful: It
should seem then that either Elias himself, or some other great Heroical spui^
matchable to him, ^s yet to be sent, for the accomplishing of this great
business in the restoring of all things. I am sure Alstedius, a famous
professor a^ Herborne, is of that opinion etc. ut supra.

Thus Doctor Hakewill, providenti^ae divinae ex^urius (...)

Doctor Twisse in his Preface to Mr. Medes Book entitled, The Apostasy of the
latter times.
THe beginning of my acquaintance with Master Mede was occasioned by a rumor
spread of his opinion, concerning the glorious kingdom of Christ here on
earth, which many hundred years ago was cried down, as the error of the
Millenaries: and i^ seemed wondrous strange to us, that such an opinion should
after so many hundred years be revived; and that in so strange a manner as
now we find, both amongst us, and amongst outlandish Divines. Nevertheless
my self being firmly set upon studies of another nature, I had no great edge
so much as to hearken to it, much less to take it into consideration. But a
friend in the country sometimes urged me to write to an acquaintance in
London; and to enquire of Master Mede, whether he were of the same opinion with
Piscator and Alstedius concerning the first resurrection, and the glorious
kingdom of Christ. And hereupon shortly after word was sent me, that he did
agree with Piscator in this, that some shall rise a thousand years before
others, but he differed from him in this, that Piscator thought this reign o^
Christ should be in heaven; but I (said Master Mede) agree rather with
Alstedius and conceive, that the thousand years reign of Christ shall be on
earth, yet herein he differed from Alstedius; that whereas Alstedius was of
opinion that the thousand years reign of Christ should be after the day of
judgment, Master Medes opinion was that it should be in et durante die
judicij, in and during the day of judgment; which day of judgment should
continue a thousand years, beginning with the ruin of Antichrist, and ending
with the destr^ction of Gog and Magog.

When I heard this, my spirit was stirred up in me to lay aside for a while my
ordinary studies, and to take this into consideration, and I prayed Master
Mede to give me leave to propose my reasons against this opinion of his. And
the truth is, the improbability of it seemed very pregnant unto natural
reason, and diverse arguments that way offered themselves, which seemed to be of
very diff^cult (if at all possible) solution, and over and above it seemed very
contradictious to diverse plain passages of holy Scripture. Mr. Mede very
readily entertained the motion, and prescribed me a time after which he should
be at leisure for me, and in a letter after this, in his familiar manner asked
me saying; when come your Quaerios? I accepted his courteous answer, and sent
up unto him, first and last, twelve arguments against that opinion of his; and
at the first I sent him with an answer devised by my self to nine of them, for
so I had promised him, namely, that I would bethink my wits of what possibly
might be said in the solution of them, according to the straight^esse of my
invention, leaving it to him to approve, or correct, or add, as he thought
good. And whereas I could devise nothing at all in answer to my tenth argument,
he sent me a large answer thereunto in three sides of a sheet of paper, whereby
I well perceived,. that my best arguments had been known to him and examined
before I devised them.

After this, I came acquainted with ma^y discourses upon the same argument, one
printed at Hanow in Germani, de die novissimo, of the last day; a few only
were printed, two copies (and no more) were brought into England, Master Med,
bought them both, and sent me one of them to copy it out, which we did. After
this, no less then seven manu-scripts were sent me from one Divine, treating
of this and other mysteries. Now here I cannot but confess my corruption, for
I received them by way of a bribe, and indeed I was to do him a favor, and I
dealt plainly with him, and told him I would not sell my favors Gratis, I
would be well paid for them. And therefore whereas I heard he had strange
n^^ions upon the Revelation, and touching the mysteries of the first
resurrection; and Christ's Kingdom, I looked to be fee'd with the
communication of them, with promise to return them safely, after I had sucked
the honey out of them, though he had never a whit the less for that, such is
the nature of spiritual commodities. The good man sent me word, that such
bribs should never make me rich: but I returned answer, that they could make me
the more rich then the enjoying of all the treasures of Ae^hopia, and the hill
Amara to boot: And here I found rich mines inde^d, even a^l the mysteries
belonging to Christ's glorious Kingdom set down a part, by wayd question, and
a solemn resolution thereon, with proofs adjoined out of the holy Scripture.
Since that, I have met with diverse choice pieces of the same argument, some
prosecuting a few parts thereof only, and others more.

So far Doctor Twisse, S^mi. Pelagianorum bujus seculi acenimus inpugn^tor.

Master Mede of Cambridge, Commena tionum Apocalypticarum. Dialog cum Tryphone.
Part of which Dialogue so far so^th as it con c^^^s the Millenary Reign of
Christ, Mr. Mede has both corrected, and illustrated with notes, in the 281
page etc. of this wo^k, where he has also published the opinions of the
Jewish Doctors concerning the kingdom of the Messiah.
Part. II. page 276. et seqq.
IDadeo proximi post Apostolo^, etc. This opinion was so approved by the
Christians in the age next to the Apostles, that Iusti^e Martyr does witness
that not only himself, but the Christian of that time in all respects
Orthodox did with a joint and unanimous consent believe it. Which opinion
notwithstanding of the first Christians, afterward deformed with some
additions, or (as I conceive) amiss understood, posterity did after an age or
two reject. Yet so far did the heat of this contention increase (which
deservedly you may wonder at, and grieve for) before it could be composed, that
they who could ^ot otherwise get free from the power of the adverse opinion,
established by the Revelati^n, would rather call in question the authority of
that divine Prophecy, confirmed by all the scholars of the Apostles, and their
next successors, and openly and boldly slight it, then yield to this opinion:
till at length happening upon some other likely interpretation o^ these
thousan^ y^ares, permitting to the Revelation it is divine authority, they
ceased from their attempt, which could by no means be freed from the censure
of impiety.

Conceive thus them, that the Seventh Trumpet, with the whole space of those
thousand years, and other predictions belonging thereto, does set forth that
great day of judgment, so much spoken of by the ancient Church, as also by
Christ, and his Apostles, and is not the short space of a few hours, as
commonly it is beleives, but according to the manner of the H^brewes, Every
where in the Prophets, as when they say in that day^ and e^sewhere in the O.T.
A^ also ^he N. as Mat. 6.11 Luke 11.13. and 8 2 Pet. 3.18 The day of an Age,
which we rende^, for ever and ev^r.
using a day for a time, the continued intervall of many years, and
circums^ribed with two resurrections, as with two set or limited t^rmes: I say
that this day shall be begun first with the part^cul^r and t^mely judgment of
Antichrist, and other ene^ies of the Church, then remaining alive with the
glorious appearance of our Lord Christ in flames of fire; and that at length
after the Kingdom of a thousand years granted to his holy Spouse the New
Ierusal^m here on earth, and others that shall afterward be borne this great
day now drawing to an end, shall be finish^d, aft^r the letting loose of Satan
and u^ter destruction of the Churches e^emies, with the general resurrection
and judgment of all the dead: which being performed, the wicked shall be
thrust down i^to Hell to be torm^nted eternally, and the Saints translated
into Heaven to live with Christ there for ever.

This indeed is the Time of the anger of God upon the Nations, and avenging the
cause of them who dyed for Christ, for which after the blast of the seventh
Trumpet, chapter ele^enth, the El^ers give thanks with triumph, because
therein God was to g^ve a reward to his servants the Prophets and Saints, and
to them that feared his ^ame, small and great; and would destroy them who
destroy the earth.

This is that day of judgment, and destruction of wicked men, of which Peter
2. Ep. 3.8. having spoken, pr^sently adds: But (beloved) be not ignorant of
this one thing, (for before I showed it was called a day) that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. In which very
day the Apostle with his brethren and kinsfolk, the Jews (to whom he writes)
does expect a new fashion of things to happen, of which he says Presen^ly BUT
WE EXPECT A NEW HEAVEN AND A NEW EARTH; verse 13.
according to his Promise where in dwells righteousness. Take notice;
according to his promise. Now where was this promise to be found of a new
Heaven, and new Earth (seeing John had not yet had this Revelation) but Esaya
65.17. and 66.22. which promise whosoever shall read, I should wonder if he
think that it is to be accomplished any where else but upon Earth.

This is also that Kingdom, which is joined with Christ's appearance here on
Earth to Judge the world, of which Paul to Timothy 2. Ep. 4 1. I charge thee
before god and the lord Jesus Christ (...) shall Judge the quick and the dead
at his APPEARING and HIS KINGDOM. For after the last and Universal
Resurrection, the same Paul being witness 1. Cor. 15.24: Christ having
destroyed the last enemy death, shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father,
that he himself may be subject to him that put all things under him; so little
can he be said to enter upon a new kingdom. The Kingdom therefore, which
neither was before the App^arance of the Lord neither shall be after the last
Resurrection must necessarily be concluded to be batweene them both.

This is the kingdom of the son of man, which Dan. saw, the times of the
Antichristian HORN being finished, or the times of the Gentiles ( Luke 21.24)
being accomplished; who shall appear in the clouds, when power, and glory, and
the Kingdom shall be given to him, that all people, nations, and languages may
serve him for when (as the Angel straight expounds it) the Kingdom and
Dominion, Dan. 13.14 18.22.26.27.
and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven (mark it well) shall be
given to the people of the Sai^ts of the most high. For neither as I said
before, shall this Kingdom be after the last Resurrection, seeing then the
Son of man shall not enter upon a Kingdom, but as Paul says, he must lay it
down, and deliver to his Father. Now that the same kingdom is spoken of by
Daniel and John may from hence be evinced. First, because both Kingdom^ begin
with the ruin of the fourth, or Roman Beast, that of Daniel, when the Beast
under the last command of the Horn which had eyes, Dan. 7.21. verse 8.
was slain and his body given to the burning flame; that in the Revelation,
when the Beast and false Prophet (that wicked Horn is Dani^l having mouth and
eyes like a head) were taken and both cast alive into the lake of fire burning
with brimstone. Secondly, from the same sitting in judgment, which went before
both: for that one place is borrowed from the other, and both ente^d the same
thing, will appear from the comparing of the descriptions of both.

DAN. Cap. VII. APOC. XX.4. Ver. 9. I beheld till the Thrones were placed. For
so it must be rendered with the Vulgar, LXX. and Theodor, and so (...) or (...)
is used of a Throne in the Targum on Ier. 1.15. And I saw Thrones. Ver. 10. And
judgment was set. That is, Judges, as in the great Sanbedrim or Council of
the Jews, according to the manner of which this whole description is fitted.
And they sat upon them Ver. 22. And judgment was given to the Saints of the
most High. That is, Power to Judge, whence is that of Paul. The just shall
judge the Earth. And judgment was given unto them. And the Saints possessed
the Kingdom. That is, with the Son of man who came in the clouds of Heaven.
And the Saints lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

Moreover I would advise the Reader of this; whatsoever wholesome truth almost
is delivered by the Jews, or by our Savior in the Gospel, or any where in the
new Testament, by the Apostles, concerning the day of the Great Judgment, is
taken out of this vision of Daniel; namely, the Judgment which shall be by
fire, Christ's coming in the Clouds of Heaven, his coming in the glory of his
Father with a multitude of Angels, the judging of the world by him with his
Saints, the abolishing of Antichrist, by the glorious appearance of his
coming, etc. So that they go about to take away a pillar of our Evangelicall
faith, who neglecting this ancient tradition of the Church, go about to carry
this Prophecy another way.

Lastly, to make an end: This is that most great Kingdom, which, as Daniel
interprets it, was showed to Nebuchadnezzar in that representative Statue of
the four Kingdoms: Dan. 11.34.35.
Not that of the STONE, which (the succession of the IV Monarchies yet
remaining) was cut out of the Mountain, (for this is the present state of
Christ's Kingdom^) but of the Stone, which (those Monarchies being dissolved and
overthrown) became a Mountain^ and filled the whole earth.

Hactenus Medeus, (...), in m sticis Prophetiis, si quis alius, (...).

The Learned Author of a Latin Treatise lately Printed in London, and
Inscribed NVNC IVS PROPHETICVS.
DE millenaria felicitate doctrinam non esse novam, besternam, etc. The future
felicity of the Saints and servants of God here on earth for the space of 1000.
years is no novell conceit, new broached fancy, or an opinion started up
yesterday; but a Truth to be reverenced for its antiquity and seniority, Multi
Ecclesiaricorum viroru^ and Martyrum ista di^erunt, Hieron. in Hierem. lib. 4.
it being countenanced and maintained above 14. or 1500. years ago, yea even
in the infancy of the Christian Church. Many reverend men, famous for their
sanctity, and learning, who lived whilst the blood of Christ was yet warm,
taught freely, and fully with applause of all, and contradiction of none,
concerning a great Sabbath and time of Rest, which should in after ages come
upon the Earth. Some of them maintained then a twofold Resurrection. 1.
Particular, of some choice Saints, especially Martyrs and Confessors, whose
lives were shortened and imbittered for the testimony of Jesus. 2. Universal,
of the residue of the Saints with all the Reprobates, which is a principal
flower in the Garland of every Christians Creed, and betwixt both, a truly
Golden Age of 1000. years continuance. Peruse and ponder, good Reader, Revel.
5.10. and chapter 20.4, 5, 6. where the premises (if my interpretation may ^eare
sway) are so manifestly asserted, as if they were written with a Sun beam.
Neither let any scruple at the raising of any particular Saints before their
Brethren, seeing we have a president hereof in sacred Writ, or the first Good
Friday, (or as I rather conceive) on the first Easter day: for at that time
there arose with Christ our first Parents, holy Patriarchs and Matriarchs,
with many religious Kings, and inspired Prophets, by name, Adam, Eve, Noah,
Abraham and his Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, Job, Moses, David: or at least, John
Baptist, Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, Joseph Christ's Foster-father, with
others who saw and conversed with Christ in the flesh.

Moreover not a few eminent and ancient Fathers were strongly opinionated that
Christ himself should then descend from Heaven, and here Reign in a visible
shape with great glory and tranquillity amongst his Saints and holy ones, That
eloquent and Lactant. Institut. l. 7.
candid writer Lactantius, the Cicero of the Christians shall be the mouth of
the rest. The Son of the highest, and great God shall come to judge the
living and dead, and he shall dwell among men 1000. years, and he shall
govern them under a most just command; and they shall live with their bodies,
they shall not dye; but for those 1000. years they shall increase into an
infinite multitude, and their issue shall be holy, and beloved of God. Now they
that are raised from the dead shall as Judges be placed over them that are
alive. And a little after: The Moon shall receive the brightness of the Sun,
and shall lose her light no more. And the Sun shall be seven times more
glorious then now it is. The earth shall express her fruitfulness, and bring
forth of its own accord plentiful store of corn: The cliffes of the
Mountains shall sweat out honey, the Springs and rivers shall flow with wine
and milk. Lactantius expresses this Prophecy in Virgils verses, changing the
order thus, 38.39.40.41.28.29.30.42.43.44.45.21.22.
And presently again, There shall be no ravenous beasts in this time, no birds
of prey; but all things shall be quiet and peaceable. The Lion and Calfe shall
feed at the same stall; the Wolf shall not devour the Sheep, neither shall
the dog hunt after his prey. The Eagle and Hawke shall do no harm: The
Infan^ shall play with Seapents. Lastly, all those things shall come to pass
which the Poets fable to have been in those golden times of Saturnes reign.
Men shall live therefore a most quiet and plentiful life, and they shall
reign together with God, and the Kings of the earth shall bring in their gifts
and presents to worship and honor the great King, etc. This is the doctrine of
the holy Prophets, which we Christians follow: This is Christian wisdom. These
are the words of Lactantius, which though plausible at the first view (being
most part Scripture phrase) yet may here and there I grant, if minutely
examined, be justly liable to exception, as bordering near upon the Heresy of
Cerinibus, Cerinthius and his followers the Millenaries were branded for
Heretics by reason of their carnal conceit of a mere temporal felicity:
That the earth during these 1000. yeare^ should be, not a paradise of
spiritual delights, but a stews of all impure pleasures, and a stage of
libertinisme, not unlike the fantastical heaven the Turks dream of. This is
also the fond fancy of the circumcised Jews, and our late rebaptized
Heretics.
and the old condemned Millmarians, except we yield them spoken (as Saint Paul
speaks in another case) after the manner of men. Howbeit the Author may be
excused, he having only amplified that in transcendent expressions and
flourishing streams, which many-many Lights of the East and West-Churches
delivered in downeright terms. But why do I single out one Lactantius, or
insist thus on his Rhetorique^ Papias a Bishop, and Saint John's Scholar,
Irenaeus and Iustine, styled the Martyr, both which lived in the next age to
the Apostles, Tertullian also and Hilarious, men of admirable endowments, yea, I
had almost said, and in part blessed Augustine himself and his contemporary
Saint Hieron. de VV. M. numerosum antiquorum Pa^^^m Catalogum in banc
sententi^m recenset.
Hierome, (all which were stars of the first magnitude in the firmament of the
Primitive Church) most willingly have afforded their places and suffrages to
this comfortable Doctrine, I mean for the maine of it. After a good pause the
same Author proceeds thus. Lastly, In what year this new world shall begin,
wherein holy men and women shall rejoice and live together in a most blessed
and heavenly manner, is one of the great secrets of Heaven, all which are
unknown to us mortals (Alas! our dim eyes, the Caleb and Joshua, fellow
spies in this Isle of man, cannot pierce those tenfold Orbs of Heaven.)

Indeed so many men so many minds: One Author assigns this year, another
that, a third differs in his account from both. But it is agreed on all hands
that this thrice happy and golden age is now at hand. Alstedius the Champion of
the late Millenarians, and a maine prop of this new revised Doctrine, names and
confidently determines the year of Christ 1694. (being 52 years hence) for
the first year of this triumphant Reign of the Saints here on earth. Others
judge the time uncertain, and certainly their judgment (in my judgment) is
most certain. I will turn my private opinion into a prayer, O that the
Almighty would hasten, I again and again I wish it, this glorious Kingdom,
that so it may come in our times before we be lodged in the silent grave, and
moulder into our principles, dust and ashes. And now I will seal this
delightful contemplation with the words of Saint John surnamed the Divine; or
rather not of the P^^man, but of the thrice blessed Spirit which guided his
pen, Rev. 20.6. Blessed is he that has his part in the first Resurrection.

Sweet Jesus, grant a part in the first Resurrection, to Thy servant and Son
of thine Handymayd, T. B.
I wholly submit my self and opinion to the determination of our long expected
Venerable Synod.

Its Auctori^^e in libello Docto, Jupiter, and laborioso!



There is extant also in Print this last year a Treatise of one Master John
Archer, sometimes Preacher of All-hallows in Lombardstreet, Entitled, The
Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth. The Author, as I ^eare, is with God, but
his Book thou may have on every stall. But so far out of some of our
English Divines. Let us now hear the Incomparable Tycho Brahe.

Tycho Brahe: (...), His Testimony taken out of his first Tome Astronomicorum
Progymnasmatum not far from the end.
IT is worthy our best observation, The first revolution of the fiery Trigon,
happened in Enco and in the then flourishing estate of the Church. The third in
Moses and the freedom from Egyptian slavery. The fifth in CHRIST, and the
restoring of us to Gods ^avourby his Passion.
that as all the former uneven Revolutions of the Fiery Trigon, (namely the
first, third, and fifth) have ever been auspicious to the world, as having
ushered in some great and singular favors of the Almighty to mankind: so it is
probable that this seventh Revolution which now Reigns ever since the year of
our Lord 1603. is the forerunner of a more happy and glorious state then all
the before p^ssed ages have eve^ yet enjoyed. Neither does this disagree with
the most ancien^ prophecies of the wisest men, and enlightened by the Holy
Ghost, who have foretold that before the general conflagration of all things,
that there shall be a certain quiet and peaceable age for some good space of
time upon Earth, wherein the tumults and confusions happening (...) politic
States, and by reason of varieties of Religions shall be settled and appeased,
and at length be made more conformable to the Divine Will, (...) SABBATISMI
qu^^da^^ ^cculta^ ratione^ ob^inet, and praecaeteris peculiare, and magni
momenti quid denunciat. Tycho Brahe d. l.
and pleasure. Which we may also not abscurely collect from the Prophets
themselves, who foretold that some golden age should be for a time on Earth, in
which men should beat their swords into Ploughshares, and their Spears into
pruning-hookes: neither should Nation lift up a sword against Nation, nor
learn^ war any more: But they shall sit every man under his Vine, and under
his Figure^, and none shall make them afraid, as Micah the Prophet has it, chapter
4. and Esaias chapter II. prophecyeth of the same in this manner: The Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the
Galfe and the young Lion, and the ^atling together, and a little child shall
lead them. And the Co^ and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie
down together: and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. And the sucking
child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shall put his
hand on the Cockatricuden. They shall not hurt in all my holy Mountain: For
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
Sea. And that passage also, Esaias 60. is to be referred to the Mystical
Jerusalem, or more perfect state of Christianity then has been hitherto. For
Brass I will bring gold, and for Iron I will bring Silver, and for-Wood
Brass, and for Stones Iron: I will also make thy Officers, peace, and thy
exactors righteousness: Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting
nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and
thy gates praise. And what goes before and follows; where at length lie thus
concludes: I the Lord will hasten it in his time. More places are likewise to
be found as well in the Prophets, as in the Without doubt he means the 20
Chapter.
Revelation, promising an unusual and unexpected happiness of earthly things,
such as never has been in any age of the world hitherto. The truth therefore
of this Prophecy shall be fulfilled before the general destruction of all
things, (for it cannot fail, proceeding wholly from the infallible Spirit of
God) and it is probable that the accomplishment thereof is at hand. Why then
may not all these things obtain an expected event within the compass of this
renewed Revolution of the fiery Trigon, and of the other three ensuing, which
complete 800. years? Hactenus Atlas ille Coeli Mathematici.

The Testimony of Carolus Gallus; out of Dr Hakewill, in his Advertisement to
page 476. for I have not the Book by me.
A Book written by Carolus Gallus a Professor of Divinity in the University
of Leyden, published in the year 1592* and entitled Clavis prophetica nova
Apocalypseos Iohannis Apostoli and Evangeliographi.
In his Epistle Dedicatory to the Prince of Orange, and the States of the
Netherlands, he professes it was a work, In quo (says he) jam inde a viginti
quinque annis, etc. that is In which for these XXV. years, I have very much
labored, by reading, meditating, searching, writing, disputing, and publicly
teaching both in Churches and Schools, seeking out and letting slip nothing,
which seemed to concern the finding out of this Divine Treasure. Now this man
after all this travel, search, and study, thus concludes his eight Observation
upon the 20. Chapter of that Book. Breviter spiritus propheticus in hac
Iohannis Apocalypsi, etc. that is, Briefly, the Spirit in this Revelation of
John Prophecyeth concerning the particular and wonderful Resurrection,
renovation, and restitution of the Church, that it, in this last Age, shall
appear made one of Jews and Gentiles, both living and dead, and more
gloriously then ever heretofore, in a wonderful manner shall live again from
the dead, or first death, and shall be renewed, restored, and flourish again.

I THESE. IV. Commate 16. (...) THE DEAD IN CHRIST [(...), for Christ, that is,
The Martyrs] SHALL RISE FIRST.
THe interpretation will not seem strange to any one who knows, that the same
Paul, who in his own words, is (...), Ephe. 4.1. was a prisoner, on bound for
the Lords sake, the preposition, as fea^he^ men know, sometimes signifying the
cause propter q^^^* That place also Rev. 14.13. (...), They that dye in the
Lord, is no otherwise interpreted by some Learned men; for the whole pericope
or passage there seems plainly to point at the Martyrs, who verse 4. are more
elegantly called (...) The first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, as
purchased by a particular prerogative from among men.


