A Sound out of Sion, From the Holy MOUNTAIN Which the Lord is establishng
above all the Mountains.

Declaring the salvation of God which is near to be revealed to the captivated
Seed that waits for Redemption.

And the Deceit of sinners laid open and witnessed against, who make a
profession of God, and yet cannot believe that they can be saved from sin while
they live.

By one who does rejoice in the Lord his Savior, William Ames.

Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart, Psalm. 73.2.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: The Testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple, Psalm. 19. 7. But to the wicked God says, What
have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant
in thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee,
Psalm. 50. 16. 17 LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by William Warwick, 1663.

A sound out of Sion, from the holy Mountain which the Lord is establishing
above all the Mountains, etc.
ALL you that make a profession of God, and of Christ, try your selves with the
Light that shows you sin in your Consciences, and see whether you have
fellowship with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1. 3. for all they who have not
felship with the Father and the Son, are not of the Church of Christ, for his
Church is his body, Col. 1. 18. and he is the Head, and the body has
fellowship with the Head; and he that has fellowship with the Son, has
fellowship with the Father also; for the Father and the Son is one eternal
Power by whom all things were made, John 1. 1, 2, 3. and he is pure and holy,
and they that have unity with him, must be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
else there is no unity, 2 Cor. 6. 14. nor fellowship; for this holy God, (Mal.
3. 6.) is an unchangeable being, who cannot be reconciled to any thing which is
not of himself, because he is holy, pure and immortal; and all other beings
that are not one with this pure being, has an end, 1 Cor. 15. 28.

Now by the Power of this pure God was all things made that is made, and he
made man according to his own Image, (Genesis 1. 7. and 2. 7) and breathed into
him the breath of Life, and he became a living soul: but man went out from that
Life in which he was created, and so dyed to that holy Life in him, and so
death came to have dominion, and man became alive in sin and unrighteousness;
and the Life that God had placed in man, became veiled, and so man came tobe
estranged from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18.

And thus being estranged from the Life of Righteousness, Genesis 6. 5. was
filled with unrighteousness, and the Life and Power in which he was created,
became his Adversary, and man became an Enemy to God, and a habitation of
uncleanness.

And from the pure and holy God went forth a Light which lights every man
that comes into the World, John 1. 9. and this Light bears witness in the
Consciences of all mankind, against unrighteousness, by which every man knows
sin; and this Light is set against man, to keep him out from the Tree of Life,
so long as he is in the enmity, left he should eat and live, Genesis 3. 24.

And this Light is one with God, for it is the true Light of the Son of God
that lights every man that comes into the World, which is the condemnation
of the World, and proceeds from the same power by which all things were
created; and this is manifested in the Conscience of every man, to lead him out
of unrighteousness, which by it is condemned, and to lead into peace with God
all those who follow it, John 1. 12.

And so all they who follow this Light, they follow the Son of God, who is made
a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. and by him comes the Life of Righteousness
to be quickened in them, and the unrighteous being to be destroyed and cast
out; For this Light condemns all unrighteousness, and they who follow it, walk
in the cross to the unrighteous lusts and desires vvhi^h moves in the flesh,
and is obedient to the Light by which they are condemned; and so the
unrighteous Power comes to be crucified, and the power in which man was
created, comes to be quickened, and so the second Adam comes to be known who
is made a quickening spirit, and does reconcile to God through the death of the
cross, Col. 1. 21. every one that believes in him, and keeps his
commandments, and in them comes the pure life of God to be raised; by which
Life purification is wrought, and man is brought into unity with God, the
enmity being slain in man through the obedience of the Cross, Ephesians. 2. 16. Here
comes the pure Life to have dominion in man, and man becomes the Temple of the
Holy God, Ephesians. 2. 21. and this is redemption. For man being obedient to the
lusts and motions of the flesh, he became the servant of sin, and so was free
from righteousness, Romans 6. 20. for righteousness is in bondage in him, and
unrighteousness bears rule, and this is the captivity of Jacob; for the life of
righteousness being lost, there is nothing brought forth but unrighteousness,
and the pure Seed of God that bears witness in the Conscience against
unrighteousness, is kept in prison; and although it cries, there is none that
answers nor obeys it, but the lusts and desires which lead to lying,
swearing, drunkenness, covetousness, idolatry, and all wickedness, hate,
malice, envy, murder witchcraft, and such like, is obeyed and followed; and
here are all men in the enmity, which is against God, Ephesians. 2. 3. and are the
heirs of wrath and condemnation: And this is the unhappy state, for there is no
other unhappiness, then to have the pure God to an Enemy, and so to be an heir
of his wrath; and he is an Enemy to all impurity; and they that act impurity,
are in the enmity against him, Col. 1. 21.

Therefore has he given his Son a Light in the World, and has lighted every
man that comes into the World, to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke
19. 10. Purity is lost, Holiness is lost, Righteousness is lost, the knowledge
of God is lost, peace with God is lost: Now they that turn to the Light, they
turn to the Son in whom the Father is well-pleased, Matt. 3. 17. who has long
sought man who is lost from it, and has convinced of sin in the Conscience,
and has sought to lead out of sin into righteousness, that it which was lost
might be found and saved.

Now every one that turns to the Son, the Light which seeks in the
Conscience, they come to find that which was lost, and to be found of it, who
have been lost from it, and come to know hol^nesse, and righteousness, and
peace, and knowledge of God brought forth in them; and here comes the Life of
God which was lost, and from which they were lost, they being without it, to be
redeemed in them; and so that which was lost, comes to be found and saved, and
the Life of unrighteousness which was exalted in man above all that is of God,
comes to be destroyed, and here comes the lofty to be cast down, and him of low
degree to be exalted, Luke 1. 52. and here comes man to be brought into
happiness; for as there is no other unhappiness but in the loss of that pure
life in which man was created, and so the loss of the friendship, unity,
knowledge and peace of God; even so there is no other happiness then the
finding and the enjoying of that which was lost; for as by the losing of that
pure Life, all men are out of Covenant with God, so no man is brought in
Covenant with God, until that be found which wa lost.

So that being found which was lost, here comes the glorious Church to be
redeemed, that is without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. of
which Christ is the Head, with whom God is one; and in that pure Life have they
fellowship with God, and he with them, and so they are one in Christ who
lights every man that comes into the World, as he is oue with the Father;
and this is the unity and fellowship of the Church of Christ.

Now all you that profess God and Christ, and say you do hope to be saved by
Christ, and yet are condemned by his Light in your Consciences; tell me, What
is the ground of your hope, seeing the measure of God in your Consciences
condemns you, with whom God is one? By whom then do you think to be justified,
seeing Christ condemns you? for he is the true Light that lights every man
that comes into the World; and by him is all unrighteousness in the World
condemned, John 3. 19. and he cannot be reconciled to any unrighteous being,
because he is one with the Father; therefore has the Fathercommitted all
Judgment unto him John 5. 22. because he judges righteously, and he is
unchangeable; and therefore if he condemn you now for sin, do not think that he
will justify you hereafter, except you forsake your sin, that so the purity of
his Life may be brought forth in you, and so you come to be transformed into
his Image, Heb. 1. 3. who is the glory of the incorruptible God; for holiness
has no union with unholiness, 2 Cor. 6. 14, nor purity with impurity, nor
light with darkness; and therefore the holy eternal God being unchangeable,
the change must be wrought in you who are unholy, by the saving Grace of God
which has appeared unto you all, Tit. 2. 11. which is the Light that
condemns sin in the Conscience, if ever you come to have unity with him.

And all they who obey the Light with which they are enlightened, they come to
find Christ to be the Minister of righteousness, Isa. 32. 1. administering the
righteous Judgments of God upon the unrighteous nature, and so comes all that
in man that would not have him to reign, to be slain by him, and so he comes
(who is the Life and Power in the which man was created) to have dominion in
man over all, who is God blessed for ever.

Now all you that say, Though you are sinners, yet you hope to be saved,
because God is merciful and ready to forgive sin, and with this hope do comfort
your selves, and do not seek to depart from sin, neither do you believe that
you can be freed from sin.

I tell you, your hope shall perish at the appearing of the God of Jacob; for
how can you be saved by the mercy of God, when you refuse to receive it? For
this is the mercy of God, That he has given his Son a Light in the World, that
all they who receive him, might receive power to become the sons of God, Ioh.
1. 12. by which Power they are redeemed from sin, and made heirs of Eternal
Life; and no sinner is heir of Eternal Life, but he that sins, is condemned
in his Conscience by the Light of Christ which God in mercy has given to save
from sin all that receive him. Now this Light lets you see that you should not
lie, swear, steal, defraud, or speak evilly, etc. but you for sake the motions
of the Light, and do follow the motions of Satan, which moves you to act
unrighteousness, and so you refuse the mercy and saving-Grace of God, and you
choose to obey the motions of Satan, which lead to act unrighteousness, and yet
you lean upon the Lord, and say you hope he will be merciful to forgive you
your sins, although you hate to obey his mercy in whom forgiveness of sins is
received And therefore the mercy of God condemns you, because you will not
receive it, nor obey it.
: And thus your hope is the hope of the hypocrite, and shall perish, for he
that has the true hope, purifies himself as God is pure, 1 John 3. 3 but you
believe you cannot be made pure, and so you are reprobate to that Faith which
purifies the heart, and gives victory over the World, 1 John 5. 4.

And therefore all you who do hope to be saved by your Faith, and yet do live
in sin and unrighteousness, and have not so much Faith as to believe that you
shall ever be freed from unrighteousness while you live (because the way of
Truth you know not) what Faith is that which you trust in, seeing it is the
just that lives by Faith, Heb. 10. 28. and you are unjust? Is not your Faith
without works, James 2. 20. and so dead, seeing that you believe that your
Faith has not so much power to work that in you which was wrought in the
Saints of old by the^r Faith; which works were these, Acts 159 By Faith were
the^r hearts purified, Romans 5. 1. By Faith were they justified, and had peace
with God; and their Faith gave them victory over the World; and this you
believe you cannot attain unto while you live; and have you now not good reason
to question your Faith, seeing it works not the same effects which was
wrought in them who had the true Faith? Does it not appear that your Faith is
not the same Faith which they had, by which they were justified, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
and did receive in the testimony of their Conscience, that they had walked
before God uprightly and holily, seeing that the same Light condemns you in
your consciences, which justified them, and you do believe you shall not be
justified before God in your Consciences while you live.

Now if you have Faith without Works, do you think that Faith will save you,
except the Works of Faith be brought forth in you? Iam. 2. 19. And is not the
Devils Faith so good as yours, who does believe and tremble before the just
Judgments of God Because of his disobedience.
? But you having not so much feeling, do harden your selves against judgment,
and does comfort your selves in your disobedience.

And yet will you say you serve the Lord, although you have given your selves
over to serve Satan? For sin is a Work of the Devil, and where the Works are
brought forth, there is the Worker; and you do believe you cannot be freed from
sin, and have you not then given your selves over to obey Satan, Romans 6. 17.
and his servants you are to whom you obey; and therefore when Satan moves you
to commit sin, you obey him, because you believe you cannot do otherwise; and
so your Faith is so far from purifying your hearts, that it leads you into
impurity: And although you are convinced by the Light of God in your
Consciences, that you should not sin, yet you believe not in the Light (which
if you did, it would purify your hearts) but you do believe and follow him who
leads you to commit sin, and you do not believe that that of God which
convinces you that you should not sin, is able to deliver you from sin And
therefore you follow it not, but reject it, and so you despise the Grace of God.
; and so you are the unbelievers who make God a liar, in not believing the
testimony which he has given of his Son, 1 John 5. 10.

And so to the righteousness of God are you disobedient, you being the servants
of sin; for you cannot serve two Masters, if you are servants of sin, you are
free from righteousness, Romans 6. 20. and are not the servants of Christ; for he
is not the Minister of sin, Gal. 2. 17. but you serve Satan who is the Author
of sin, and your Faith leads you no further than to serve him; and therefore
that cannot be the Faith which gives peace with God; for there is no peace from
God to the wicked, Isa. 48. 22. much less to those who believe they shall never
be made righteous; and so has made a Covenant with death and Hell, to commit
sin so long as you live; you are not those who do wait for the Savior to save
you from sin, but do comfort your selves with your vain imaginations, and being
ignorant of the righteousness of God which is made manifest in all those who
believe in the Light, to take away sin. You think to be saved by your own
righteousness, in making a profession from the words of the holy men of God,
although you are unholy; and you do believe you shall never be made holy while
you live; and so you make likenesses, and bow down to them, although the
Scripture which you profess, says, Thou shall not make the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, nor in the waters under
the Earth; Exodus 20.4. but you being ignorant of the substance, have nothing
but the likeness, which you bow unto, and say Christ has commanded you so to
do, when you have neither heard his voice, nor seen his shape; but that which
you have, you have gathered into your imaginations by reading the Scripture,
and do endeavor to get into a form of godliness, but the Power you never look
for while you live; for they that have the power of godliness, by it are they
redeemed from sin; but you believe that cannot be in this life: And thus are
you strangers to the life of Saints.

And yet you will own the Name of Christians, and say you are baptized in his
Name, although you believe you shall never be partakers of his Life while you
live. And so it appears that your Baptism is not the Baptism of Christ; for as
many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death, and are made
partakers of the resurrection of his Life, and are made free from sin, Romans 6.
3, 7. but your Baptism cannot free from sin; for we see drunkards, swearers,
liars, thieves, murderers, and such like who are baptized with your baptism,
and yet remain so; and therefore it is an abomination to God, and it is a
likeness which the Lord forbids, who says, Thou shall not make any likeness;
and this you have, but the substance you never look for while you live; and so
your hearts being not circumcised by the circumcision of Christ, in putting off
the body of the sins of the flesh; you cannot understand the things of God,
because you are not buried with him in baptism.

And yet will you boast of the Lord's Table, although you believe you shall
never be freed from the Table of Devils while you live; for you believe you
cannot be freed from sin, and he that commits sin, is partaker with Satan;
and he that takes part with Satan, is God's Enemy, and is shut out from the
Lord's Table. And then you take Bread and Wine, and eat and drink it, and call
that the Lord's Supper, and say he did so with his Apostles the same night that
he was betrayed; and this is false; for that Bread which he gave his Disciples,
was his Body, (John 6. 51. Matthew. 26. 26, 27, 28. Mark. 14. 22, 23, 24 Luke 22.
19. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24.) which you are ignorant of, who call outward Bread
and Wine the Lord's supper, for that is not his Body: And Christ said, The
Bread that I will give you, is my flesh. And when the time drew near that he
should go to the Father, he brake that bread, and gave it them, and said, Take,
eat, this is my body; and after they had eaten, he took the Cup, and gave it
them, and said, Drink ye all of it, this is my Blood which is shed for many for
the remission of sins: And this was the same that Paul did administer to the
Corinthians; and the Cup of blessing was the communion of the blood of Christ;
and the bread which they did break, was the communion of the body of Christ,
and this did God ordain; but yours is a likeness which God is against, and it
must be destroyed.

And because you read in Scripture, that the holy men of God did sing because
the Lord had redeemed them; therefore you who are unholy, have made songs of
their words, and you sing, who never know what Redemption was. Moses and the
children of Israel did sing because the Lord had redeemed them out of the hands
of Pharaoh, Exodus 15. and that which they spoke in their song, in them was
truth; but if you sing their words, and are not partakers of their deliverance,
are you not liars. Deborah and Barack sung, Judge. 5. because the Lord had
delivered them, and had destroyed the Enemies of Israel: But what rule is this
for you to sing, who cannot believe that sin (which is Isreal's Enemy) can be
destroyed in you while you live; and they that were redeemed unto God out of
Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, (Rev. 14. 3. and 15. 3.) sung a new song, the
song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, because they were
redeemed by him; but what caufe have you to sing, who are strangers to this
redemption? and the Apostle said, Be not ov^rcome with Wine, but be filled with
the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs,
making melody in your hearts unto God, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19 But what melody is there
in your hearts unto God, who are strangers to his Spirit, and are filled with
excess of the Wine of the Fornication of the Whore, with which all Nations are
become drunk, and do believe you cannot be cleansed from it while you live.
David when he was delivered, and did keep the ways of the Lord, and had not
wickedly departed from his God, 2 Samuel 22. 22 23. he declared the wonderful
Works of God, and did sing to the glory of his Name; and you have made songs of
his words, who depart from God daily, and do believe you cannot keep the ways
of the Lord; and is not this hypocrisy, to profess the words of them who were
holy, seeing you are unholy, and strangers to their Life?

And thus all your singing, and all your prayers, and all your Ordinances are
an abomination to God, because they are wrought by that nature which is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, and your hearts are poluted
with uncleanness, and you are not obedient to the righteousness of God, Christ
Jesus the Light of the World, that lights every man that comes into the
World, which convinces you of sin in your consciences, and bears witness
for God against your unrighteousness: This is he who God has given to be his
salvation to the ends of the Earth, Isa. 49. 6. And because you do not obey
this Teacher near you, therefore you are not saved, but you wander up and down
(many of you) from Mountain to Hill to seek a covering, but nothing can cover
you from his presence; for he is near that condemns you, and then how can you
be justified? For they who are not in him, and he in them, cannot be justified
before God.

And you follow the teachings of men whose minds are corrupt, who withstand the
Truth as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3. who creep into Houses,
and lead silly women captive, who are laden with sin, and led away with diverse
lusts, always learning but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.
Now all you who are led captive under their traditions and ordinances which
they teach, some for filthy lucre, others out of pride being puffed up with
knowledge in the Letter, are you not those whom the Apostle speaks of, who are
laden with sin? and are you not led away with diverse lusts? and after you have
learned twenty, thirty, forty or fifty years, do you know any more of God than
when you first began? but still you remain serving your lusts, until you are
taken away from the Earth.

And if any come to witness redemption through Jesus Christ, and do declare
against your evil deeds, then are you those who are enraged, and cries out,
These are the seducers, when you your selves are sinners, and so are seduced;
for there is no other seducing them to commit sin, and all sinners are seduced;
and yet you say of those who witness Christ in them redeeming from sin, these
are the false Prophets that should come in sheeps clothing, for we do not
believe (say you) that any can be freed from sin while he lives; and herein you
manifest your selves to be the false Prophets you speak of; for you cover your
selves with the Lambs words, and with a profession thereof; but you are so far
from being partaker of his Life, that you believe you cannot attain unto it;
for where the Lamb of God is made manifest, he takes away sin; but where sin
has dominion, there is the Lamb of God slain; and you do believe sin must have
dominion in you while you live, and then are you not the Wolves who devoureth
the Lambs, and yet clothe your selves with the Wool, making a profession of
Christ, and yet are Enemies to his Life; for there is no other enmity against
God, but sin; and there is nothing that condemns sin but Christ, who lights
every man that comes into the World; for the Father has committed all
Judgment unto him, for he judges righteously, he will not condemn the
righteous, neither will he justify the sinner in his sin, but every one who
departs from sin, and takes up his Cross and follows him through death,
he will in no wise cast off.

But all you who think to be justified because of your outward profession,
outward Baptism, outward Supper, outward singing, outward praying, and yet your
inward parts poluted with sin; you stink in the nostrils of God because of your
hypocrisy, to profess the words of those who were holy, while you are unholy;
for God desires truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. and without holiness
none can see God; Heb. 12. 14. but you are so far from having truth and
holiness in the inward parts, that you believe it cannot be attained to; and so
all your profession is no more than that which the Jews had, who crucified the
Lord of Life; for they professed the words of the holy men of God, and so do
you; but truth and holiness in the inward parts had they not, neither have you;
and he who was the true light that lights every man that comes into the
World, did they crucify, and so do you; for with your sins you cross the true
Light which convinces you of sin, and so did they; and this is the reason that
truth and holiness is not brought forth in your inward parts.

And thus all the Works by which you think to be justified in your profession,
are dead Works, they being wrought by that nature which crucifies that Life in
whose Works God is well-pleased, and to repentance from dead Works are you not
come, but in your dead Works do think to be just fied, and therefore are you so
ignorant of the Works of Eternal Life which are wrought in all that are
justified by Christ Jesus, who is the Life eternal, and works in all that
receive him to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. in whose Works the Father is
well-pleased; and by the power of his working in us, are we redeemed from the
power of Satan, and are made to rejoice in the Lord our Savior.

And therefore cease from all false Teachers, who cry peace peace, where there
is no peace, Ier. 6. 14. and tell you, you shall be justified, although in your
Consciences you are condemned; these are the false Teachers who are against
Christ, and they preach peace to such whom Christ Jesus condemns by his Light
with which he has lighted every man; but against such who are redeemed by
Christ, and do witness them to be liars, they prepare war: And they persuade
you that you cannot be saved from sin while you live. And thus they deny the
Power of God to save from sin, and would persuade you that the Lord's hand is
shortened that it cannot save: And thus they delude you until the measure of
your iniquity is full, and then you must receive a reward according to your
works, Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every soul of man that does evil.

But if you turn to the Light with which you are lighted, you turn to the true
Teacher which will always be present with you to lead you into the paths of
righteousness, where is peace eternal, and rejoicing in the Testimony of your
consciences, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and the Law of God will be written in your hearts,
Heb. 10. 16. by which sin will be condemned in your flesh, 1 Pet. 4. 6. and
there will the power of God be manifest to destroy sin; and thus you will
receive the pure water, (Heb. 10. 22.) which purifieth from sin; and this is
obtained in obeying the Light with which you are lighted; for that is truth,
and is no lie, and it manifests the thoughts and intents of the heart; and
therefore they who receive it, need not that any man teach them, for they are
taught by the anointing, 1 John 2. 27. and they need not to teach one another,
saying, Know the Lord, (Iereremiah 31: 34.) for they following the Light, do
come to find the Law in their hearts and the Spirit of God in their inward
parts, by which they know God from the least to the greatest; and he that
knows not this condition, but remains learning of men, such a one is a
stranger to the New Covenant.

Given forth for the Seeds sake, who groan for redemption, by one who desires
that righteousness may be established, William Ames,

THE END.

