ULTIMA, The last things, in reference to the First and Middle things: OR
CERTAIN MEDITATIONS on Life, Death, Judgment, Hell, Right Purgatory, and
Heaven: Delivered by ISAAC AMBROSE, Minister of the Gospel at PRESTON in
AMOUNDERNES in LANCASHIRE.

Deuteronomy. 32.29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end.

Ecclus. 7.36. Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and thou shall
never do amiss.

LONDON: Printed for J. A. and are to be sold by Nathanael Webb, and William
Grantham, at the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

To the Reader.
READER,
NOt to stay thee too long at the door, come in, and thou may in this
fabric see these several partitions.

Here is Man's misery in his Life, Ser. 1. Death, Ser. 2. Judgment, Ser. 3. The
Execution, Ser. 4.
Gods mercy in our Redemption, Ser. 5. Salvation, Ser. 6.


The first part may bring thee to a sight, and sense, and sorrow for sin; the
second to a sight of Christ, and a comfort in Christ: and these are the
principal means of conversion. Nor is the work unprofitable, if thou be
converted; use them as daily Meditations, and they will keep thee from sin, and
help thee toward heaven. One of our Worthies can tell thee, that Nothing more
strongly bends men to sin then security, or incogitancie of these things. If
thou ask what things? he answers, The end of our creation and redemption, the
certainty of death, the uncertaintie of life, the severe account we must give,
the just retribution we shall have, the misery of the damned in hell, the
blessedness of the Saints in heaven, these things being sadly and frequently
thought upon, would quench our burnings and lustings after sin. And true thou
may find it, that such good thoughts, and an inordinate life, are scarce
consistible: Will you hear another? A serious and fruitful meditation on these
things (so blessed M. Bolton) has ever been holden very material, and of
special moment to make us (by Gods blessing) more humble, unworldly, provident
and prepared for the evil day. And I take it, every one of these following
subjects would be an excellent theme, or matter for our deliberate meditation.
See the Middle things, Chap. 7. Sect. 4. Read then and practice these
Meditations, and I trust by these means, thy end will be Heavens happiness. So
ends this work, and to that end solely, next to Gods glory, I built it for
thee. Farewell.

Thine in all services I may, for thy souls salvation, I. A.

Life's Lease.
GENESIS 47.9. Few and evil have the days of my life been.


WHen Pharaoh was Egypts King, Joseph Pharaohs Steward, and Jacob Joseph's
father, there was a great famine which Pharaoh had dreamed, Joseph foretold,
and Jacob suffered: God that sent Joseph to Pharaoh, brings Jacob to Joseph,
the same providence so disposing of all, that yet some food must be in Egypt,
when nothing was found in all the land of Canaan: Thither come, and welcome (as
you may see in the story,) Pharaoh salutes Jacob with this question, What is
thy age? How many are thy days? How many? alas, but few: what are they? alas,
but evil: Thus we find Jacob at his Arithmetic, the bill is short, and the
number but a cyphar: Will you hear him cast his accounts? First, they are
days, and without all rules of falsehood, by subtraction few, by addition full
of evil; contract all and this is the sum of all, Few and evil have the days
of my live been.

This Text, briefly, is the Lease of Jacobs life, God the chief Lord inricht
his substance, yet limits the grant of his time: will you question the Lease?
for what time? no more, but my life] says Jacob: but a life? what years? no
years, but dayes] says Jacob: but days? how many? not many, but few] says
Jacob, but few? how good? not good, but evil] says Jacob: who can blaze the
arms of life, that finds not in it Cross and Croslet? the lease but a life]
the term but dayes] the number few] the nature evil] nay, when all is done, we
see all is out of date; the days are not, but are past, they have been] Few
and evil have the days of my life been.]

We must, you see, invert the Text, and begin with that on which all hangs; it
is but my life] says Jacob. Life.
Would you know what is that? take but a view of Nature, and Scripture, and
these will sufficiently describe our life.

First, Nature, whose dim eye sees thus far: what is it? but a Rose, Ut rosa
Paestano languet adepta jugo. Tifernas. Ut herba solstitialis, Plaut.
says Tifernas, which if you view in its growth, the cold nips it, heat
withers it, the wind shakes it; be it never so fair it withers, be we never so
lively, immediately we die and perish.

A Rose? that is too beautiful! Life is but grass, says Plautus, green now,
withered anon; thus like the flower that is cut in Summer; as soon as we are
born, Death is ready with his Sithe; as soon as we are dead, Angels gather in
the harvest, on whose wings we are carried to that Barn of Heaven. (...),
Philemon.
Grass? no says Philemon, life is no better then a counterfeit picture: what
if the colors be fair, and the resemblance near? the shadow of death, Scena
est ludus quoque vita: Luscin. Cum parumper se ostendisset, mox se abscondit
Anonymus: Rodol. Agric. Tu quicscis securus; and in modum gliris sepultus
jaces. Philonius. (...). Aristophanes.
and the Curtains of our grave will darken all. A picture? that is too
honorable; life is (a worse resemblance) but a Play says Luscinius, we enter
at our birth, and act all our life, presently there is an exit, or a back
return, and away we go, shutting all up with a sudden Tragedy. A Play? that is
too large. Anonymus being asked what was life, he shows himself a little, then
hides himself amain; his meaning was this, our life is but a little show, and
no sooner are we seen, but immediately are we hid and gone. A show? that is too
pleasant; life is nothing but a sleep, says Philonius, we live secure, and
Dormise-like we slumber away our time; when all is done, as if all this were
too little, we sleep again, and go from (our grave) the bed, to (that bed) our
grave. A sleep? that is too quiet, it is nothing but a dream, says
Aristophanes; all our worldly pleasures are but waking dreams, at last Death
rouzeth our souls that have slept in sin, (...), Pind. in Pyth. Vita quid
nisi mortis imago? Cato.
then lifting up our heads and seeing all gone we awake sorrowing. A dream, or
the dream of a shadow, says Pindarus; the worst, the weakest dream that can be
imagined; sure one step further, were to arrive at deaths door; and yet thus
far are we lead by the hand of Nature: nay if you will lower, death su^ceeds
life, and life is but the image of death, says Cato. Here is a true picture of
our frailty, life is like death; indeed so like; so near together, that we
cannot differ each from other.

See here the condition of our life; what is it but a Rose, a Grass, a
Picture, a Play, a Show, a Sleep, a Dream, an Image of death? such a thing is
life, that we so much talk of. Nature give this light, how blind are they that
cannot see life's frailty? you need no more but mark the Destinies (as Poets
feign) to spin their threads: one holds, another draws, a third cuts it off:
what is our life but a thread? some have a stronger twist, others a more
slender: some live till near rot, others die when scarce born: there is none
endures long, this thread of life is cut sooner or later, and then our work is
done, our course is finished. Are these the Emblemes of our life? and dare we
trust to this broken staff? how do the heathen precede us Christians in these
studies? Their books were skuls, their desks were graves, their remembrance an
hourglass. Awake your souls, and bethink you of mortality: have you any
privilege for your lives? are not Heathens and Christians of one Father Adam?
of one mother, Earth? the Gospel may free you from the second, not the first
death; only provide you for the first to escape the second death. O men, what
be your thoughts? nothing but of Goods and Barns, and many Years? you may boast
of Life, as Oromazes the Conjurer of his Egg, which (he said) included the
felicity of the world, yet being opened, there was nothing but Wind: Think what
you please, your life is but a Wind, which may be stopped soon, but cannot last
long by the law of Nature.

Nature, so Scripture will inform you in this point. The life of man is but of
little esteem; what is it but a Shrub, or a Brier in the fire? As the crackling
of thorns under the pot, so is the (life or) laughter of the fool: momentary
and vanity, Eccles. 7.6. Eccles. 7.6.
Nay, a shrub were something, but our life is less no better then a leaf, not
a tree, nor shrub, nor fruit nor blossom: We all fade as a leaf, and our
iniquities like the wind have swept us away, Esaias 64 6. Esaias 64.6.
Yet a leaf may glory of his birth; it is descended of a Tree; life is a Reed,
sometimes broken at least shaken, so vain, so infirm so inconstant is the life
of man: What went you out to see? a reed shaken with the wind? Matthew. 11.7.
Matthew. 11.7.
Nay, a reed were something, our life is baser, indeed no better then a rush or
flag. Can a rush grow without mire? though it were green and not cut down, yet
shall it wither before any other herb, Job 8 11, 12. Job 8.12.
What shall I say more? what shall I cry, a rush? All flesh is grass, and all
the grace thereof as the flower of the field, the grass withers, the flower
fades, surely the people is grass, Esa. 40.7. Esa. 40.7.
I am descended beneath just patience; but not so low as the life of man; as
all these resemble life, so in some measure they have life: but life is a
smoke, without any spark of life in it, thus cries David, My days are consumed
like smoke, and my bones are burnt like an hearth, Psalm. 102.3. Psalm. 102.3.
Yet is here no stay, the smoke ingenders clouds, and a cloud is the fittest
resemblance of our life: Our life shall pass away as the trace of a cloud, and
come to naught as the mist that is driven away with the beams of the Sun. Wisd.
2.4. Wisd. 2.4.
Neither is this all, clouds may hang calm, but life is like a tempest, it is a
cloud and a wind too, Remember that my life is but a wind, and that mine eye
shall not return to see pleasure, Job 7.7. Job 7.7.
Nay, we must lower, and find a weaker element, it is not a wind, but water,
said that woman of Tekoah, We are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again, 2. Sam. 14.14. 2. Sam. 14.14.
yet is water both a good and necessary element, life is the least part of
water, nothing but a foam, a bubble: The King of Samaria (that great King) is
destroyed as the foam upon the water, Hos. 10.7. Hos. 10.7.
I can no more, and yet here is something less, a foam or bubble may burst
into a vapor, and What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a
little time, and afterward vanishes away, Iam. 4.14. Jam. 4 14.
Less then this is nothing, yet life is something less, nothing in substance,
all it is, it is but a shadow, We are strangers and sojourners as all our
fathers were, our days are like a shadow upon the earth, and there is none
abiding, 1. Chr. 29.15. 1. Chr. 29.15.
See whither we have brought our life, and yet ere we part, we will down one
step lower; upon a strict view we find neither substance nor shadow, Psalm 39.5.
only a mere nothing, a very vanity: Behold, thou have made my days as an
hand breadth, and mine age is nothing in respect of thee, surely every man
living is altogether vanity: Psalm. 39.5. Psalm. 39.5.


Lo here the nature of our life, it is a shrub a leaf, a reed, a rush, a
grass, a smoke, a cloud, a wind, a water, a bubble, a vapor, a shadow a
nothing. What mean we to make such ado about a matter of nothing? I cannot
choose but wonder at the vanity of men, that run, rid, toil, travel,
undergo any labor to maintain this life, and what is it when they have their
desire which they so much toil for? we live, and yet whilst we speak this
word, perhaps we die. Is this a land of the living, or a region of the dead? We
that suck the air to kindle this little spark, where is our standing but at the
gates of death? Psalm. 9.13. Psalm. 9.13.
Where is our walk, but in the shadow of death? Luke 1.79. Luke 1.79.
What is our mansion house, but the body of death? Romans 7.24. Romans 7.24.
What think ye? Is not this the region of death, where is nothing but the gate
of death, An non and haec regio mortis, ubi porta mortis, umbra mortis, and
corpus mortis?
and the shadow of death, and the body of death? Sure we dream that we live,
but sure it is that we die; or if we live, the best hold we have is but a
lease: God our chief Lord may bestow what he pleases, to the rich man wealth,
to the wise man knowledge, to the good man peace, to all men somewhat: yet if
you ask, Who is the Lessor? God. Who is the Lessee? Man. What is leased? This
world. For what term? My life.] Thus Jacob tells Pharaoh, as the Text tells you,
Few and evil have the days of my life] been.

This is the Lease, and now you have it, let us see what use you will make of
it. life some live, Come (say they) and let us enjoy the pleasures that are
present, Wisd. 2.6, 7.
and let us cheerfully use the creatures as in youth, let us fill our selves
with costly wine and ointments, and let not the flower of life pass by us.
What a life is here? Can it be that pleasures, wine and ointments should have
any durance in this vale of misery? Suppose thy life a continued scene of
pleasures, had thou Dives fare, Solomon's robes, David's throne, Croesus
wealth, livedst thou many years without any cares, yet at last comes death, and
takes away thy soul in the midst of her pleasures: alas, what is all thy glory,
but a snuff that goes out in a stench? Could thou not have made death more
welcome, if he had found thee lying on a pad of straw, feeding on crusts and
crumbs? Is not thy pain more grievous, because thou wast more happy? Do not thy
joys more afflict thee, then if they had never been? O deceitful world, that
grievest if thou crossest, and yet to whom thou art best, they are most
unhappie?

new birth, would you have life indeed, and enjoy that joy of life which is
immortal? then hear, revive, watch and awake from sin: were you sometimes
dead in sin? O but now live in Christ, Christ is the life. John 14.6. John
14.6.
Were you sometimes dumb in your dying pangs? O but now abide in Christ, Christ
is the word of life. John 1.1. John 1.1.
Are you as yet babes in Christ, feeble and but weak through life's infirmities?
why then use all good means, eat and be strong, Christ is the bread of life
John 6.48. John 6.48.
Here is a life indeed, would you not thus live for ever? then believe in God,
and in Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and this is life eternal. John 17.3.
John 17.3.
O happy life, which many a man never dreams of! So much they strive to
protract this brittle life, which but adds more grief, that they forget Christ,
nay, they forget their Creed, which begins with true life, God; and ends with
life never-ending, Life everlasting. Others that hope for heaven, fix not their
thoughts on earth; if you be Gods servants, lift up your hearts above, for
there is life, and the God of life, the Tree of life, and the Well of life, the
life of Angels, and the Life everlasting.

One sand is run, and the Text is lessened; but as you have the lease, so you
may now exspect to know the date: the lease is but a life, the date lasts but
days. Days.]
NOt weeks, nor months nor years; or if a year, the best Arithmatick is to
reduce or break it into Days: so we have it in the last translations, The
days of the year.

Here then is the Sum, a Year. Fraction, Days.


First, a Year; in the Spring is the youthful spring of our age, in the Summer
is the aged time of our youth; in the Autumn is the high noon, or middle of our
age, when the Sun (which is our soul) rules in the Equinoctial line of our
life; in the Winter we grow old and cold, the nips of frost strip the tree of
our life, we fall into the grave, and the earth that nourished us, will then
consume us. See what is man! a Spring of tears, a Summers dust, an Autumns
care, a Winters woe: Read but this map, and you need travel no further to
enquire of life.

The first quarter is our Spring, and that is full of sin and misery; the
infant no sooner breathes, but he sucks the poison of his parents: in Adam all
sinned, and since his time all were defiled by his sin. Is it not Natures
rule, that every man begets one like himself? And is it not Gods rule, that
every sinner begets another no better then himself? How may a foul vessel keep
sweet water? or how may an earthy sinner beget an heavenly Saint? we are all in
the same state of sin, and so we fall into the same plunge of sorrow: the
child in his cradle sleeps not so secure, but now he wakes, and then he weeps,
cold starves him hunger pines him, sores trouble him, sickness gripes him,
there is some punishment, which without sin had never been inflicted. It is
wonderful to consider, how Nature has provided for all creatures, birds with
feathers, beasts with hides, fishes with scales, all with some defense, only
man is born stark naked, without either weapon in his hand, or the least
thought of defense in his heart; birds can fly, beasts can go, fishes can
swim, but infant-man, as he knows nothing, so neither is he able to do any
thing: indeed he can weep as soon as born, but not laugh (as some observe) till
forty days old: so ready are we born to woe, but so far from the least spark
of joy. O mere madness of men, that from so poor, naked and base beginnings,
can persuade our selves we are born to be proud!

And if this be our Spring, what (think ye) is our Summer? Remember not the
sins of this time, prays David, Psalm 25.7. Psalm. 25.7.
and why? their remembrance is bitter, says Job, Job 13.26. Job 13.26.
If mirth and melody should never meet with end, this were an happy life,
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, let thine heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes;
but remember for all these things God will bring thee to judgment, Eccles.
11.9. Eccles. 11.9.
This judgment is the damp that puts out all the lights of comfort: could not
Solomon have given the rains, but he must pull again at curb? Must youth
rejoice, But for all this remember? what a bar stands here in the very door
of joy? alas, that we should trifle thus with toys, which no sooner we enjoy,
but in grievous sadness we repent our follies. The wise man that gave liberty
to his ways, what cries he but vanity, and after, vanity of vanities, and at
last, all is vanity? what was the wisdom of Achitophel? a vain thing: what
the swiftness of Hazael? a vain thing: what the strength of Goliath? a vain
thing: what the pleasures of Nebuchadnezzar? a vain thing: what the honor of
Haman? a vain thing: what the beauty of Absolon? a vain thing. Thus if we see
but the fruit that grows of sin, we may boldly say of laughter, thou art mad,
and of joy, what is this thou do? Eccles. 2.2. Eccles. 2.2.


And if this be our Summer, what may be our Autumn? an hour of joy, a world of
sorrow; if you look about you, how many miseries lie in wait to ensnare you?
there is no place secure, no state sufficient, no pleasure permanent, whither
will you go? The chamber has its care, the house has its fear, the field has
its toil, the Country has its frauds, the City has its factions, the Church
has its Sects, the Court has its envy, here is every place a field where is
offered a battle: or if this were better, consider but your states, the Beggar
has his sores, the Soldier has his scarres, the Magistrate has his
troubles, the Merchant his travels, the Nobles their crosses, the great ones
their vexations; here is every state a sea, tossed with a world of tempests: or
yet if this were happier, bethink you a little longer of your fleeting joys;
the sweet has its sower, the Crown has its care, the world has its want,
pleasure has its pain, profit has its grief, all these must have their end:
here is a dram of sugar mixed with an Epha of bitter. Is this manhood, that is
subject to all these miseries? Nay, what are these in comparison of all it
suffers? It is deformed with sin, defiled with lust, outraged with passions,
over-carried with affections, pining with envy, burdened with gluttony,
boiling with revenge, transported with rage; all man's body is full of
iniquity, and his soul (the bright image of God) through sin, is transformed
to the ugly shape of the Devil.

And if this be our Autumn, what (I pray) is the Winter? then our Sun grows
low, and we begin to die by degrees; show me the light which will not darken,
show me the flower which will not fade, show me the fruit which will not
corrupt, show me the garment which will not wear, show me the beauty which
will not wither, show me the strength which will not weaken: behold, now is the
hour that thy lights shall darken, thy cheeks wrinckle, thy skin be furrowed,
thy beauty fade, and thy strength decay. Here is the ambition of a long life,
thy lease lies a bleeding, and death raps at the door of thy heart to take
possession: O forcible entry! will not pleasures delay? cannot riches ransom?
dares not strength defy? Is neither wit nor wealth able to deceive nor bribe?
what may rent this house, that the soul may but lodge there one night longer?
Poor soul that dies (or departs) in unremedied pangs! our sins may run on
score, and repentance forget her days of payment. Yet our lease shall end, the
date exspire, this body suffer, and the soul be driven from her house and
harbor. See the swift course of our mortal Sun, at North and South, in our
mothers womb and tomb both in one year.

Consider this, yet that forget God, you have but a year to live, and every
season yields some occasion to tell you, ye must die. In childhood, what is
your chest of clouts, but a remembrance of your winding sheets? In youth, what
is your mirth and music, but a summons to the knell? In manhood, what is your
house and enclosure, but a token of the coffin? In age, what is your chair or
litter, but a show of the beer, which at last shall convey you to your graves?
Man, ere he is aware, has dressed his hearse, every season adding something to
his solemnity. Where is the Adulterer, Murderer, Drunkard, Blasphemer? Are
you about your sins? look on these objects; there is a sun now setting, or
a candle burning, or an hour-glasse running, or a flower decaying, or a
Traveller passing, or a vapor vanishing, or a sick man groaning, or a strong
man dying, be sure there is something pulls you by the sleeve, and bids you
beware to commit such enormities: Who dares live in sin, that considers with
himself he must die soon? And who will not consider, that sees before his eyes
so many a remembrancer? Alas, we must die, and howsoever we pass from
childhood to youth, from youth to manhood, Senectutem nemo excedit.
from manhood to age, yet there is none can be more then old: here is the
utmost of our life, a Spring, a Summer, an Autumn, a Winter, and when that is
done, you know the whole Year is finished.

The sum is a Year] the Items are Days.] And what Days can ye exspect of
such a Year? my text, in relation to these days, gives us two attributes, the
first is few, the second is evil: if you consider our days, in regard of the
fewness, (which this word seems rather to intimate) you may see them in
Scripture brought to fewer and fewer, till they are well near brought to
nothing.

If we begin with the beginning, we find first, that the first man Adam had a
lease of his life in fee and (as Lawyers say) To have and to hold, from the
beginning to everlasting: but for eating the forbidden fruit, he made a
forfeiture of that estate: of this he was forewarned, In the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall die the death; Genesis 2.17. Genesis 2.17.
And this he found too true, Because thou have eaten of the tree, whereof I
commanded thee, Thou shall not eat -- what then? amongst other curses this was
one, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return: Genesis 3.19. Genesis 3.19.
After him, the longest life came short of the number of a thousand years, The
days of Methusalem (says Moses) were nine hundred, sixty, and nine years:
Genesis 5.27. Genesis 5.27.
and had he come to a thousand, which never was attained by man, yet a thousand
years are but one day with God: 2. Pet. 3.8. 2 Pet. 3.8.
yea, but as yesterday, says Moses, A thousand years in Gods sight are but as
yesterday: Psalm 90.4. Psalm. 90.4.
But what speak I of a thousand years? no sooner came the flood, but the age of
man (of every man born after it) was shortened half in half. These are the
generations of Sem (says Moses) Genesis 11.10. Genesis 11.10.
to wit, Arphaxad, and Selah, and Eber, none of which three could reach to the
number of five hundred years; the longest liver was Eber, and yet all his
days, before and after his firstborn Peleg, were but four hundred, sixty,
and four years: Genesis 11.16, 17. Genesis 11.16, 17.
nay, as if half a thousand were more then too much, you may see God halfs
their ages once again: Peleg lives as long as any man after him, and yet his
days were neither a thousand, nor half a thousand, nor half of half a
thousand; no, no more then two hundred, thirty and nine years, Genesis 11.18, 19.
Genesis 11.18, 19.
but this was a long life too: If we come to arrive at the time of Jacob, we
shall find this little time well-near halfed again; when he spoke this text, he
tells he was one hundred and thirty years old, and after this he lived no
longer then seventeen years more, so that the whole age of Jacob was but (seven
score and seven) an hundred forty, and seven years. Genesis 47.28. Genesis 47.28.
Nay, to leave Jacob a while, and to come a little nearer our selves, in Moses
time we find this little time halfed again, he brings seven score to seventie,
The days (says he) of our age are threescore years and ten, and though men
be so strong that they come to fourscore years, yet is their strength then but
labor and sorrow, so soon passes it away, and we are gone. Psalm. 90.10. Psalm.
90.10.
Here is halfs of halfs, and if we half it a while, sure we shall half away all
our time: nay, we have a custom goes a little further, and tells us of a
number a great deal shorter, we are fallen from seventie to seven, in life's
leases made by us. Nay, what speak I of years, when my text breaks them all
into days? Few and evil have the days been, so our former translation,
without any addition of years at all: and (if you mark it) our life in
Scripture is more often termed days then years: the book of Chronicles, which
writes of men's lives, are called according to the interpretation, Words of
days: to this purpose we read, David was old, and full of days. 1 Chronicles.
23.1. 1 Chronicles. 23.1
and in the days of Iehoram, Edom rebelled. 2 Chronicles. 21.8. 2 Chronicles. 21.8
So in the New Testament, In the days of Herod the King. Matthew. 2.1. Matthew.
2.1.
and, in the days of Herod the King of Judea. Luke 1.5. Luke 1.5.
In a word, thus Job speaks of us, our life is but days, our days but a
shadow: we know nothing (says Job) and why so? our days upon earth are but a
shadow. Job 8.9. Job 8.9.


Lo here the length of our little life, it is not for ever; no, Adam lost that
estate, and he that lived longest after Adam, came short of the number of a
thousand years: nay, that was halfed to somewhat less then five hundred, and
that again halfed to little more then two hundred; Jacob yet halfs it again to
a matter of seven score, and Moses halfs that again to seventy, or a little
more: nay, our time brings it from seventy to seven: nay, Jacob yet brings it
from years to days few and evil have the dayes] of the year] of my life been.
Teach us, O Lord, to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom, Psalm. 90, 12. Moses Arithmetic is worthy your meditation; learn of
him to number, pray to God your teacher, think every evening there is one day
of your number gone, and every morning there is another day of misery coming
on; evening and morning meditate on Gods mercy, and your own misery. Thus if
you number your days, you shall have the less to account for at that day,
when God shall call you to a final reckoning.

days run on without any meditation in this kind: What think they of, but of
long days, and many years? And were all their days as long as the day of
Joshuah, when the Sun stood still in the midst of heaven, yet it will be night
at last, and their Sun shall set like others. True, God may give some a
liberal time, but what enemies are they to themselves, that of all their days
allow themselves not one? 1. Pet. 3.10.
If any man long after life, and to see good days let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile. How live they that would
needs live long, and follow no rules of piety? many can post off their
conversion from day to day, sending Religion before them to thirty, and then
putting it off to forty, and not pleased yet to overtake it, promise it
entertainment at threescore; at last death comes, and allows not one hour: In
youth these men resolve to reserve the time of age to serve God in; in age they
shuffle it off to sickness, when sickness comes, care to dispose their goods,
loathnesse to die, hope to escape, ma^tyrs that good thought. O miserable men!
if you have but the Lease of a Farm for twenty years, you make use of the time,
and gather profit; but in this precious farm of Time, you are so ill husbands,
that your Lease comes out before you are one penny worth of grace the richer by
it. Matthew. 20.6.
Why stand ye here all the day idle? there are but a few hours or days that ye
have to live; at last comes the night of death, that will shut up your eyes in
sleep till the day of doom.

You see now the term of our Lease, our Life lasts but Days.] and although we
live many days, Luke 19.42. Matthew. 6.12.
yet in this thy day, says Christ; and, Give us this day our daily bread, say
we as if no day could be called thy day but this day: if there be any more, we
shall soon number them, my text tells you they are not many, but few, Few and
evil have the days of my life been. Few]
OUr Lease is a Life, our Life is but Days, our Days are but Few. The
Phoenix, the Elephant, and the Lion fulfill their hundreds; but man dies when
he thinks his Sun yet rises, before his eye be satisfied with seeing, or his
ear with hearing, or his heart with lusting, death knocks at his door, and
often will not give him leave to meditate an excuse before he comes to
judgment; Is not this a wonder to see dumb beasts outstrip man's life? The
Phoenix lives thousands (say some); but a thousand years are a long life with
man: Methushalem (you saw) the longest liver, came short of this number; and
yet, could we attain to so ripe an age, what are a thousand years to the days
everlasting? If you took a little mote to compare with the whole earth, what
great difference were in these two? and if you compare this life which is so
short, with the life to come which shall never have end, how much less will it
yet appear? As drops of rain are unto the sea, Ecclus 18.9.
and as a gravel stone is in comparison to the sand; so are a thousand years
to the days everlasting. But will you have an exact account and learn the just
number? It was the Arithmetic of holy men to reckon their days but Few;] as
if the shortest cut were the best account. The Hebrews could subduct the time
of sleep, which is half our life. so that if the days of men were threescore
years and ten, Psalm. 90.10.
here is five and thirty years struck off at one blow. The Philosophers could
subduct the time of weakness, which is most of life; so that if vivere be
valere that only a true life, which enjoyes good health, here is the beginning
and the ending of our days struck off at a second blow. The Fathers could
subduct all times not present, and what say you to this account? were the days
of life at noon, man grown to manhood? look ye back, and the time past is
nothing; look ye forward, and the time to come is but uncertain: and if time
past and time to come stand both for ciphers, what is our life but the present?
and what is that but a moment? Nay, as if a moment were too much, look at
Scripture, and you will see it brought to a lesser pass: Job (for his part)
goes about to subduct the time of his birth, which is the bud of life; Let the
day perish (says he) wherein I was born; nay let it not be joined unto the
days of the year, nor let it come into the count of months, Job 3.6. Job 3.6.
Solomon could subduct not only childhood but the time of youth too, which is
the strength of life: Take away grief out of thine heart, and cause evil to
depart from thy flesh; for childhood and youth both are but vanity, Eccles.
11.10. Eccles. 11.10.
Paul could subduct the time of sin, which is the joy of life, She that lives
in pleasure (lives not, nay she) is dead while she is alive, 1. Tim. 5.6. 1.
Tim. 5.6.
Sum all and suppose that the time of birth, and childhood, and youth, and
sin were gone, to what an epitome were man's life come? Think of this all ye
that travel toward heaven, had we not need to make haste, that must go so
long a journey in so short a time? How can he choose but run, that remembers
his days are few? nay, that every day runs away with his life? The workman
that sets a time for his task, he listens to the clock, and counts the hours,
not a minute must pass, but his work goes onwards: how then do we neglect our
time while we should serve God? Work while it is day, John 9.4. 2. Cor. 6.2.
says Christ; and, this is the day of salvation, says the Apostle. Would you
know your task? you must work: would you know the time? it is this day: a great
task, a short time, had we not need with Moses to number our days, lest we
loose a minute? It is true, of all numbers we cannot skill to number our days:
we can number our sheep, our oxen, our fields, our coin; but we think our days
are infinite, and never go about to number them. The Saints that went before us
cast another account; Moses had his tables, Job had his measures, all agree
both for measure and number, magnitude and multitude, our life is but short,
our days are but few. Few] and evil they have been.

Give me leave a little to amplify on this point: would we thoroughly know the
shortness of out time, the fewness of our days? I shall then set before you
the magnitude of the one, and the multitude of the other:

And first, for the magnitude of the time of our life; A man (say the
Philosophers) is Microcosmus, a little world: little for goodness, but a world
of wickedness. Of this world if you will have the dimensions according to the
rules of Geometricians, the length, breadth, and depth of our short life; then
first for our length from East to West, from our birth to our burial. I need
not to take so many paces, as will make mill passus, a mile; our little life
bears no proportion to such a length: I dare not say as Stobaeus relates, that
our life has the last of a cubits length: Psalm. 39.5.
for that is more then the Scripture will afford it: it is but a span, or hand
breadth, says David, that is little: nay, Alcaeus in carmine Lyrico, says, it
is but an inch long, that is less: nay, Punctum est quod vivimus, and adhuc
puncto minus.
says Plutarch, All our life is but a prick, a point: yet less, says Seneca,
it is a point that we live, and less then a point. that is less then either I
can say, or you conceive. What is it? not a mile, but a cubit, but a span, but
an inch, but a point, nay less then that: here is little longitude of life.
Well, but our latitude perhaps is greater: no, take a measure if you please
from one pole to another, as we stand betwixt the terms of life and death and
weresoever we are, death is within an hand-breadth of our life: if we be on the
sea, there is but a thick board betwixt us and drowning: if on the land, there is
but a shoe-sole betwixt us and our grave: if we sleep, our bed is our bodies
grave, and there is but a sheet, (perhaps a winding sheet) betwixt us and it:
when we are awake, our body is our souls grave, and there is but a few skins
(as say Physicians) betwixt death and us. What is it? but the breadth of an
hand, of a board, of a shoe-sole, of a thin sheet, of a small skin: there is
little latitude you see. Well, but our profundity may help all this: go to
therefore, and see what that is. I shall not lead you down many steps, for
indeed there are not many steps to lead you down: in one word come to the
center of the heart of man: The Grecians to express the shallowness of this
life, give the same name to the heart, that they do to death. (...) is the
heart, the author of life; and (...) is destiny, the worker of death; to show
that as every man has an heart; so death has a dart for every man.
Christians! mortals! consider your magnitude in all these dimensions; alas, how
is it that many of you make your selves so great? what mean those titles which
you take upon you? Your Greatness, Your Highness, your -- I know not what. O
consider the mortality of your bodies and that will tell you the just Mors
sola fatetur quantula sunt hominum corpuscula. Juvenal. Psalm. 90.10.
scantling of your selves.

2. For the multitude of our days, he was branded with the name of a fool,
that thought he had many years to live. Moses tells us, The days of our years
are threescore years and ten, Psalm. 90.10. But now (as you heard) we value our
life but at seven years, as if six years we had to labor, and to do all we had
to do; but the seventh were a Sabbath to rest with God, Revel. 14.13. Revel.
14.13.
nay yet the Scripture comes somewhat lower, and because a plurality might
cause a security, it bestows but a unity upon our years, thus Jacob in this
text reckons of a great number of one year, The days of the year of my life
are an hundred and thirty year. Genesis 47.9. Genesis 47.9.
nay Austin comes shorter, and compares our life to a quarter of a year, like
Jehoahash reign, which lasted about three months time. 2 Kings 23.31. 2 Kings
23.31.
nay, the Scripture descends from months to days, Few and evil are my days,
says Jacob: implying that this life is but a few days, or but Vita nostra,
non diuturna, sed diurna.
one day, as some would have it, which is the meaning of Christ's prayer, Give
us this day our daily bread. Matthew. 6.11. Matt. 6.11.
And yet that we may not think our death a great way off, the Scripture tells
us, it is not a day to come: no, boast not of to morrow, for thou know not
what a day may bring forth. Prove. 27.1. Prove. 27.1.
thy day is this present day, and therefore says the Apostle, To day if you
will hear his voice, Heb. 3.7. Heb. 3.7.
nay, to speak further, this day (says Job) is past already, we are but of
yesterday, Job 8.9. Job 8.9.
nay, as if a day were too long for the life of man, most resembles it to the
grass that grows up in the morning, and is cut down in the evening, Psalm.
90.6. Psalm. 90.6.
and Gregory compares it to Ionahs gourd, that came up in a night, and
perished ere the day was come, Jonah 4.10. Jonah 4.10.
The evening and the morning make but one day. Genesis 1.5. but Quem dies videt
veniens superbum, hunc dies videt abiens jacentem.
our day is often times an evening without a morning, and often times a morning
without an evening. Nay, yet to go lower, as if half a day were more then our
life could parallel, Moses compares it to a watch, which is but the fourth
part of a night. Psalm. 90.4. Psalm. 90.4.
yea and as if this were longer then our life does last, the Scripture calls it
but an hour. John 5.25. John 5.25.
The hour is coming, and now is, says Christ: nay our life is but a minute, or
if we can say less, a moment, in a moment they go down to the grave, says
Job, Job 21.13. Job 21.13.
and in a moment shall they die says Elihu. Job 34.20. Job 34.20.
And a lying tongue is but for a moment, says Solomon, Prove. 12.19. Prove.
12.19.
and our light affliction is but for a moment, says Paul, 2 Cor. 4.17. 2 Cor.
4.17.
Lo here the length of our little life, this is the gradation that God makes of
it: at first a matter of seventie years, but these were tythed from seventie to
seven, this number again was made no number, one single year: a year? nay a
month, nay a day, nay an hour, nay a minute, nay a moment, as soon as we were
born, we began to draw to our end. Wisd. 5.13. Wisd. 5.13.
There Is but one poor moment which we have to live, and when that is spent, our
life is gone, How? but one? and a moment? one is the least number that is, and
a moment the shortest time that ever was: O what mean men to plot and project
for the time to come, as if this life would never be done? O consider of the
littleness of the time that thou have to live! O consider of the greatness of
the matter that depends upon it; thy body, soul, heaven, and hell, all hangs on
this thread, a short life, a few days.] Few] and evil have the days of my
life been.

You have learned Moses Arithmetic to number your days; practice a while, and
you find this use. busy, because his time is short, Revel. 12.12. Rev. 12.12.
and are you worse then Devils? is not your time shorter? and yet are you more
negligent? how do you give way to that old serpent? he delays no time to bring
you to hell, and ye neglect all times to get you heaven: What is your life but
a Jonas gourd, suddenly sprung up, and by and by withered again, and gone?
whatsoever ye do, your wheel whirls about apace: in a word, ye die daily, and
you all know thus much, that you have every one of you a poor soul to save. I
have wondered at men, that desire time after time, one time after another, why
if your souls perish, the day will come soon enough. It makes me weep (said one
of a better stamp) when my hour-glasse is beside me, and I see every drop of
sand follow other so speedily. Your days are but few, and yet who knows
whether this day his sun may set? Take heed, you unregenerate, if death come
unawares, it is the price of your souls how you are provided! Who (alas) would
defer to be good, that knows not how soon he may go to judgment? The enemy
keeps a daily watch, a friend prepares for your welcome, and are you such
enemies to your selves, that never are prepared to welcome death?

regenerate or unregenerate, the best counsel thou can learn, is to be still
in a readiness; think every day thou risest to be thy day of death, and every
night thou go to bed, that thou art laid down in the grave: if thou
should forget, will not each object be a remembrancer? thy sheets, of thy
winding sheet; thy coverings, of thy clasping dust; thy sleep, of thy death;
with whom (I may say truly) thou shakest hands every night: who can forget his
grve, that lies him down in his bed? and who then would not so provide himself,
as if every night he went to his grave? Our days are but few, and the night
will be ere long that we die indeed. What are we but Tenants at will in this
Clay Farm? the foundation of all the building is a small substance, always
kept cold by an intercourse of air, the pillar is but a little breath, the
strength some few bones tied together with dry strings, howsoever we piece and
patch this poor cottage, it will at last fall into the Lords hands, and we must
give surrender only in this tenor, Few] and evil have the days of my life
been.

You now see the time of our Lease to the full, out life lasts but days, our
days are but few, who is so fond to settle his care on this Lease, that so
soon is exspired, nay, with a blast is gone out? The man that is wedded to this
world, enjoyes neither length of days, nor a day of joy; as he is mortal, so
is he miserable: you shall see my Text join both the hands, nothing indeed but
death can loose the bonds, the days of my life are few, the few days of my
life are evil; few in number, evil in nature; neither many, nor good, but
few, and evil. Evil.]
OUr life is but days, our days are but few, our few days but evil: Into
what a sea of misery have I now rushed sail? Evil life, evil days; but few,
yet evil.

There waits on our life Sin, Punishment.


Both these are evil; Sin, as the father, plays the Bankrupt; Jam. 1.15.
and Punishment, the son, must pay the debt: first, Lust conceives and brings
forth sin, then sin being finished brings forth death. Here is both the
work and wages, first we commit, and then we suffer evil.

The evils we commit are sins, and see what a troop of enemies march about
us; if you exspect the battle in array, what say you to those evils original?
these are the inheritance which we have from our first parents; it is the same
infection that distilled from them abides in us, and therefore the same
punishment is due to us, that fell on them. O the floud-gate of evils that now
are opened! Adams sin is ours by imputation, we are twigs of one root,
streams of one fountain, and by the same reason partakers of one sin. And as
no evil is alone, so besides that imputed, we have another inherent, this is
the proclive disposition that we have to evil, because of the loss of those
powers that we had to good; First, Primo persona infecit naturam, sed post
natura infecit personam: Polanus.
the sin of the person infected nature but now the sin of nature infects
the person: Is not the mind doubtful of the ways of God? Is not the will
prone to all manner of evil? Are not the affections disordered in their
actions? But as for goodness, and holiness, and virtue, and grace, and
temperance, and innocence, all these ornaments are lost; Adam received them for
himself and us, and therefore lost them from us, as from himself: what wonder,
if we being spoiled, nature be left naked; a rotten root must needs bear rotten
branches; and if the first man be infected with sin, what follows, but a
corruption of the whole nature of man?

But these are but the seeds, what say ye to the offspring? Evils original
beget evils actual, Dictum, vel factum, vel concupitum, contra legem aeternam.
Aug. l. 22. contra Faust. cap. 27. initio tom. 6.
and such are they (as Austin defines them) Whatsoever we say, or do, or think
against the Law eternal. How many of these Furies haunt us? our saying, doing,
thinking, all is evil that is against Gods command: his will is the rule that
should measure all our actions, our actions are the frame that should be
measured by his will; here then is sins material and formal, the actions of
man diverted from the will of God; and if all these be evils, how many evils
are they all?

Look at our omission of good duties, and come they not in like moats in the
Sun? How many alms have we denied? How many blessings have we refused? How many
Sermons have we neglected? How many Lords days have we misspent? This was the
sin of that rich man, of whom though Lazarus had no hurt, yet because he
could receive no good therefore he was tormented in that flame. You know a day
will come, Luke 16.
when a bill of negatives shall be framed against the wicked, not what ye
have done, but what ye have not done: I was hungry, Matthew. 25.42, 43.
and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a
stranger, and ye lodged me not; I was naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and
in prison, and ye visited me not, Matthew. 5.42. It is the not doing your duties
must incur that heavy sentence, Matthew. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed. Mere harmless men are no fit members for Gods
kingdom; if you mean to avoid evil, you must neglect no good: alas, who
would slip any occasion, that considers the just revvard of this evil of
omission.

But these are not half the count, there be evils of Commission, whereby we
fight against God, and provoke his justice against us: of all the Commandments
which we should perform, there is not one precept which we have not broken; God
himself is dishonored, his worship is neglected, his name is blasphemed, his
days are profaned: if we go any further parents are disobeyed, injury is
maintained, adultery is committed, robbery is practiced, false witness is
produced, covetousness is followed: thus is the manner of our keeping the
Commandments, from the first to the last having transgressed against all. Psalm.
51.9.
Hide thy face from my sins, O Lord, and put away all mine iniquities. We had
need to pray, Hide them, for if they be not hid, how many of these evils will
rise up in judgment against us?

But here is no end, there be evils external that accompany the body, and
what part of the body is not possessed with some evil? Look at the senses, and
wherein have thou employed thine eyes, but in beholding vanity? wherein thine
ears, but in hearkening to lies? wherein thy tasting, touching, smelling, but
in sensual pleasures? and as the senses, so are the members full of evil,
Esai. 1.5. Jer. 17.9. Jam. 3.8. Prove. 30.14. Esai. 1.15. Esa. 59.7. Esa. 1.6.
The head is sick, the heart deceitful, the tongue unruly, the teeth as
swords, the jaws as knives, the hands are full of blood, and the feet swift to
shed blood. Thus from the sole of the feet to the crown of the head, there is
nothing whole, but wounds, and swellings, and sores full of corruption, Esa.
1.6.

And if these be our outward, what be those inward evils? should I thrust my
hand into your bosoms, O how leprous should I pluck it out again! that
Understanding created full of light, 1. Cor. 2.14.
is now so blind, that it perceives not the things of the spirit of God,
neither can it know them, for they are spiritually discerned. No doubt there is
in us a remaing spark of Nature, and that is the light of reason which makes us
men; but if you look at this reason, it perceives only natural and external
things; it can perceive thy house adorned, thy lands tilled, thy grounds
stocked; but those spiritual blessings, celestial promises, eternal
privileges, it cannot see, nor so much as think of: What are all our thoughts
but vanity, and imagination of man's heart, but only evil, Genesis 8.21. Genesis
8.21.
Neither is this all, God framing man's soul, planted in it two faculties, the
Understanding that informs, and the Will that follows: and as the
Understanding, so is the Will; it receives from Reason (her Counselor)
sensual advice, and sends forth to the Affections (her Courtiers) injunctions
of vanity; here is a Counselor indeed, what is it but reason without reason?
and here is a will indeed, what is it but a slave to sin, without any will to
good? Man is so holden captive with the yoke of sin, that of his own nature he
can neither aspire by desire nor travel by endeavor to any goodness. Calv.
Instit. l. 2. c. 4.
I say not, but (as Bernard) to will is in us all, but to will evil is of
nature, to will good is of grace, away then with our abilities, and confess we
with the Apostle, that to will is present with me, but I find no means to
perform that which is good, Romans 7.18. Romans 7.18.


And yet this is not all, take a view of those affections which attend the
will, and how are all evil? It is God should be the object both of our will and
affections, and what say you? do you love him, and fear him, and trust in him,
and serve him? your sins say, no: we can do nothing that good is, but we run
upon evil; see thine anger like a Serpent, thy desire like a Wolf, thy fear
like an Heart, thine envy like a Viper, all thy passions are become sensual,
and Every man is a beast by his own knowledge, Jer. 10.14. Jer. 10.14.


Blessed God! what a world of evils are within us? Orat. Manass.
We have sinned (O Lord) above the number of the sands of the seas, our
transgressions (O Lord) are multiplied, our offenses are exceeding many: Many
sure, that contain these streams, and yet how many are the rivolets that issue
from them? There be evils of weakness against God the Father, whose attribute
is Power; there be evils of ignorance against God the Son, whose attribute is
Wisdom; there be evils of malice against God the holy Ghost, whose attribute
is Love. Can we add any more? Mark but our thoughts, our delights, our
consents to evil: or if these be not enough, see a swarm indeed that
continually assault us, anger, hatred, envy, distrust impatience, avarice,
sacrilege, pride, despair, presumption, indevotion, suspicion, contention,
derision, exaction, (give me leave to breathe in the numbering of this bedroll)
perjurie, blasphemy, luxury, simony, perplexity, inconstancy, hypocrisy,
apostasy: here is a number numberless, gross sins, little sins, known sins,
hid sins; Who can understand his errors? O Lord, cleanse me from my secret
faults, Psalm. 19.12. Psalm. 19.12.
The days of life are few, but the evils God knows how many; he that would
number them may tell a thousand, and yet not tell one of a thousand: Can the
proudest Pharisee justify himself? Remember the swarms that lurk in thy
venomed conscience, number thy wanton words, thy carnal thoughts, thy
unchristian gestures, thy outrageous sins, and come they not in by troops and
herds, thicker then the frogs in Egypt? well may we stand amazed at their
number, and as convicted prisoners, cry for that Psalm of mercy, Miserere mei.
Lord have mercy on us, most evil wretched sinners.

Thus you see, Beloved, how evil be our days, since every day we do evil: then
to wander no further, now we have found such a world of them, will you see them
in a map? here is evils original, evils actual, evils of omission, evils of
commission, evils of the body evils of the soul; well may we pray, Deliver us
from evil: what, so many evils of sin? now the Lord deliver us. David's burden,
Psalm. 38.4.
Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and as a weighty burden, they are too
heavy for me to bear? There is in sin (says Austin) both weight and number,
and is any one so dull or dead, that he is sensible of neither? go ye to the
balance, and what a mass lies upon you? enough and enough again to sink you
down to hell: go ye to the count, and what a swarm comes upon you? a million,
and a million of millions to keep you out of heaven; when all your sins must be
called to account before that Judge of the world, what account shall be given
of this account that is endless? see them like the stars, only these set and
rise, but your sins rise, and never set; see them like your hairs, only these
shed and lose, but your sins grow ever more and more; see them like the sands,
only these are covered with the floods and waters, but your sins lie still
open and are ever before you: think on these stars, these hairs, these infinite
innumerable sands of sins, and when all is done, let your tears be the flood to
hide them over. Psalm. 6.6.
It was David's saying, Every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with my
tears: if your days be evil, let not your night slip without repentance; go
not to bed, but beat your breast with the Publican; lay you not down, but
withal lift up your voice Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: How sweet a rest
does that night bring, whose sleep is prevented with the consideration of our
sins? though we are begirt with a thousand devils this would be as the watch of
our souls, and the safeguard of our persons.

When I speak thus of tears or repentance, I argue not a causality or merit;
only I infer a necessary presence of repentance in those that obtain pardon
of sin. All that I positively affirm is this, that repentance is the means or
way which God has appointed antecedently to to pardon. Act. 3.19. Jer. 4.14.
washing away your sins with tears, that I fear you never took much notice of
the multitude of your sins: should I tell you that you brought sin enough with
you to damn you, when you first came into this world; should I tell you, that
you have every one committed thousands, and thousand of thousands of actual
sins and yet any one of those thousands is enough to send you packing to hell:
You would think these strange points; but if God be true, there is no sin of
man, either originiall or actual, either of omission or commission, either of
the body, or of the soul, which without repentance will not produce eternal
death: and therefore in Gods fear take notice of your sins, set before you the
Commandments of God, and thereto comparing your life, you may find out such a
catalogue of your sins, that will thoroughly convince you of your damnable
estate,

You may ask, to what end should we be so careful to find out our sins? I
answer to a very good end, both in respect of the Unregenerate, Regenerate.


First, in respect of the unregenerate: this is the first step of repentance;
this is one of those paces that will lead you toward heaven. You may be sure,
without repentance no heaven, without confession no repentance, and without
finding out sin there can be no confession. It were good therefore, and a
singular means to bring you out of corruption into Christianity, and out of the
state of nature into the kingdom of grace, that you would every one of you
have a Catalogue of your sins. If you will not, I can tell you who will, there
is an adversary called Satan (the adversary of mankind) that stands at your
back, and (I may say figuratively) with a scroll in his hands, wherein he
writes down your sins; not a day passes on, but he can easily tell how many
sins you have committed all day. Lord, that men would think on it! Are you about
any sin? at that very time Satan is registring the act, and time and place,
and every circumstance: now woe, woe to man, that lets Satan do his work for
him! Would you do this your self, would you but study for a Catalogue of your
own sins, that so you might confess them to God, and repent you thereof, this
would be a dash in the devils book, so that he could not have whereof to accuse
you; but if still you go on securely in sin, and never go about to call your
sins to remembrance, a day will come (woe worth the day) when that roaring Lion
shall set all your sins and transgressions in order before you: then shall you
read (perforce) your sins original and actual, of omission and commission,
of your bodies and souls. And I must tell you, herein is a great policy of
Satan, he lets you alone in your security a while, if you will not trouble
him, he will not trouble you; if you will not tell your own sins, neither
will he tell you of them; but he will change his note (at furthest) when your
few evil days finish: it is the very case as many creditours deal with their
debtors, while they have any doings as they say, and are in trading, they will
let them alone, in policy they will say nothing; but if once down the wind, in
sickness, poverty, disgrace, or the like, then comes Sergeant after Sergeant,
arrest upon arrest, action upon action: just thus is Satan's dealing with the
unregenerate man; if you will but sin, and never call your selves to a
reckoning, inpolicie he will say nothing, but when the score is full, and death
comes to arrest you, then will he bring out his black book of all your sins
committed all your days. O I tremble to speak of it! then shall your sins fall
as foul on your souls, as ravens on the fallen sheep, and keep you down for
ever in the dungeon of despair.

Secondly in respect of the regenerate; that you have ready by you (or by
heart) a catalogue of your sins, is necessary in many respects.

First, to humble you: for no sooner shall the poor soul look on all the sins
he has committed, both before and after his regeneration, but confessing them
in prayer, it will pull down his heart, and make the wound of his remorse to
bleed a fresh, as before: and therefore this catalogue is most necessary in
days of humiliation.

Secondly, it is necessary to prepare you for the receiving of the Sacrament;
for indeed I would have none to presume to taste on that Supper, but first to
view over all his sins, and to confess them in payer to his heavenly Father:
there be many that in Confession look on their sins, as they do on the stars
in a dark cloudie night, they can see none but the great ones, of the first or
second magnitude, it may be here one and there one; but if they were truly
illightened, and informed aright, they might rather behold their sins, as
those innumerable stars that appear in a fair frostie winters night; they are
many, and many: and therefore take a little pains in composing your catalogue,
that so you may confess all (at least for the kinds) before you presume to come
near that Table of the Lord.

Thirdly, it is necessary in times of desertion, or visitation: yea, if the
Lord shall please to exercise you with any cross, or disgrace, or
discountenance, loss of goods, disease of body, terror of soul, or the like;
you may be sure as no misery comes but for sin, so then the enumeration of
your sins from a bleeding broken heart, is the prime and first means to cause
that Sun of mercy to break through the clouds, and to beget a clear day; alas,
our days are evil, and sure we have as good reason as ever Jacob had to
confess it: for my part, though I keep my catalogue to my self, yet in the
general I cannot but confess to you all, My days have been evil, evil, evil:
Few and evil.

And now we have done with the work, it rests that you should know your wages;
there be days of sin, and then days of sorrow; as you have spent your days,
so must you have your rewards; first we trespass, and then we pay for it;
first we sin, and then we suffer evil. evils original fill up the scene, and
what a multitude of evils do enter with them? No sooner had Adam sinned, but a
world of miseries fell on man, so that as the infection, in like manner the
punishment distills from him. Romans 5.12.
By one man (says the Apostle) entered sin into the world: what, sin alone? no,
but death by sin, and so death went over all men Romans 5.12. Infants
themselves bring their damnation with them from their wombs; or if that be
omitted, how many are the miseries of this life, as the forerunners of that
judgment? Look at the mind and what think ye of our ignorance, not only that
of wilful disposition, but (as the Schools distinguish) of pure negation; if
it be not a sin, what is it but a punishment for sin? that our understanding
should be obscured and darkened, our knowledge in things natural wounded, in
supernatural utterly extinguished: O the miserable issue of that monster Sin!
But as evils come by heaps, so of the same parent here is another brood,
Ignorance and Forgetfulness; and is not this a misery, after all our time and
study to get a little knowledge, quickly to forget that we are so long a
learning? Man in his whole state, before the fall, could not forget things
taught him; but now (as the hourglass) we receive in at the one ear, and it
goes out at the other; or rather (like the sieve) we always keep the bran, but
let the flower go, so apt are we to retain the bad, but we very easily forget
the good. And is this all? nay, yet more evils; see but our affections, and to
what a number of infinite sorrows, griefs, anguishes suspicions, fears,
malices, jealousies, is the soul of man subject? So prone are we to these
miserable passions, that upon any occasion we fall into them; or for want of
cause from any other, we begin to be passionate with our selves: Why have thou,
O Lord, set me against thee? I am become irksome and burdensome even unto mine
own self, Job 7.20. Job 7.20.


Alas, poor man how art thou beset with a world of miseries? and yet, as if all
these summed up together, could not make enough, look at the body, and how many
are its sufferings? In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, said
God, Genesis 3.19. Genesis 3.19.
The Spider spins, and weaves, and wastes her very bowels to make her net, and
when all is done, to what purpose serves it, but to catch a fly? If this be
vain work, how vain is man in his fond imitation? the birds and beasts can feed
themselves, without any pains, only man toils night and day, on sea and land,
with body and mind; yet all is to no purpose, but to catch a fly, to protract
a life, or to procure some vanity. And yet, as if misery had no mean; besides
our industry, how is this body stuffed with many an infirmity? all the
strength of man is but a reed, at best shaken, perhaps broken, howsoever
weakened by every wind that blows upon it. The Physicians distinction of
Temperamentum ad pondus, and justitiam, gives us thus much to learn, that no
constitution is ever so happy, to have a just temper according to its weight;
some are too hot others too cold all have some defects, and so are disposed to
all kind of infirmities: man cannot carry himself, but he must needs carry
about with him many forms of his own destruction. De ipso corpore tot exsistunt
morborum mala, ut nec libris Medicorum cuncta comprehensa, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l.
22. cap. 22.
The books of the Physicians tell us of many diseases, and yet many are the
diseases which their books cannot tell of: we see in our own days, most labor
of new sicknesses, unknown to our fathers; or if any of us be free from any of
these, yet every ones body nourishes the causes, and may be a receptacle of
a thousand diseases. How evil is sin, that incurs so many evils of punishment?

But as if all were too little (because our sins are so many) if you will
number any more, here is yet another reckoning, evils original, and e^^ls
adventitious, evils of necessity, Quid de innumeris casibus qui forinsecus
corpori formidantur? Aug. ibid.
and evils of chance. Austin says, What shall we say of those innumerable
accidents that befall a man? as heat, and cold, and thunder, and rain, and
storms, and earthquakes, and poisons, and treasons, and robberies, and wars,
and tumults, and what not? go whither you will, and every place is full of
some of these evils: if you go on sea, every wave threatens you, every wind
fears you, Quae mala patiuntur navigantes? quae terrena itinera gradientes?
every rock and sand is enough to drown you: if you go on land every step
dangers you, every wild beast scares you, every stone or tree is enough to
kill you: if you go no whither, you cannot be without danger: Eli was sitting,
and what more secure? yet at the news of Gods Ark, 1. Sam. 4.17.
that it was taken by the Philistims, he falls down backwards, and his neck was
broken. Korah was standing, what more sure? yet as soon as Moses had made an
end of speaking, the earth opened her mouth, Number. 16.32.
and swallowed him and his family, and all the men that were with him. Indeed
Absalon was riding, and what way more ready to escape the enemy? yet, as the
mule carried him under a great thick oak, 2. Sam. 18.9.
his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and
the earth and the mule that was under him went away. Whatsoever we do, or
vvhithersoever we go, so long as we do evil, these evils will meet us. Go
into the ship, there is but a board betwixt thee and the waters: walk on the
ground, there is but a shoe-sole betwixt thee and thy grave: take a turn in
the streets, and so many perils hang over thee, as there are tiles on the
houses; travel in the country, and so many enemies are about thee, as thou
meetest beasts in the fields; if all these places be so dangerous, then retire
to thy house, and yet that is subject to fire, or water, or if it escape both,
it may fall on thy head: whithersoever we turn us, all things about us seem to
threaten our death. Our days are evil indeed, and who is it that is exempted
from every of these evils? Sinners are corrected, good men are chastened,
there is none escapes free.

To see a little the state of Gods own friends and children: Was not Abel
murdered by his brother? Noah mocked by his son? Job scoffed by his wife? Eli
slain for his sons? will you all at once? take one for all, and see Jacob our
Patriarch, a notable example of extreme infelicity: he is threatened by his
brother, banished from his father, abused ^y his uncle, defrauded of his wife,
was not here misery enough to break one heart? But after this, for another
wives sake, see him enter into a new service, Genesis 31.40.
In the day he is consumed with heat, in the night with frost: an hard service
sure! nay after this that he got his Rachel, see then a division betwixt her
and Leah, two sisters brawling for one husband yet neither content, after both
enjoyed him. Blessed Saint! how wast thou haunted with afflictions? yet after
this, he agrees his wives, and they all run from their father, and now see a
fresh pursuit; behind him, Laban follows which an Hue and Cry, before him Esau
meets him with 400 men; to go forwards intolerable, to go backwards
unavailable; which way then? It was an Angel of God, nay the God of Angels that
now must comfort him.

And yet again after his first entry into his own country, his wife Rachel
dies, his daughter Dinah is ravished his son Reuben lies with his concubine,
and if the defiling of a wife be so great a grief to the husband, what sorrow
and shame, when the wickedness is committed by a man's own son? what can we
more? If ye his heart be unbroken, here is another grief great enough to match
all the rest, his son, his Joseph (they report) is lost, and what news hears
he of him, but that he is torn with wild beasts? and now see a man of miseries
indeed! Genesis 37.34, 35.
He rends his clothes, he puts sackcloth about his loins, he will not be
comforted, but surely (says he) I will go down into the grave unto my son
mourning. Alas poor Jacob! what can they say to comfort him? To comfort, said
I? nay, yet hear the tidings of a new misfortune, a famine is begun, and
another of his sons is kept in prison: What a grief is here? Another in
prison, and nothing to redeem him but his only Benjamin; Genesis 42.36.
here is the loss of son after son, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and
now ye will take Benjamin, all these things are against me. We need no more, if
Jacob thus number, how many are the miseries he did daily suffer? would you
have the sum? He himself the best witness of himself, affirms it to Pharaoh,
Evil, Evil. Few and Evil] have the days of the years of my life been.

So miserable is our life, that no man can take his breath before some evil or
other do seiz on his person: if you would that we knit up all in one bundell,
there be evils original, evils adventitious, evils of the mind evils of the
body, evils that are common, evils of the chosen, we had need pray again,
Deliver us from evil.] What? so many evils of suffering? Now the Lord deliver
us. Psalm. 4, 2.
how can thou settle so great a vanity as sin in a field of such misery as
the world? O ye sons of men, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor, and have
such pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasing? Were men not mad in their
ways, or utterly besotted in their imaginations, well might these miseries of
our life breed their neglect of the world. Can we choose but wonder to see how
busily thou heapest up riches yet know not who shall eat the grapes of thy
planted vineyard? God gave thee a countenance erected toward heaven, and must
it ever be grovelling and poring on the earth? God gave thee a soul to live with
his blessed Angels, and will thou make it a companion fitter for no other then
brute beasts? Eccles. 5.12.
There is an evil sickness (says Solomon) that I have seen under the Sun;
and what is that, but riches reserved to the owners for their evil. See here
the just judgment of a righteous God, to this end is thy riches, thou would
live at ease, and outlast many years, therefore thy life is but miserable, and
thy death must be sudden, thy days are but few, and thy few days are evil.

days are evil,] and what then? this is to make trial of your love to God,
and a trial it is of Gods love to you.

First it makes a trial of your love to God; Certainly if you have but a spark
of this love, your days cannot be so evil, but in the midst of those evils you
shall find some inward consolations that will sweeten all. Genesis 29.20.
It is memorable how Jacob for Rachel serves Laban seven years, but yet (says
the Text) they seemed to him but a few days for the love he had to her. Nay,
after Laban had deceived him in giving him blear-eyed Leah in stead of
beautiful Rachel, Jacob then serves him another seven years prentiship; love
makes the heart cheerful in the worst of sufferings: though Jacob was consumed
with drought in the day, and frost in the night, Genesis 31.40.
which many and many a time made his rest and sleep to depart from his eyes;
yet his love of fair Rachel sweetens all his labors. Why thus thus will it be
with you that wait on the Lord your God: what though miseries come upon you as
thick as hail-storms in a sharp winters day? you may remember you have a better
master then Laban, a better service then Jacobs, a fairer prize then Rachel:
who is your master but such an one as will surely keep his covenant, even the
Lord your God? what is your service, but such a one as is most glorious and
honorable, even a light burden, a perfect freedom? what is your prize, but
such a one as surpasses all prizes whatsoever, even the beauty of heaven, the
beatificall vision of our blessed God, If then you but love God as Jacob did
Rachel, what matters it how evil your few days be? nay be they never so evil,
and were your days never so many, yet an hundred, a thousand years spent in
Gods service, they would seem but a few days for the love you bear to him. O
Lord work in us this love, and then command what thou will, persecution,
affliction, the Cross, or death, no service so hard, but we shall readily obey
thee.

Secondly, as your evils of sufferings try your love to God, so they are a
trial (or token) of Gods love to you: 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light affliction which is but for a moment causes unto us a far more
excellent and an eternal weight of glory; and if this be the end, who would
not endure the means? O divine mercy! therefore the dugs of this life taste
bitter, that thereby God may wean us from the love of this world to attain a
better: Certainly God is good unto us in tempering these so fitly; bitterness
attends this life, that thou may sigh continually for the true life. Would
thou not run through dangers for a kingdom? would thou not fetch a crown for
fear of a thorn? nay, who would not go to heaven, although it were with Eliah
in a whirlwind? I count (says Paul) that the afflictions of this life are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. Romans 8.18.
Come then ye that thirst for long life, believe in God, and you shall have
life eternal. All is well that ends well: though a while we sink in miseries,
yet at last the joys of heaven will refresh us: then shall we live in love,
rejoice in hymns, sing forth in praises the wonderful works of our Creator
and Redeemer, this is that life of heaven, and when our life ends here, Lord
grant us life everlasting.

Thus far have you seen the state of our life, this lease breeds sorrow, but
the reversion is our joy; no sooner shall this life exspire, but God will give
us the purchase of his Son, that inheritance of heaven; comfort then thy soul
that wades through this sea of miseries, and the Lord so assist us in all our
troubles, that he lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
Have been.]
OUr life is but days, our days are but few our few days but evil, and now
when all is done, we find all is out of date. Few and evil have] the days of
my life been.]

This last word is the leases exspiration: and why have been?] If you will
needs know the reason.

The time that is past is best known to Jacob. And the life of Jacob is but as
the time that is past. First, the time that is past is best known to Jacob:
Olim meminisse juvabit. Virg.
old men can tell old stories, and something it delights them to remember the
storms gone over them. We all know how Many years we have lived. Great miseries
we have suffered.


Jacob tells you, as you may tell each other, our years have been few, our few
years have been evil. To make this good. Have they not been few? Let me ask
some old man, whose hairs are dipped in snow, Eccles. 12.6.
whose golden ewer is broken, whose silver cord is lengthened, how many be thy
years? It may be thou will answer, Psalm. 90.10.
as Moses gives the number, a matter of threescore years and ten, or fourscore
years: I cannot say but it is a long time to come, but alas, what are these
fourscore years now they are gone? Tell me you that have seen the many changes
both of Moon and Sun, are they not swiftly run away? you may remember your
manhood, childhood, and I pray what think ye? was it not yesterday? is it not a
while since? who will not wonder to see how quickly it is gone, and yet how
long it was a coming? The time to come seems tedious, especially to a man in
hope of bliss, the time now past is a very nothing, especially to a man in
fear of danger: go down to those castaway souls that now suffer in hell
flames, and what say they of their life, but as soon as we were born we began
to draw to our end, Wisd. 5.13. Wisd. 5.13.
go down to those putrified bodies, and find amongst them the dusts of Adam,
Seth, Enosh, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered, Enoch, Methushalem, every one of whom
lived near to the number of a thousand years, are they not dead? and what is
their epitaph, but, they lived and dyed? Genesis 5. Genesis 5. Genesis 47.9.
To sum up all in one, and to make this one serve for all, Jacob is an
hundred and thirty years old (for so you see it registered in Gods book) yet now
being demanded to tell his age, he answers but Days, and his days are but
Few; how should they be many that now are gone already? these few days, they
have been.]

Scribit in marmore laesus.
2. And as time past tells our days, so it counts all our miseseries, who
cannot remember the miseries he does suffer? The poor, the sick, the banished,
the imprisoned, the traveller, the soldier, every one can write a Chronicle of
his life, and make up large volumes of their several changes. What is the
history of the Bible but an holy brief Chronicle of the Saints grievous
sufferings? See the miseries of the Patriarchs described in the books of Moses:
see the wars of the Israelites set down in the books of Joshua: see the
afflictions of David in the books of Samuel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, every
one has a book of their several calamities, and if all our miseries were but
thus abrevitaed, I suppose the world would not contain the books that should be
written.] There is no man so cunning to know his future condition; but for
those things which have been, every one can read them. Look then (beloved) at
the time now past, and will you not say with Jacob, your days have been evil?
Evil for your sins, and evil for your sufferings: if you live more days what
do you but increase more evils? the just man sins seven times a day, and
every one of us perhaps seventy times seven times: do we thus multiply sins?
and think we to subract our sorrows? think but of those storms that already
have gone over our heads famines, sores, sicknesses, plagues, have we not seen
many seasons unseasonable, because we could find no season to repentance? Our
Springs have been graves rather then cradles, our Summers have not shot up but
withered our grass, our Autumns have took away the flocks of our sheep, and
for our latest Harvest, the heavens themselves have not ceased weeping for us,
that never yet found time to weep for our selves. And as this procured the
famine, so famine ushered the pestilence. O the miseries miserable that at this
time fell upon us! Were not our houses infected? our towns depopulated? our
gardens made our graves? and many a grave a bed to lodge in it a whole family?
Alas, what an hideous noise was heard about us? In every Church bells towling,
in every hamlet some dying, in every street men watching, in every place, every
where, wailing and weeping, or groaning and dying. These are the evils that have
been,] and how should we forget them that have once seen them with our eyes?
Call to mind time past, Recole primordia. Bern.
was the rule of Bernard, and what better rule have we to square our lives,
then the remembrance of those evils which our lives have suffered? Look back
then with Jacob, and we have good reason to redeem the time past, because our
days have been evil.

few evil days have been.] As the time past is best known to Jacob so the
life of Jacob is but as the time past. Go to now (says St. James) ye that say
to day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and
buy and sell, and get gain, and yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow.
James 4.13. James 4.13.
It is a mere presumption to boast of the time to come: can any man say he will
live til to morrow? look back ye that trust to this staff of Egypt, there is no
man can assure you of this day, Man knows not his time, says the Preacher,
Eccles. 9.12. Eccles. 9.12.
As near as it is to night, it may be before evening some one of us may be
dead, and cold, and fitter to lodge in our graves under earth, then in our beds
above it; nay, assure your selves, our life is of no long continuance: what
speak we of to morrow, or this day? we are not sure of (that least of times
division) a very hour: watch therefore (says our Savior) and will you know
the reason? for ye know neither the day, nor the hour when the Son of man
will come, Matthew. 25.13. Matthew. 25.13.
The man with ten or twenty dishes set before him on his table, when he has
full intelligence that in one of them is poison, will he not refuse all, lest
in eating of any be run upon the hazard of his life? What is our life but a
few hours? and in one of them death must needs come; watch then for the hour
is at hand, and we know not how soon it will seiz upon us. This hour the breath
thou drawest may be thy infection, this hour the bread thou eatest may be thy
poison, this hour the cup thou tastest may be that cup that must not pass from
thee. But what speak we of this hour, seeing it is come, and gone? The sweetest
ditty that Moses sung, were his briefs and semibriefs of life, and what is it
but a watch? Psalm 90.4. Psalm. 90.4.
what is it but a sleep? Psalm 90.5. Psalm. 90.5.
we watch when it is dark, we sleep when it is night; if then our life be no
more but a night-work, what is truer then this wonder, our life is done, our
days they have been?

You may think we go far to prove so strange a paradox, yet Job goes further;
what are we but of yesterday, for our days upon earth are but a shadow? Job
8.9. Job 8.9.
See here the chronology of man's frailty, we have a time to live, and when is
it, think you? not to morrow, nor do day, nor this hour, nor last night, it is
as long since as yesterday it self. Are not we strangely deceived? What mean
our plots and projects for the time to come? why our life is done, and we are
now but dead men. To speak properly, In the midst of life we be in death, our
whole life being truly (if not past, yet) as the time past that is gone and
vanished. The similitude or resemblance will run in these respects, the time
past cannot be recalled. suddenly is vanished.
And so is our life: can we recall that which is fled away? the the life that
we led yesterday, you see it is gone; the life that we led last night, it is
past and done; the life that we led this morning, it is now a going, nay, it is
gone as soon as we have spoken. Nicodemus saying according to the flesh was
true, How can a man be born which is old? can he enter into his mothers womb
again, and be born? John 3.4. John 3.4.
How should a man recall that is past? can he receive again the soul once
given, and begin to live? man never so great in power, and spreading himself
like a green bay tree, a tree] most durable; a bay tree] most flourishing; a
green bay tree] that is most in prime, if any thing will stand at a stay, what
is more likely? yet he passed away (says the Psalmist) and lo he was gone, I
sought him but be could not be found, Psalm 37.35, 36. Psalm. 37.35, 36
We cannot stay time present, how should we recall time past? See here the man
on whom the eyes of the world are fixed with admiration, yet for all this he
passeth] without stay, he is gone] without recall, I sought him but to find
him] is without all recovery. Time was that Adam lived in paradise, Noah built
an Ark, David slew Goliath, Alexander overcame the world: where be these men
that are the wonder of us living? we all know they are long since dead and the
times they saw shall never come again. How fond was that fiction of Plato,
Annus Platonicus.
that after the revolution of his tedious year, then he must live again and
teach his Scholars in the same chair he sat in? our faith is above his
reason, for the heavens shall pass away, the elements shall melt with heat,
and the earth with the works therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. 2 Pet.
3.10.
Where then is the life of Plato, when all these things shall turn to nothing?
we may now for his learning praise him where he is not, and he may then for his
error be damned and tormented where he is. Is there any man with skill or
power can call back but yesterday? once only we read of such a miracle, but it
was only by the hand of God Almighty. Hezekiah was sick, 2 Kings 20. 2 Kings
20.
and to confirm the news that he must recover, he requires a sign. What shall
be the sign that the Lord will heal me, and that I shall go up into the house
of the Lord the third day? this was no temptation, for you see how the Prophet
gives him satisfaction, This sign shall thou have of the Lord; will thou that
the shadow go forward tenn degrees, or go back tenn degrees? Hezekiah thinks of
death, and the Prophet restores his life, not only a time of fifteen years to
come, but of ten degrees now gone, and thus it was observed in the dial of
Ahaz. This was a miracle that but once happened since the beginning of the
world; he then that sleeps away his time in exspectation of Hezekiahs sun,
may sleep till his death, and then not recall one minute of his life; as the
time, so our life, if once past it is irrevocable, irrecoverable.

2. And as it cannot be recalled again, so suddenly it is vanished;
Longitudinem hujus vitae sentiri non facit, nisi spes vivendi: nam nihil
videtur esse celerius quam quicquid in ea jam praeteritum est: Aug. in Psalm. 6.
Certe videres vitam tuam non fuisse diuturnam. Aug. in Psalm. 36.
Nothing makes life long, but our hope to live long: take away those thoughts
of the time to come, and there is nothing swifter then the life that is gone.
Suppose then thou had lived so long, as from Adam to this time: as Austin
says, Certainly thou would think thy life but short: and if that were
short, which we think so long, how long is our life, which in comparison of
that is so extremely short? The time once past, we think it suddenly past, and
so is life gone in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, so soon indeed,
before it can be said, This it is.] In every one of us death has ten thousand
times as much as life, the life that is gone is deaths, and the life yet to
come is deaths, our now is but an instant; yet this is all that belongs to
life, and all the life which any of us all is at once possessed of: here is a
life indeed, that so soon is vanished, before it can be numbered or measured;
it is no time but now, yet stays not till the syllable now may be written, or
spoken: what can I say? the life that I had when I began to speak this word, it
is now gone since I began to speak this word. May we call this life that is
ever posting toward death? Do we what we can, and could we do yet more, all we
do, and all we could do, were to no purpose to prolong our life: see how we
shore this ruinous house of our body with food, with raiment, with exercise,
with sleep, yet nothing can preserve it from returning to its earth; we go,
and we go suddenly, witness those two Cesars, who put off themselves
vvhilest they put on their shoes; Fabius (styled Maximus for his exploits, and
Cunctator for his delaying) yet could not delay death, till notice might be
taken he was sick: but how many examples in this kind have we daily amongst
us? you know how some lately have gone safe to bed, and yet in the morning
were found dead and cold: others in health and mirth laid down by their wives,
and yet ere midnight found breathless by their sides. What need we further
instances? You see how we go before we know where we are; the life that we had,
what is it but a nothing? the life that we have, what is it but a moment? and
all that we can have, what is it but a fleeting wind, begun and done in a trice
of time, before we can imagine it. In a word, our Sun now sets, our day is
done: ask Jacob (the Clock-keeper of our time) this Text tells the hour and now
struck, you hear the sound? our days are gone, few and evil they have been.]

The Conlusion: Occasioned by the death of CHARLES BRIDGEMAN, who deceased
about the age of twelve, in the year of our Lord 1632. he was a most pious
son of a most pious mother, both now with God.
HEre I thought to have finished my Text and Sermon; But here is a sad accident
to confirm my saying, and whilst I speak of him, what can I say of his state,
his person, his birth, his life, of all he had, and of all he was, but that
they have been.

Sweet rose, cropped in its blossom, no sooner budded, but blasted; how shall we
remember his days, to forget our sorrows? no sooner had he learnt to speak,
but (contrary to our custom) he betook him to his prayers; so soon had grace
quelled the corruption of his nature, that being yet an infant, you might see
his proneness to learn, nay, sometimes to teach them this duty, who waited on
to teach him his devotion: not long after he was set to school, where he
learned by book, what before he had learned by heart: the sweet care, good
disposition, sincere religion, which were in this child, all may remember which
cast but their eyes upon him. O God, how have thou bereaved us of this Gem?
Sure it is (as it was said of another) for this cause only, that it might
shine in heaven. But this was but the beginning of his days, now they are
past, they have been.]

Go a little further, we left him at school, but how learned he Christ, 1. Cor.
2.2. Psalm. 8.2.
and him crucified? this was the knowledge taught him by the Spirit of God in a
wonderful manner. Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou, O God,
ordained strength. To consider again his religious words, his upright actions,
his hearty devotions, his fear of God, all then concluded, as they did of John,
Luke 1.66.
What manner of child shall this be? No question the grace of God was with him.
If I should instance in any of these his frequencie in prayer, his reading of
Scripture, his reasoning with others to get knowledge to himself, we may wonder
at Gods power in this child's poor weakness: Excuse me whiles I tell nothing but
truths, and I hope they will tend to our own instruction. In the morning he
would not stir out of doors, before he had poured out his prayers; at noon he
would not eat any meat, before he had given the Lord thanks; at night he would
not lie down on his bed, before he had kneeled down on his knees: we may
remember those times, when sometimes that he had forgotten this duty, no
sooner had he been in bed, but up he would have got again, and so kneeling down
on his bare knees, covered with no garment but his linens, he would ask God
forgiveness for that sin of forgetfulness; neither have his brothers escaped
without his reprehension: for had they eat any meal or meat without a grace,
his check was usual; Dare you do thus? unless God be merciful unto us, this
bit of bread might choke us. The wise sentences, the religious words, which
often dropped from his mouth like honey can we remember them, and not grieve at
the death of him that spoke them? What comfort had we in those days? What
sorrow have we to think those days are done? Surely we cannot speak it without
bitterness of soul, they are gone, they have been.

Thus he lived: will you know how he died? First, a lingering sickness seized
upon him, against which to comfort him, one tells him of possessions that must
fall to his portion: And what are they? (said he) I had rather have the
Kingdom of Heaven, then a thousand such inheritances. Thus he minds Heaven;
and God, so minding him, presently sent him his sickness that should summon him
thither. And now how should I repeat his words with the life that he spoke them
dying? No sooner had God struck his body with that fatal sickness, but he
asks, and needs would know his souls estate: I have heard of the soul (said he)
but what is the soul? the mind? he questions, and questioning answers, better
(I fear) then many, too many gray headed amongst us; but the answer given, how
the soul consisted of the Will and the Understanding, he says, he is
satisfied, and now understands better then he did before. Another comes to him,
and then he begins another question, now he knows the soul, he desires yet to
know further, How his soul may be saved? O blessed soul, how wisely could
thou question for thine own souls good! The answer given, by faith applying
Christ's merits: he heard it, and had it, anon telling them, who before had
taught it him. Resolved in these questions, he questions no further, but will
now answer them, that go about to question him: One asks him, whether he had
rather live or die, he gives the answer, and not without Paul's reason, I desire
to die (said he) that I might go to my Savior. O blessed Spirit, bow did
thou inspire into this child thy wisdom and goodness! This done, his pain
begins again to afflict him, and this occasions another thus to question him,
whether he would rather still endure those pains or forsake his Christ? Alas
(said he) I know not what to say as a child, for these pains might stagger a
strong man, but I will strive to endure the best I can. Upon this he presently
calls to mind that Martyr, who being in prison, Thom. Bilney.
the night before his burning put his finger in the candle, to know how he
could endure the fire; O (said he) had I lived then, I would have run through
the fire to have gone to Christ. Sweet resolution of a silly child! who can
hear, and not wonder? wonder, and not desire to hear that he may wonder still?
Blessed child, had thou lived that we might have wondered at thy wisdom! but
his days were determined, and now is the number turned to this poor cipher,
they are not, they have been.

I cannot leave him yet, his sickness lasts long, and at least three days
before his death, he prophesies his departure, and how strange a prophecy? not
only that he must die, but foretelling the very day, On the Lords day (said
he) look to me. Neither was this a word of course, which you may guess by his
often repetition, every day asking till the day came indeed, What, is Sunday
come? At last the lookt-for day came on, and no sooner had the Sun beautified
that morning with his light, but he falls into a trance; What (think ye) meant
his blessed soul, whilst the body it self used such an action? his eyes were
fixed, his face cheerful, his lips smiling, his hands and arms clasping in a
bow, as if he would have received some blessed Angel, that there was at hand to
receive his soul; but he comes to himself, and tells them how he saw the
sweetest boy that ever eyes beheld, and bids them, Be of good cheer, for he
must presently go with him. One standing near, as now suspecting his time of
dissolution, bids him say, Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit; Psalm. 31.5.
Yes (said he) Into thy hands, Lord, I commit my spirit which is thy due; for
why? thou have redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. Who will not believe this
child now sings in Heaven, that so soon had learned this David's Psalm on earth?
I cannot hold my self, nor will I hold you long; but how may I omit his
heavenly ejaculations? Beloved, I beseech you pardon me whilst I speak his
words, and I will promise you to speak no word, but the very same formally
which were his own: Pray, pray, pray, nay yet pray, and the more prayers the
better all prospers: God is the best Physician: into his hands I commend my
spirit: O Lord Jesus receive my soul. Now close mine eyes, forgive me father,
mother, brothers, sister, all the world. Now I am well, my pain is almost gone,
my joy is at hand, Lord have mercy on me, O Lord receive my soul unto thee.
Where am I whilst I speak these words? Blessed Saint, now thou singest in
Heaven, God has bid thee welcome, the Angels are hugging thee, the Saints
rejoice with thee, this day is the Crown set on thy head, this day is the Palm
of victory in thy hand now art thou arrayed in the shining robes of Heaven, and
all the Host do triumph at thy corronation. Sweet soul, how am I ravished to
think upon thee! What joy is this? The Patriarchs salute thee, the Prophets
welcome thee, the Apostles hug thee, all hands clap for joy, all harps warble,
all hearts are merry and glad. O thou Creator of men and Angels, help us all
to Heaven, that when our days have been] we may all meet together in thy
blessed Kingdom.

I have done: turn back by the same thread that led you through this labyrinth,
and you shall have in two words the sum of this whole Text.

The time of our Lease what is it but our Life? what is this Life, but a number
of few days? what are these days, but a world full of evil? But a life, but
days, but few, but evil; can we add any more? Yes, Life is life howsoever we
live, and better you think to have a bad lease in being, then our life to be
quite extinguished; nay, be not deceived, this life is but death, the days
that we spend, they are past and done, few and evil they have been. Thus ends
the Text with the exspiration of our Lease: yet is not all done, when we loose
this life we have another freehold prepared in Heaven, and this is not leased,
but purchased; not for a life, but inheritance; not for days but for ever:
Cross but the words of my Text, and many and happy shall the ages of thy life
be in Heaven, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Deaths. Arrest.
LUKE 12.20. This night thy soul shall be required of thee.


Man's Body (we say) is closed up within the Elements, his Blood in his Body,
his Spirits in his Blood, his Soul in his Spirits and God or Satan in his
Soul. Who holds the possession we may guess in life, but then is it most
apparent when we come to death: The tree may bend East, or West, or North, or
South; but as it falls so it lies: Our affections may look up or down,
toward heaven or hell; but as we die we receive our doom, and then whose we are
shall be fully made manifest to all the world. There is a parable of poor
Lazarus, Luke 16.
whose life was nothing but a catalogue of miseries, his body full of sores,
his mind full of sorrows; what spectacle could we think more pitiful, whose
best dainties were but broken crumbs, and his warmest lodging but the rich man's
gates? Here is a parable of a certain rich man, who enjoyes (or at least
purposes) a delicious fare, he has lands verse. 16. Verse. 16.
fruits, verse. 17. 17.
buildings, verse. 18. 18.
and if this be the Inventorie, what is the sum? see it collected in the
verse succeeding, Soul, 19.
thou have much goods laid up for many years; now live at ease, Eat, drink, and
take thy pastime. These two estates thus different, how should they be but of
diverse tenures? Matthew. 6.24.
No man can serve God and Mammon. See Lazarus dying, and the Angels carry him
in-Abrahams bosom. See this rich man dying, and they (that is, devils) require
his soul. God receives one, and his soul is in heaven; Satan takes the other,
and drags down his soul to hell; he is comforted that received pains, and thou
art tormented that wast full of ease: this is the doom, and that he may undergo
this, death now gives the summons, This night thy soul shall be required of
thee.

The Text we may christen Deaths Arrest, it is we that offend his Majesty of
heaven, and his precepts are given unto Death to attach our souls. See here a
president, a rich man taken on a sudden, who must instantly appear before the
Judge of heaven: when? this night.] What? thy soul.] Why? it is required.] Of
whom? of thee.]

Or if this will not find the offender, see yet a more narrow search, every
word is like some dark closet, therefore we will open the windovvs that you may
have full light. This Text is Deaths Arrest, which as it must be executed, so
it admits of no other time but This] This what? this day, whilst the Sun gives
light to the world, and the light gives pleasure to the eye? this were some
comfort: no, but then suddenly whilst all sleep securely, not This day but
This night.] And what, this night? Is it to attach the body of some great
personage, whose looks might affrighten Officers had they come by day? No, let
his body rot in dust, vvhilest the Soul must answer his defaults: it is not
thy body; it is thy soul.] And what, of his soul? Is this a subject liable to
arrests? rather can they beg it at his hands, or will he yield it at their
fair entreaties? no, it is neither begged nor entreated; but by virtue of Gods
Writ, it is required.] And how required? of his sureties bound for his good
appearing? he has many friends, and all, either have or would have entered
bonds: no, he must go without bail or main-prize, it is not required of his
sureties, but himself; not of others, but of thee] is thy soul this night
required.

You hear the Texts harmony, of each string we will give a touch, and first
note the time, this night.

This.]
This? were it a fortnight, a seven-night, any but This] night, and his griefs
were lessened; the news is more heartlesse in that it comes more sudden. You
may observe, Then are the greatest losses when they come on us by heaps, and
without fear or suspicion of any such matter. Here was a man swimming in his
fullness, and a sudden death robs him of all his treasures. To give you a full
view, see his possessions, and how great was the loss, because of the
suddenness: This] night.

goods, whereof he boasted, are now confiscate; not a penny, not a dram, not a
mite shall be left him, save only a token of remembrance (I mean his
winding sheet) which he carries along with him to his grave.

goods and grounds both were took from him at his death; he that commanded so
much of earth must now have no more earth to pleasure him but a grave; what a
change was this? his grounds were fertile, Verse. 16.
and they brought forth plenteously, but a blast of death has struck both the
fruit and ground; and nothing is now left him but a barren Tomb.

lands and houses both went together. You may guess that great demeans must
have stately Halls: we read of his building, and especially of his Barns; when
these were too little for his store, he tells us, he will pull them down, and
he will build greater. He never thinks of any little room in the bowels of the
poor. Was his harvest so great that his barns would not hold it? Whence came
the blessing but from God? How is it then he forgets God that bestowed this
blessing? It is written, When ye reap the harvest of the Land, ye shall not
reap every corn of your field, neither shall thou gather the gleanings of the
harvest. How? not reap it? not gather it? what then? why, Thou shall leave them
for the poor, and for the stranger: I am the Lord your God, Levit. 19.9. Lev.
19.9, 10.
When Ruth came to glean in the fields of Boaz, that good Master commands his
servants, Ruth 2.15.
Let her gather among the sheaves, and do not rebuke her. Had this Worldling
been so pitiful to the poor, his barns might have stood, himself might have
lived, his soul have been saved. But now what a strange lot happens on him? his
Halls, Houses, Barns, Buildings, all run round in a dance of Death before his
eyes.

house and friends both left him when death came: The Parable is common: Ex
Damasceno
A man has three friends, two whereof he loved most entirely, the third he
made no account of: this man being sent for to come before his King, he desires
his first friend to go with him, but he could not, only he would give him
something for his journey: He desires his second friend to go with him, but he
would not, only he would bring him a little piece of his way: When both these
forsook him, he goes to the last, which before he esteemed least, and this
friend was the party that went with him to the King, and answered for him in
all his causes: This is the case of every man dying; the King our Judge sends
death his Sergeant to summon you to your judgment. Come to your first friends,
(I mean your riches) alas! they cannot go with you, but give you a sheet as
necessary for your journey: Come to your second friends (I mean your
acquaintance) alas! they will not go with you, but bring you to your graves, and
there leave you to your selves: Come to your last friends, which you now least
think of (I mean your Consciences) and you shall find that is the truest friend
that will go with you to the Judge, answer for you to the King, and either
acquit you, or condemn you; bring you to the gates of heaven, or deliver you to
the goal of hell. Have a care of your Consciences, if you mean to speed well at
this day: how blessed a man had this Worldling been, if only a good conscience
had accompanied him to the Judge of heaven? but now when death summons him,
there is no friend to solicit, no Advocate to plead no man to speak one word
in his souls behalf: it is his bad conscience keeps him company, and though all
others leave him, he can devise no means to shake this from him.

time, and what a loss was this? all his goods, grounds, barns, buildings,
were they more worth then the world it self, yet were they not able to restore
one minute of his time: if this could be purchased, what a rate would he give
for a little respite? nothing is now so precious as a piece of time, which
before by months and years he lavishly misspent: they that pass away time
with mirth and pastime, shall one day see to their grief what a loss they
have; now we revell it out, dally it away, use all means and occasions to make
it short enough; but when this golden shower is gone, and those opportunities
of salvation lost by negligence, then we may wish, and wish again, Oh had we a
little time, a little space to repent! Imagine that this worldling (whom now
you must suppose to lie frying in hell flames) were dispensed with for a little
time, to live here again on earth amongst us; would but the Lord vouchsafe him
one hour of a new trial, a minute season of a gracious visitation, oh how
highly would he prize, how eagerly would he apprehend, with what infinite
watching, praying, fasting, would he improve that short time, that he might
repent him? I know not how effectually this may work an your hearts, but I am
fully persuaded, if any damned creature had but the happiness to hear this
Sermon, you should see how his very heart would bleed within him; bleed said
I? nay, break and fall asunder in his breast like drops of water. Oh with
what inflamed attention would he hear and listen? with what insatiable
grasping would he lay hold on Christ? with what streaming tears would he
water his cheeks, as if he would melt himself, like Niobe, into a fountain?
Blessed God! how fond are foolish men that never think of this till their time
be lost? we that are alive have only this benefit of opportunity, and if we
neglect it, a day will come (we know not how soon) that we shall be past
it, and cannot recover it, no not one hour, if we would give a thousand, ten
thousand, worlds for it. What can I say? reflect on your selves, you that have
souls to save; you have yet a little time (and the time present is that time)
what then, but so use it now, as when you are gone, you need not with grief
vvish you here again?

Sixthly, yet more loss, and that is the loss of losses, the loss of his
soul; his riches, lands, houses, friends, time, and all were nothing to his
soul. This is that Paragon, Peer, Rose, and Spouse of our well-beloved Christ.
How many a tear shed he to save it? what groans cries, prayers, tears, and
blood, poured he before God, that he might redeem it from the jaws of Satan?
and is this lost notwithstanding all this labor? O sweet Jesu! what a loss is
this? thou wast born, lived, died, and that a shameful death, (the death of
the cross) and all this suffering was to save poor souls: yet see a soul here
lost, and the blood of God, though able, not effectual to redeem it. Whose
heart would not melt into blood, that but knew this misery? Suppose you could
see the soul of this wretched worldling, no sooner had it left the body, but
immediately was it seized on by infernal fiends, now lies it on a bed of fire,
tortured, tormented scourged, and scorched in those furious flames; there his
conscience stings him, his sorrow gripes him, his pain so handles him, that he
cries, and roares, Woe, woe, and alas evermore. Who now for shadows of short
pleasures, would incur these sorrows of eternal pains? In this world we can
weep and wail for a loss of trifles: an house, a field, an Ox took from us,
is enough to cruciate us; but how shall we bewail the loss of a soul, which no
sooner plunged into that pit of horror, but it shall feel a punishment without
pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without comfort,
torment without ease, a world of mischief, without all measure or redress?
Such is the loss of this man's silly soul, whilst he was cheering it with an
homebred solace; Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years: God
whispers in his ears, and tells him other news: What? of his soul: how? it is
required: when? this night: a fearful sound unlookt-for message, speedy
dispatch, no more delays, nor days, only this night, for then must his soul be
taken from him.

all is lost on a sudden. Losses that come by succession are better born with,
but all on a sudden is the worst of all; yet such is the misery of man, when he
goes, all goes with him, and he and all pass away on a sudden: As in the days
of Noah, they ate, and drunk, married, and gave in marriage, and knew nothing
tell the flood came, and took them all away; so is the coming of the Son of
man, Matthew. 24.38. Mat. 24.38.
How many have been thus took tripping in their wickedness? Belshazzar in his
mirth, Herod in his pride, the Philistims in their banqueting, the men of
Ziklag in their feasting, Jobs children in their drunkenness, the Sodomites in
their filthiness, the Steward in his security, this Churl in his plenty:
miserable end, when men end in their sin. Call to mind this (O my soul) and
tremble: sleep not in sin, lest the sleep of death surprise thee: The hour is
certain, in nothing but uncertainties; for sure thou must dye, yet thou know
not on what day, nor in what place, Certa mors, incerta hora.
nor how thou shall be disposed when death must be entertained. Do you not see
most dye, whiles they are most busy how to live? he that once thought but to
begin to take his ease, was fain that very night (whether he would or no) to
make his end: would you have thought this? Psalm. 37.35, 39
he but now flourished like a green bay tree, his thoughts full of mirth, his
soul of ease, but I passed by, and lo he was gone: gone, whether? his body to
the grave, his soul to hell, in the midst of his jollity, God threats
destruction, Devils execution, death expedition, and thus like a Swan he sings
his funerals. There is that says, I have found rest, and now will I eat
continually of my goods, and yet he knows not what time shall come upon him,
and that he must leave those things to others, and dye, Ecclus 11.19. Eccles.
11.19.
The higher our Babel-tower of joy is raised, the nearer it is to ruin and
confusion. Sodom, in the heat of their sins, had that shower of fire poured on
their heads: Nebuchadnezzar, in the height of his pride, became suddenly a
beast, that ruled before as a King: once for all, here was a man solacing,
singing warbling out pleasant songs of ease and pastime; but (O the misery) in
the midst of his note here is a sudden stop; he dreams of longs and larges,
he hears of briefes and semi-briefes, no longer a day, but this very night, and
then shall thy soul be taken from thee.

See here the many losses of one man, his goods, his grounds, his houses, his
friends, his time, his soul, and all on a sudden, whilst the word is spoken,
this] night.

Remember his judgment, thine also may be likewise: Ecclus 38.22.
unto me yester-day, and unto thee to day. Whose turn is next God only knows,
who knows all. Is not madness in the hearts of men whiles they live? Eccles.
9.3.
In the least suspicion of loosing worldly riches, all watch and break their
sleep; you shall see men work, and toil, and fear, and care, and all too little
to prevent a loss; but for all these losses which are linked together, our
riches, lands, houses, friends, time, and soul, and all we have, there is few
or none regards them: O that men are so careful in trifles, and so negligent
in matters of a great importance! It is storied of Archimedes, that when
Syracuse was taken, he only was sitting secure at home, and drawing circles
with his compass in the dust. Thus some we have, that when the eternal
salvation of their souls is in question, they are handling their dust, nothing
but suites or mony-matters are their daily objects: but (alas) what will your
goods or grounds, or houses, or friends avail you, when death comes? Where did
ever that man dwell, that was comforted by any of these, in that last and
sorest conflict? Give me a man amongst you, that spends the span of his
transitory life in grasping gold, gathering wealth, growing great, enriching
his posterity, without any endeavor, or care to treasure up grace against that
fatal hour; and I dare certainly tell him, whenever he comes to his deaths
bed, he shall find nothing but an horrible confusion, extremest horror and
heaviness of heart; nay, his soul shall presently down into the kingdom of
darkness, and there lie and fry in everlasting fires. Nor speak I only to the
covetous (though my text seem more directly to point at them) but whosoever
thou art that go on daily in a course of sin, in the fear of God unbethink
thee of mortality: some of you may think I speak not to you, and others, I
speak not to you; the truth is I speak to you all, but to you more especially
that to this day have sinned with delight, but never as yet felt the smart for
sin upon your souls or consciences: O beloved! this is it I call for, and must
call for till you feel a change, a thorow-change in you: would but some of you
at this present examine you consciences, and say, whether have I not been
inordinate in drunkenness, or wantonness, or coveteousness? whether have I not
sworn an oath, or told a lie, or dissembled in my heart, when I have spoken? O
who can say amongst you, I am clean, I am clean? and assure your selves if you
are guilty, you must either feel hearts grief, or you can never be provided for
deaths dismal arrest. If you were but sensible of sin, if you felt but the
weight and horror of Gods wrath for sin, I am verily persuaded you would not
take a quiet sleep in your beds for fear, and horror, and heaviness of heart:
what is it but madness of a man to lie down in ease upon a feather bed, and to
lodge in his bosom that deadly enemy, sin?

But (horror of horrors!) what if this night, whilst you sleep in your sin,
death should arrest you on your beds? This I tell you is no wonder, are not
sudden deaths common and ordinary among the sons of men? How many have we heard
that went to bed well over night, for ought any man could tell, and yet were
found dead in the morning? I will not say carried away out of their beds, and
cast into hell fire; whether it be so or no, the Lord our God knows: but
howsoever it is with them, if we for our parts commit sin, and repent not
thereof by crying, and sobbing, and sorrowing for sin; it may be this night,
(and that is not long to) you may sleep your last in this world, and then shall
your souls be hurried by Devils to that infernal lake, whence there is no
redemption. O beloved! O wretch, whosoever thou art! Can thou possibly sleep
in such a case as this? Can thou go to bed with a conscience laden with sin?
Can thou take any sleep (which is the brother of death) when thou lie now
in danger of eternal death? Consider, I pray, what space, what distance, how
far off is thy soul from death, from hell, from eternity? no more but a breath,
one breath and no more; no more but a step, one step and more: O beloved! were
not this lamentable, that some one of us that now are standing, or sitting,
should this night sleep his last, and to morrow have his body brought to be
buried; yea, and before to morrow morning have his soul (which the Lord forbid)
cast from his bed of feathers, to a bed of fire? and yet alas! alas! if any of
us this night dye in his sin, or in a state unregenerate, thus will it be with
him whosoever he be; to morrow may his body lie could under earth, and his soul
lodge in hell with this miserable rich man.

of whom I hope better things; it is good counsel for you all to exspect death
every day, and by this means, death foreseen cannot possibly be sudden; no, it
is he only dies suddenly, that dies unpreparedly, Watch therefore, says our
Savior, be ever in a readiness: and finally, that this rich man may be your
warning, you that tender your souls, learn that lessen of our Savior; Lay not
up for your selves treasure upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and
where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for your selves treasures in
Heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not
break through, nor steal: Mat. 6.19, 20. Mat. 6.19, 20.
You will say, What treasures are those? I answer: These treasures are those
stocks of grace that will last for ever, it is that circumspect walking, Ephesians.
5.15. Ephesians. 5.15.
that fervency of spirit, Romans 12.11. Rom 12.11.
that zeal of good works, Tit. 2, 14. Tit. 2.14.
that purity, which St. John makes a property of every true hearted professor,
1 John 3.3. 1 John 3.3.
In a word, it is the work, the life, the power of that prayer, that the rest
of our life hereafter may be pure and holy; these are heavenly hoords indeed, O
that we would treasure up such provision against the day of calamity! If while
it is called to day, we would make our peace with his heavenly Highness, by an
humble continued exercise of repentance, if in this time of grace we would
purchase Gods favor, and those rarest jewels of faith and a good conscience,
if now before we appear at the dreadful Tribunal, we would make God and his
Angels our friends in the Court of Heaven, O then how blessed would out deaths
be to us? came it never so suddenly, still should death find us ready, and if
ready, no matter how suddenly, yea though it were this] this night.

I have broke open the writ, and you see when it must be served this] night; but
in this Quando there is both suddenness, and sadness, it is not this day, but
this night] Let this] end this days discourse, and the next day we will lay
open the nights dark sadness: it is a dismal time, and God give us grace so to
provide, that we may be ready with oil in our lamps, and enter with our
Savior into his blessed Kingdom. Night.]
HE sins all day, and dies at night, and why at night? This you know is
frequent, and there is reason, most are begot, and born, and therefore dye at
night: but we must further then the lists of nature, this night was more then
ordinary, as being the fittest time to aggravate his grief: weigh but the
circumstances.

darkness, and this may increase the horror of his judgment: think but what a
fear seized on the Egyptians, Wisd. 17.5.
when no power of the fire must give them light, nor might the clear flames of
the stars lighten the horrible night that fell upon them. The Husbandmen, the
Shepherds, the workmen, Exodus 10.23.
all were bound with one chain of darkness, No man saw another, neither rose up
from the place where he was for three days, Exodus 10.23. Was not this fearful
darkness? you may guess it by the effects, they were troubled, and terrified,
and swooned, as though their own souls should betray them. Wisd. 17.18, 19.
Whether it were an hissing wind, or a sweet noise of birds, among the
spreading branches, or a pleasing fall of waters running violently, or a
terrible sound of stones, or the running of skipping beasts, or the noise of
cruel beasts, or the echo that answers again in the hollow mountains, these
fearful things made them to swoon for fear: And if thus the Egyptians, how was
it with this Worldling? a darkness seized on him that engendered a thousand
times more intolerable torments. Wisd. 17.21.
This was the image of that darkness which should afterward receive him, and
yet was he unto himself more grievous then the darkness. It was not an
outward, but an utter darkness, not only to be not seen, but to be felt and
feared. Imagine then what visions, what sounds, what sights, what sudden fires
appeared unto him? Unhappy Worldling, look round about thee; although it be
dark, here is something to be seen: above is the angry Judge, beneath is the
burning lake, before is gloomy darkness, behind is infallibe death, on thy
right and left hand a legion of evil angels, exspecting every moment to receive
the prey. Here is a sight indeed, able to break the very heart strings of each
seer. If some have lost their wits, by means of some dreadful sight; yea, if
the very suspicion of Devils have caused many men to tremble, and the hairs of
their heads to stand staring upright; what then was the fear and terror of
this man, when so many dreadful, horrible hellish monsters stood round about
him, now ready to receive him? O ye sons of men, stand in aw and sin not,
Psalm. 4.4.
commune with your own heart, and in your chamber, and be still: Will not this
fear you from your sins? Suppose then you lay on your beds of death, were the
Judge in his throne, your souls at the Bar, ths accuser at your elbows, and
hell ready open to shut her mouth upon you: O then, how would you curse your
selves, and bewail your sins? What horrible visions would appear to you in the
dark? horrible indeed? In so much (says Cyril. de vitae beati Hieron. ad fin.
Epist.
one) that were there no other punishment then the appearing of Devils, you
would rather burn to ashes, then endure their sights. Good God, that any
Christian should live in this danger, and yet never heed it till he sees its
terror! How many have gone thus fearfully out of this miserable world? I know
not what you have seen, but there is very few which have not heard of many, too
many, in this case: What were Judas thoughts, when he strangled himself that
his bowels gushed out again? What were Cains visions, when he ran like a
vagabond roaring and crying, Genesis 4.14.
Whosoever finds me shall slay me? What are all their affrights that cry when
they are a dying, they see spirits and Devils flying about them, coming for
them, roaring against them, as if an hell entered into them, before themselves
could enter it? I dare instance in no other but this wretched miser: What a
night was that to him, when on a sudden a darkness seized on him, that never
after left him? Thus many go to bed, that never rise again, till they be
wakened by the fearful sound of the last Trumpet: and was not this a terror?
whose heart does not quake? whose flesh does not tremble? whose senses are not
astonished whilst we do but think on it? And then what were the sufferings
of himself in his person? He might cry, and roar, and vvail, and vveep, yet
there is none to help him; his heart strings break, the blessed Angels leave
him, Devils still exspect him, and now the Judge has pronounced his sentence,
This night, in the dark, they must seiz upon him.

night both of darkness and drowsiness, or security in sin. He that reads the
life of this man, may well wonder at the fearful end of so fair beginnings:
walk into his fields, and there his cattle prosper; come nearer to his house,
and there his barns swell with corn; enter into his gates, and there every
table stands richly furnished; step yet into his chambers, and you may imagine
doun-beds curtain'd with gold hangings: nay, yet come nearer, we will draw the
curtains, and you shall view the person; he had toiled all day, and now see how
securely he takes his rest, this night, he dreams golden dreams, of ease, of
mirth, of pastime, (as all our worldly pleasures are but waking dreams) but
stay a while and see the issue: just like a man who starting out of sleep, sees
his house on fire, his goods ransacked, his family murdered, himself near
lost, and not one to pity him, when the very thrusting in of an arm might
deliver him: this, and no other, was the case of this dying miser: at that
night while his senses were most drowsy, most secure, death comes in the dark,
and arrests him on his bed: Awake, rich Cormorant! what charms have lulled thee
thus asleep? Can thou slumber whilst death breaks down this house thy body,
to rob thee of that jewel thy soul? What a deep, dull, drowsy, dead sleep is
this? O fool! this night is thy soul assaulted, see death approaching, Devils
hovering, Gods justice threatening, can thou yet sleep? and are thine eyes yet
heavy? Behold, the hour is at hand, and thy soul must be delivered into the
hands of thine enemies: heavy eyes! he sleeps still, his care all day had cast
him into so dead a sleep this night, that nothing can warn him until death
awake him, That thief is most dangerous that comes at night, such a thief is
death, a thief that steals men, Latro hominis.
which then is most busy whilst we are most drowsy, most secure in sin;
Hark the sluggard that lulls himself in his sins, Yet a little more sleep, a
little more slumber, is not his destruction sudden, and poverty coming on him
like an armed man? Prove. 6.11. Prove. 6.11.
Watch (says our Savior) for you know not when the master of the house
comes, at even, or at midnight, at the cock-crow, or in the morning, lest
coming suddenly he should find you sleeping Mark 13.35. Mark 13.35, 36.
Was not this the wretchedness of the foolish virgins? how sweetly could they
slumber? how soundly could they sleep until midnight? they never wake, nor so
much as dream to buy oil for their lamps: imagine then how fearful were those
summons to these souls, Behold the Bridegroom, go ye out to meet him. Matthew.
25.26.
Sudden fears of all others are most dangerous: was it not a fearful waking to
this rich man, when no sooner that he opened his eyes, but he saw deaths
ugliness before his face? what a sight was this? at his door enters the King of
fear, accompanied with all his abhorred horrors, and stinging dread: on his
curtains he may read his sins, arrayed and armed in their grisliest forms, and
with their fieriest stings; about his bed are the powers of darkness, now
presenting to his view his damnable state, his deplorable misery: what can he
do that is thus beset with such a world of woeful work, and hellish rage? his
tongue faulters, his breath shortens, his throat rattles, he would not watch,
and now cannot resist; the cry is made, the midnight come, God sounds
destruction, and thus runs the proclamation, This night so drowsy, thy soul
must be taken from thee.

drowsinesse and sadness. How is he but sad, when he sees the night coming,
and his last day decaying? Read but the copy of this rich man's Will, and see
how he deals all he has about him; he bequeaths his garments to the moth, his
gold to rust, his body to the grave, his soul to hell, his goods and lands he
knows not to whom, Whose shall these things be? Here is the man that made such
mirth all day, and now is he forced to leave all he has this night. It is the
fruit of merry lives to give sad farwels. You that sport your selves, and spoil
others; that rob God in his members, and treasure up your own damnations, will
not death make sorry hearts for your merry nights? a night will come as sad as
sadness in her sternest looks, and then what a lot will befall you? O that men
are such cruel Caitiffs to their own souls! Is this a life (think ye) fit for
the servants of our God, revelling, swearing, drinking, railing? what other did
this miser? he would eat, and drink, and revell, and sing, and then came fear
as desolation; and his destruction on a sudden as a whirlwind: If this be our
life, how should we escape his death? Alas for the silly mirth that now we
pleasure in! you may be sure a night will come that must pay for all, and then
shall your pleasures vanish, your griefs begin, and your numberless sins (like
so many envenomed stings) run into your damned souls, and pierce them through
with everlasting sorrow: away with this fond, Prove. 14.13.
foolish, sottish vanity, The end of mirth is heaviness says Solomon, Prove.
14.13. What will the sons and daughters of pleasure do then? all those sweet
delights shall be as scourges and Scorpions for your naked souls, Then (though
too late) will you lamentably cry out, Wisd. 5.8.9.
What has pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of riches brought
us? all those things are passed away as a shadow, or as a Post that passes
by: Look on this man as he lies on his bed of death, here is neither smile nor
dimple, All the daughters of music are brought low. Eccles. 12.4.
His voice is hoarse, his lips pale, his cheeks wan, his nostrills run out, his
eyes sink into his head, and all the parts and members of his body now lose
their office to assist him: Is this the merry man that made such pastime?
Sweet God! what a change is this? Esa. 3.24.
In stead of sweet smell there is a stench, in stead of a girdle a rent, in
stead of well-set hair baldness, in stead of beauty burning; in stead of mirth
mourning and lamentation, weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Must not
sadness seize on that soul which incurs this doom? Here is a malefactor
stands at bar, indicted by the name of Fool, charged with the guilt of treason,
condemned by the Judge of heaven, and this night (the saddest that ever he saw)
is that fearful execution, that his soul is taken.

a night of sin, and this does increase the sorrow. Psalm. 116.13.
How dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints? and we may say
on the contrary, How abominable in the sight of the Lord is the death of the
wicked? Was not this a grief to be took thus tripping in his wickedness? even
now whilst he was busily plotting his ease and pastime, death stands at his
door, and over-hears all his plots and projects. It was a death to his soul to
be took in his sin: hear how he roars and cries, O that I had lived so
virtuously as I should; had I embraced the often inspirations of Gods blessed
Spirit; had I followed his Laws, obeyed his Commands, attended to his will how
sweet and pleasant would they now be unto me? We and alas that I had not
foreseen this day, what have I done, but for a little pleasure, a fleeting
vanity, lost a Kingdom, purchased damnation? O beloved! what think ye of your
selves, whilst you hear this voice? you sit here as senseless of this
judgment, as the seats, the pillars, the walls, the dust nay, as the dead
bodies themselves on which you tread: but suppose (and it were a blessed
meditation) you that are so fresh and frolic at this day, that spend it
merrily, use it profanely swearing, revelling, singing, dancing; what if this
night, while you are in your sin, the hand of death should arrest you? Could I
speak with you on your deathbeds, I am sure I should find you in another case:
how? but sorrowing, grieving, roaring, that your time were lost; and these
words not heeded, whiles the time well served? how would you tear your hair,
gnash your teeth, bite your nails, seek all means possibly to annihilate your
selves? and can nothing warn you before death seize on you? take heed, if you
go on in sin, the next step is damnation. It was the Apostles advice, Romans
13.11.
Now it is high time to wake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nearer,
then when we believed, Romans 13.11. If this wretched man had observed the
present time, how happy had he been this hour of his departure? But as Officers
take malefactors, drinking or drabbing; so is he nearest danger, when deepest
in the mire of pleasure. Look at all those that are gone before us, and which
of them thought their end so near, while they lived so merry? I must needs
tell you, there is a fire, a worm, a sting, a darkness, an hell provided for
all wicked wretches, and there most certainly must you be this night, if you
die this day in your natural state of sin. Lord! that men should be so
strangely bewitched by the Prince of the air, as for the momentarie enjoyment
of some glorious miseries, bitter-sweet pleasures, heart-vexing riches,
desperately and wilfully to abandon God, and to cast themselves headlong into
the jaws of Satan. Such a prodigious madness seized on this Worldling, he
sings, he revels, he dallies, Plin. l. 7. c. 23.
then dies. Thus greatest evils arise out of greatest joys, as the ears with
vehement sounds, and the eyes with brighter objects, so many by felicity have
lost both their sense and being. Gallus dies in the act of pleasure, 2 Samuel
4.7. Number. 11.33.
Ishbosheth dies in the midst of sleep, the Israelites die in their day of
lust, this Worldling dies in that night of sin, even then on a sudden his
soul is taken.

a night of death, and this was the vvorst of all: the darkness, drowsiness,
sadness, sin, all were nothing to this, all nothing in themselves, if death
had not follovved: Aristot. lib. 3. mor. cap. 6.
this is that most terrible of all terribles, all fears, griefs, suspicions,
pains, as so many small brooks, are svvallovved up, and drowned in this Ocean
of misery. Now rich man! what say thou to thy barns, buildings, riches,
lands? Do these pleasure thee in this thy extreme and dying agony? Thou lie
this night on thy departing bed, burdened with the heavy load of thy former
trespasses, the pangs come sore and sharp upon thee, thy breast pants, thy pulse
beats short, thy breath it self smells of earth and rottenness: vvhither vvilt
thou go for a little ease or succor? what help can thou have in thy heaps
of gold, or hoord of wealth? Discip. de temp sermon. 118. ex Hum. in tract. de
septuplici timore.
should we bring them to thy bed, (as we read of one dying, commanded that
his golden vessels and silver plate should be set before him, which looking on,
he promised to his soul, it should have them all, on condition of his stay with
him, but the remedy being silly, at last most desperately he commends it to
the Devil, seeing it would not stay in his body, and so gave up the ghost.)
Alas, these trifling treasures can no more deliver thee from the arrest of that
inexorable Sergeant, then can an handful of dust. Wretched men! what shall be
your thoughts, when you come to this miserable case? full sad and heavy
thoughts (Lord thou know): you may lie upon your beds, like vvild bulls in a
net, full of the fury of the Lord: In the morning thou shall say, would God it
were evening; and at even thou shall say, would God it were morning: for the
fear of thine heart wherewith thou shall fear, and for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shall see, Deuteronomy. 28.67. Deuteronomy. 28.67.
Here is the terror of that night of death, when you may vvish with all your
hearts, that you had never been born; if the Lord once let loose the cords of
your conscience, what account will you make of crowns, of possessions? all
these will be so far from healing the wound, that they will turn rather into
fiery Scorpions, for your further torments. Now, now, now is the dismal time
of death, what will you do? whither will you go? to whom will you pray? the
Angels are offended, and they will not guard you; God is dishonored, and he
will not hear you; only the Devil had your service, and only hell must be
your wages. Consider this, ye that forget God, Psalm. 50.22.
lest ye be torn in pieces, and there be none to deliver you: It is cruel for
your souls thus to suffer, to be torn, and torn in pieces, and so torn in
pieces that none may deliver you. Better this Worldling had been a worm, a
toad, an adder, any venomous creature, then so to live, and thus to have died;
yet hither it is come, his sickness is remediless, his riches comfortless, his
torments easeless, still he must suffer, and there is none to deliver, he is
torn, torn in pieces, and none may deliver him. What need you more, now we are
come to this period? his glass is run, his Sun is set, his day is finished,
and now this night, the very night of Death, his soul is required, and
received of him.

Lo here the dismal, dreadful, terrible time of this man's departure, it was
in the night, a night of darkness, drowsiness, sadness sin, death, and
destruction. night? howsoever we pass away our time in sin, we must of
necessity, ere it be long, lie gasping for breath upon our dying beds, there
shall we grapple hand to hand with the utmost powers of death and darkness:
what should we do then, but sow our seed while the seed-time lasts? we have
yet a day, and how short this day is, God only knows: be sure the night comes
wherein none can work, Joh. 9.4.
and then what a fearful time will come upon us? I know there be some that
dream of doing good in another world, or at least will defer it longer, till
some time hereafter, such vain hopes of future performances has undone many a
soul: I must work the work of him that sent me, Joh. 9.4.
while it is day, says our Savior. The wayfaring man travels not in
darkness, but while the day shines on him, then he knows he is under the
protection of the Laws, the light of the Sun, the blessing of heaven; Joh.
11.9.
Are there not twelve hours in the day? if any man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this world; but if a man walk in
the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.] Do good then, and
lay hold of every season which may get you to heaven. Let the whole course of
your life be a conscionable preparative against death. Suppose every day your
last, as if at night you should be called to account before that high and great
tribunal: in a word, whatsoever you think, or speak, or do, say thus with your
self, Would I do thus and thus, if I knew this night to be my last? Who is it
would sin, if he thought at that instant he must go to judgment?

day, be sure the night will come to our condemnation: where be those wonders
that so dazzled our eyes, while the day shone on them? Where is Absaloms
beauty, Jezabels paint, Saul's personage; nay, where is this wretched
Worldling? he had a day to work out his own salvation, and that being lost, at
last came night, before he had gone two steps toward heaven. Joh. 12.35.
O beloved! walk while ye have light, that ye may be children of the light.
You may be sure the meanest soul that has the work of grace upon it, death is
to him no night, but the daybreak of eternal brightness. This may make us in
love with the sincerity of religion, this may make us to labor, and never
cease laboring till we have gotten out of the state of nature, into the state
of grace. O that I could say of every one of you, as Paul of the Ephesians, Ye
were once darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. Ye were once carnal, but
now are ye spiritual: ye were once unregenerate, Ephesians. 5.8.
but now are ye a first fruits dedicated to God. If it were thus with you, then
(to your comfort) upon your dying beds you should meet with a glorious troop of
blessed Angels, you should feel the glorious presence of the sweetest
comforter, you should see the glorious light of Gods shining countenance, you
should have a night (if it were night) turned all into a midday. Now the Lord
give you such a day, whenever you dye, through Christ our Lord.

You have heard the time of Deaths arrest,] This night.] Now for the party
we will make a privy search, and if we stir one word, we shall find him at next
door, it is thy soul.] Thy Soul.]
THe party under arrest is the rich man's Soul,] no warranty could prevail, no
riches satisfy, no strength rescue, death now demands it, and there is none can
redeem it, therefore This night they will have his soul.]

Every man has a jewel better worth then a world, Observe.
and the loss of this is so much more dear, by how much it is more precious.
What profits it a man to gain a world, and to lose his soul? (said our Lord and
Savior) Mat. 16.26. Mat. 16.26.
Nay, what are a thousand worlds when the soul is valued? Give me leave to open
the cabinet, and you shall see the jewel that is arrested; it is the Soul]

The Soul; what is that? Substantia creata, invisibilis, incorporea, immortalis,
Deo similima, imaginem habens creatoris sui. Aug. in lib. de definitione
animae. Dicearchus.
it is (says Austin) a substance that is created, invisible, incorporeall,
immortal, most like to God, as bearing the image of its Creator. Please you
that we illustrate this description, and you shall see how every word shows
forth some excellencies (as the glorious lustres) of this glorious pearl the
Soul.]

First, if you ask what is the Soul, it is a substance.] How fond were the
opinions of some Philosophers? one would have it to be nothing, [vox, and
praeterea nihil,] and how many of us are of this opinion? Do not we live as if
we had no souls at all? The epicure is for his belly, the ambitious for his
body, but who is he that provides for his soul? Sure we imagine it to be
nothing valuable, or how should our estimation of it be so gross and vile, to
prefer the body, to neglect the soul?] There were other Philosophers went a
pace yet further, and they gave it a being, Galen.
but what? no better then an accident, that might live or dye without death
of the subject; this they call (...) humorum, a certain temper composed of the
elements, or nothing but the harmony of those humors in the body. Is this the
soul? then of all creatures are men (say we), 1 Cor. 15.19.
of all men are we (says the Apostle) most miserable, most unhappy. Look at
beasts, and in this respect we and they are even as one condition, Eccles.
3.19. Eccles. 3.19. Eccles. 11.3. Mat. 27.51.
Look at trees, and in their corruption you may see, the like constitution both
of us and them. Look at stones, and by their dissolution we may argue this
temper of composition in them also: if then our soul were nothing but this
(...), not only men, but beasts, and plants, and stones, and metalls have a
soul: far be this from your thoughts, whose souls are prized to be of more
worth then a world, there being nothing in the world that may give a recompense
for our souls, Matthew. 16.26. Mat. 16.26.
Others have gone a little further, Antiqui Philosophir.
and they suppose it to be a substance: but how? only bodily, and not
spiritual; such gross conceits have many idolaters of the Deity, as if this
our image were of Gods own substance, and this substance nothing else but a
bodily being. A spirit (says our Savior) has not flesh and bones, Luke 24.39.
as you see me have. It is the body is the flesh, but the soul is the spirit:
the body you may see and handle, but the soul is not seen, not handled: as the
Disciples then did err in supposing a spirit when they saw his body, no less
is their error, in supposing a body where is only a spirit. Anima pessima
melior optimo corpore. Aug. de verb. Dom. Quid tibi cum carne? Bern. in
meditat. Plurimi Patres
The worst soul is better then the best of bodies. O precious soul (says
Bernard) espoused to thy God, endowed with his spirit, redeemed by his Son,
what art thou to the flesh, whose being is from heaven. Others again have
passed this opinion, and they call it a form: but what? only material, not
substantial, and such as are the souls of beasts that dye with their bodies,
as being deduced from the matter of some bodies pre-existent. It is not so with
the souls of men, which though for a while they are knit and united to this
house of clay, yet may they be separated from it, and subsist without it: this
is that goodness of God, that as our souls are intellectual, so their being is
perpetual, Dionys. c. 4. de divin. nom. aliquantulum a principio. 1 Cor. 4.7.
not but that our souls might dye (seeing every thing that is of nothing may
return into the same nothing whence it sprung) but that God so sustains them by
his glorious goodness, that as he gave the first being, so he would continue
that he gave. What have we, that we have not received? Or to speak of the
soul, what are we that God, and God only has not bestowed upon us? our
parents begot our bodies, God only gave our souls: our bodies are buried again
in the womb of our common mother, but our souls return to God, as to their
chiefest good. So immateriall is the soul, that neither will nor understanding
depends on the dying organ. What then is the soul? a nothing, an accident, a
body, a form only material: no, but on the contrary, an ens, a substance, a
spirit, a form, a substantial being of it self subsisting.

But we will ascend a little higher, it is a substance created,] not traduced,
(as some would have it.) I must confess the opinion was not a little strong,
that as our bodies, so our souls were both propagated from our parents.
Tertullian, In epist. ad Marcellin.
and the Fathers of the West (as Jerome witnesses) were most on that side: the
reason of this opinion was because of original sin, which defiles the soul,
as well as the body of each man sprung from Adam, they could see no means how
both were corrupted, except withal the soul were propagated. But are not our
souls as the Angels? and therefore if our souls, then may the Angels beget one
another; nay if this were true, what soul were generated, but another were
corrupted: for the rule is infallible, There can be no generation without a
transmutation, and so would every soul be subject to corruption. Concerning
that objection of original sin (if the soul were not traduced from the loins
of Adam, Magis credi debet quam quaeri, and quaeri facilius quam intelligi, and
melius intelligitur quam explicatur. Whitak. l. 1. de peccat origin. c. 8.
Fallacia divisionis.
how then should that sin be imputed to our souls?) I must confess the question
is intricate, we should rather believe it, then enquire of it, and we may
better enquire of it then understand it, and yet more easily understand it,
then express it. But so well as we can, we shall untie the knot. First then,
we say it is a fallacy to divide soul and body, for not the soul without the
body, nor the body without the soul, but the whole man sinned in Adam, as the
whole man is begot of Adam; so soon therefore as the soul is conjoined to the
body, and of the soul and body is constituted whole man, that man being now
made a member of Adam, is said to sin with him, and to derive that sin from
him. But for a further satisfaction, although the soul depend on God according
to its substance, yet is it created in that body which is produced of the
parents: thus in some sort we may say that the soul is begotten, ( non quoad
essentiam, sed quoad (...),) God only gives the essence, but to exist comes
from the parents. Arist. de anima 2. l. c. 1.
What is the soul but a form of the body? and of what body, but of that which
is organicall, as being apt for the soul? This aptness then whereby it is
prepared for the form, being received from the parents, we may say of the soul,
that thus it is generated, as not beginning to subsist before the body is
prepared. This is true in some sort, though not properly. Consider then the
excellency of man's soul, which is not born, but created,] and howsoever now it
is bespotted with sin, yet was it then pure and undefiled, as the untouched
virgin: how is it but pure, which the hands of God has made? it was the devil
that caused sin, but all that God made was good, and very good, Genesis 1.31. Genesis
1.31.
and such a soul has every man. Sedibus aethereis spiritus ille venit.
It is created by God, infused by his Spirit, of nothing made something, and
what something, but an excellent work, befitting such an excellent workman?

invisible.] Has any man seen God? or has any man seen Gods image (which is
the soul) and lived? Substances that are more pure are less visible. We see but
darkly through a glass, nay, the best eye upon earth looks but through a
lattice, a window, an obscuring impediment, mortal eyes cannot behold
immortal things; how then should this corruptible sight, see a spiritual
soul? the object is too clear for our weak eyes, our eyes are but earthly, the
soul of an heavenly nature. O divine being! not only heavenly, but heaven it
self: as God and man met both in Christ, so heaven and earth met both in man:
would you see this earth? that is the body, Out of it wast thou taken, and into
it must thou return, Genesis 4.19. Genesis 4.19.
would you see this heaven? that is the soul, the God of heaven gave it, and to
the God of heaven returns it, Eccles. 12.7.
Eccles. 12.7. The body is but a lump, but the soul is that breath of life: of
earth came the body, of God was the soul: thus earth and heaven met in the
creation, and the man was made a living soul, Genesis 2.7. Genesis 2.7.
the sanctified soul is an heaven upon earth, Est coelum sancta anima, habens
solemn intellectum, lunam fidem, astra virtutet. Bern super Cantic.
where the sun is understanding, the moon is faith, and the stars gracious
affections: what heaven is in that body, which lives and moves by such a soul?
yet so wonderful is Gods mercy to mankind, that as reason does possess the
soul, so the soul must possess this body. Here is that union of things
visible, and invisible: as the light is spiritual, incorruptible, indivisible,
and so united to the air, that of these two is made one, without confusion of
either; in like manner is the soul united to this body, one together,
distinguished asunder: only here is the difference, the light is most visible,
the soul is invisible, she is the breath of God, the beauty of man, the wonder
of Angels, the envy of devils, that immortal splendour which never eye has
seen, never eye must see.

incorporeall.] as not seen with a mortal eye so neither clogged with a bodily
shape: I say not but the soul has a body for his organ, to which it is so knit
and tied, that they cannot be severed without much sorrow or struggling: yet is
it not a body, but a spirit dwelling in it: the body is an house, and the soul
the inhabitant: every one knows the house is not the inhabitant, and yet (O
wonder!) there is no room in the house where the inhabitant lives not: would
you please to see the rooms? the eye is her window, the head is her tower, the
heart is her closet, the mouth is her hall, the lungs her presence chamber, the
senses her cinque ports, the common-sense her custom house, the fantasy her
mint, the memory her treasury, the lips are her two leaved doors, that shut
and open, and all these, and all the rest, (as the motions in a Watch,) are
acted and moved by this spring, the Soul. See here a composition without
confusion, the soul is in the body, yet it is not bodily: as in the greatest
world the earth is more solid, the water less, the air yet lesser, the fire
least of all; so in this little world of man, the meaner parts are of grosser
substance, and the soul by how much more excellent, by so much more spiritual,
and wholly withdrawn from all bodily being.

immortal.] It was the error of many Fathers, Scaliger. notae in nov. Test.
That bodies and souls must both die till doomes-day, and then the bodies being
raised, the souls must be revived. Were that true, why then cries Stephen, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit? or why should Paul be dissolved, that he might be with
Christ? Act. 7.59. Philip. 1.23.
Blessed men are but men, and therefore no wonder if subject to some error.
Others more absolutely deny the souls immortality, We are born (say they) at
all adventures, and we shall be hereafter, as though we had never been; (Why
so?) for the breath is a smoke in our nostrils, and the words as a spark raised
out of our hearts, Wisd. 2.2, 3.
which being extinguished, the body is turned into ashes, and the spirit
vanishes as soft air. What, is the soul a smoke? and the spirit no better
then the soft vanishing air; Matthew. 22.32.
wretched men! Have you not read what is spoken of God, saying, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? now God (says Christ) is
not the God of the dead, but of the living. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, they are not
dead then in (the better part) their souls, but passed indeed from the valley
of death, unto the land of the living. Whosoever lives and believes in me
(says our Savior) shall never die, John 11.26. John 11.26.
Not die,] against some, never die] against others: what can we more? only
live and believe in him that redeemed us, and be sure his promises shall never
fail us; our souls must live, live for ever. Sweet soul, blessed with the
felicity of eternal life! here is a joy unspeakable, that this soul now clogged
with cares, vexations, griefs, passions, shall one day enjoy those joys
immortal, not for a day, or two, Nullus erit defectus, nullus terminus.
(though this were more then we can imagine) but through all eternity; There
shall be no defect, nor end: after millions of ages the soul must still live in
her happiness, it is not of a perishing, but an everlasting substance.

soul goes higher; it is most like to God,] so far it transcends all earthly
happiness: I cannot say, but in some sort all creatures have this likeness;
every effect has at least some similitude with its cause, but with a
difference; some only have a being, as stones; others, being and life, as
plants; but man above all has a being, life, and reason, and therefore of all
other the most like unto his Creator.

Jacobs ladder: The soul is not only like God, but the image of God. I cannot
deny, but there is some appearance of it in the outward man and therefore the
body in some measure partakes of this image of the Deity, it was man, and
whole man that was corrupted by sin, and (by the law of contraries) it was man,
and whole man, that was beautified with this image. Please you to look at the
body, is it not a little world, wherein every thing that God made was good? as
therefore all goodness comes from him, so was he the pattern of all goodness;
that being in him perfectly, which only is in us partly. This is that Idaea,
whereby God is said to be the exemplar of the world: man then in his body being
as the worlds map, what is he but that image, in which the builder of the world
is manifest? but if you look at the parts of his body, how often are they
attributed (though in a metaphor, yet in resemblance) to his Maker? our eyes
are the image of his wisdom, our hands are the image of his power, our heart
is the image of his knowledge, and our tongue the lively image of his revealed
will: God therefore, before he made the body, said, Let us make man in our own
image: Genesis 1.26.
and what was the meaning, but that soul and body should both bear the image of
his Majesty? Be astonished then, ye men of the earth! If this dust, this clay,
this body of ours be so glorious, what think ye of the soul, whose substance,
faculties, qualities, dignities, every way represents Gods omnipotent Essence?
Look on this glass, and first for substance, is the soul invisible? why so is
God: No man has seen him at any time, Joh. 1.18. John 1.18.
Is the soul incorporeall? why so is God: We ought not to think him like unto
gold, or silver, or stone graven with art, Acts 17.29. Acts 17.29.
Is the soul immortal? why so is God: He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
who only has immortality, 1. Tim. 6.16. 1. Tim. 6.16.
Is the soul spiritual? why so is God: God is a spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in spirit, John 4.24. John 4.24.
Is the soul one essence? why so is God: There is one God and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.6.
See here the lively image of God in every soul of man. But there is another
character imprinted in every faculty, so that not only the substance, but the
powers of the soul bear this image in them: As there is one God and three
persons, so there is one soul and three faculties: the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost are but one God; the Understanding, Will, and Memory are but one soul:
the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the holy Ghost; so the Understanding is
not the Will, nor the Will the Memory: and yet the Father is God, the Son is
God, and the holy Ghost is God; so the Understanding is the soul, the Will is
the soul, and the Memory is the soul. I dare not say, but there is some
difference. Trinitatem in nobis videmus potius quam credimus, Deum vero esse
Trinitatem credimus potius quam videmus. Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 6. Psalm.
45.13. Ecclus 17.6.
This trinity in us we rather see it then believe it; but that Trinity of
Persons, we more believe it then see it: Howsoever then our soul is no proof of
the Godhead, yet is it a true sign of that image of God in the soul. Nay, yet
(as if this stamp were of a deeper impression) see the dowry of Gods Spouse,
and who wonders not at the qualities and conditions with which the soul is
arrayed? The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of
broydered gold. What say you to that heavenly knowledge inspired into us? God
that created man, filled him with knowledge of understanding, and showed them
good and evil, Ecclus 17.6. What say you to those heavenly impressions that are
stamped upon us? Ephesians. 4.24.
such are the new man's marks, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. These make the soul like God, and God loving to
the soul; is it not clad with righteousness, as with a garment? witness the
integrity of Adam, in that sweet subjection, his soul to the Lord, his
affections to the soul, his body to the affections, the whole man to God, as to
the chiefest good: and as truth and mercy meet together, so righteousness and
holiness kiss each other: this righteousness to God is it that makes us
righteous before God, and this is that holiness wherein we are created. O
blessed image! how nearly do thou resemble thy Creator? he is the pattern of
perfection, and we bear the image of that pattern. Be ye holy, for I am holy,
1. Pet. 1.15. 1. Pet. 1.15.
And yet again, as if this picture were of deeper die, how like is the soul to
its Creator in her full dominion over all the creatures? Cant. 6.3.
Thou art bountiful, O my soul, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
army with banners. What is it will not stoop to this Gods Vicegerent? Beasts,
and birds, and serpents, and things of the sea are tamed, and have been tamed
of the nature of man, Jam. 3.7. Jam. 3.7.
What a thing is this soul? she can came the wild, command the proud, pull down
the lofty, do what she will, by compounding, comparing, contemplating,
commanding. O excellent nature! that sit on earth, can reach to heaven,
may dive to hell, nothing being able to resist thy power, so long as thou
art subject to that power of God. Psalm. 8.6.
Is this the soul? Lo, what is man that thou art mindful of him? thou have
made him to have dominion in the works of thy hands, thou have put all things
in subjection under his feet, Psalm. 8.6.

O my soul, my soul! what can we say of such a creature? to sum up all, she
is in nature a substance, created by God, invisible of men, incorporeall with
Angels, immortal through grace, most like to God in a way of nearness, and
bearing his image in the glorious stamp of her created likeness. Is this the
darling of our Lord? where then is the rich man that has lost this pearl? he
that could tell his soul, Soul, Verse. 19.
thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink and take
thy pastime. Now on a sudden his soul is taken, and whose shall those things be
which he has provided? The loss of all losses is the loss of a soul, without
which, had we never so much, we could truly enjoy nothing; what trust then in
your earthly treasures? what stay in such broken staves of reed? one day you
shall find them most deceitful, leaving your naked souls to the open rage of
wind and weather, to the scourges and scorpions of guiltiness and fear: Could
you purchase a monopoly of all the world, had you the gold of the West, the
treasures of the East, the spices of the South, the pearls of the North, all
is nothing to (this incarnate Angel) this invaluable soul. O wretched
worldling! what have thou done then to undo thy soul? was it a wedge of gold,
an heap of silver, an hoord of pearl, to which thou trustest? see, they are
gone, and thy soul is required.] Alas, poor soul! whither must it go? to
heaven? to its Creator? to God that gave it? no, there is another way for
wandering sinners; Go ye into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels: thither must it go with heaviness of
heart, into a kingdom of darkness, a lake of burning, a prison of horrible
confusion of terrible tortures: O poor soul! what a misery is this? darkness,
burning, confusion, torments, are these the welcomes of his soul to hell? what
meant the rich man in his unhappy forecast? he propounded to his soul a world
of ease, of pleasure, of pastime; it proves far otherwise: this other world is
a world of torments, which (like infinite rivers of Brimstone) feed upon his
soul without ease or end. What avails now his pompous pride at his doleful
funerals? the news is sounded [hee is dead] friends must lament him,
passing-peales ring for him, an hearse-cloth wrap him, a tombe-stone lie over
him, all must have mourning suites, and (may be) rejoicing hearts; but all this
while his soul his going to judgment, without one friend, or the least
acquaintance to speak in his cause: O that his soul were mortal, and body and
soul to be buried both together in one grave! must his body die, and his soul
live? in what world, or nation? in what place or region? it is another world,
another nation, where Devils are companions, brimstone the fire, horror the
language, and eternal death the souls eternal life; never to be cured,
Bernard. in Medit.
and never must be ended. O my soul (says Bernard) what a terrible day shall
that be, when thou shall leave this Mansion, and enter into an unknown region?
who will deliver thee from these ramping Lions? who can defend thee from those
hellish monsters? God is incensed, hell prepared, justice threatened, only
mercy must prevent, or the soul is damned. View this rich man on his
deaths-bed, the pain shouts through his head, and at last comes to his heart,
anon death appears in his face, and suddenly falls on to arrest his soul; Is
it death? what is it he demands? can his goods satisfy? no, the world claims
them: must his body go? no, the worms claim that: what debt is this, which
neither goods, nor body can discharge? [Habeas animam ejus coram nobis] Gods
warrant bids fetch the soul: O miserable news! the soul committed sin, sin
morgaged it to death, death now demands it; and what if he gain the world, he
must lose his soul: This night [thy soul] shall be required of thee.

Animula vagula, blandula, said the heathen Emperor; Pretty, Adrian.
little, wandering soul, whither go thou from me? will thou leave me alone,
that cannot live without thee? O what conflicts suffers the poor soul, when
this time is come, must the soul be gone? help friends, physic, pleasure,
riches, nay, take a world to reprive a soul; so different are the thoughts of
men dying, from them living: now, are they for their pleasure, or profit, the
body, or the world; but then, nothing is esteemed but the soul. what can we
say? but if you mean your souls must be saved, O then let these precious, dear,
everlasting things breathed into your bodies for a short abode, scorn to feed
on earth, or any earthly things: it is matter of a more heavenly metal,
treasures of an higher temper, riches of a nobler nature, that must help your
souls. Do you think that ever any glorified soul, that now looks God Almighty
in the face, and tramples under foot the Sun and Moon, is so bewitched as was
Achan with a wedge of gold? no, it is only the Communion of Saints, the
society of Angels, the fruition of the Deity, Josh. 7.21.
the depth of eternity, which can only feed and fill the soul. So live then,
as that when you die, your souls may receive this bliss, and the Lord Jesus
our Savior receive all your souls.

soul: If the reward be so great (as you know it) to recover a sick body, Si
magnae mercedis est a morte eripere carnem, quanti est meriti a morte liberare
animam. Ambros. Offic. 1.

Quid est quod velis habere malum? nihil omnino: Aug. in quod. sermon.


which for all that must die, of what reward is that cure to save a soul, which
must ever, ever live? O sweet Jesu* why sheddest thou the most precious and
warmest blood of thy heart, but only to save souls? thou wast scourged,
buffetted, judged, condemned, hanged; was all this for us? and shall we do
nothing for our selves? What is it thou would have bad, if thou could
wish it good? not thy house, nor thy wife, nor thy children, nor thy good, nor
thy clothes, but no matter for thy soul; I beseech you, value not you souls at
a less price then your shoes; you can please the flesh with delicates, which
is naught but worms meat; but the soul pines for want, which is a creature
invisible, incorporeall, immortal, most like to God: are we thus careful of
pelf, and so careless of this pearl? certainly, I cannot choose but wonder,
when seeing the streets peopled with men that follow suits, run to Courts,
attend and wait on their Counselors for this case, and that case, this house,
or that land, that not one of these, no nor one of all us will ride, or run or
creep, or go to have counsel for his soul: I must confess, I have sometimes
dwelt on this meditation: and (Beloved, let me speak homely to you) be our
Counselors in this Town, every week solicited by their Clients? and have we no
Clients in soul-cases? not one that will come to us with their cases of
conscience? sure you are either careless of your souls, or belike you have no
need of particular instructions: O let us not be so forward for the world, and
so backward for the soul! yet I pray mistake not; I invite you not for fees, as
noble Terentius, when he had petitioned for the Christians, and saw it torn in
pieces before his face, gathered up the pieces, and said, I have my reward; I
have not sued for gold, silver, honor, or pleasure, but a Church: so say I, in
midst of your neglect; I have not sued for your good, or silver, for your
houses, or lands, but for your souls, your precious souls: and if I cannot, or
shall not woe them to come to Christ, God raise up some child of the
Bride-chamber which may do it better; if neither I, nor any other can prevail,
O then fear that speech of Elies sons, they hearkened not unto the voice of
their father, because the Lord would slay them: 1 Samuel 2.25.

In such a case, O that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night for your sins! O that I could wash your
souls with my tears from that filth of sin, wherewith they are besmeared and
defiled! O that for the salvation of your souls, I might be made a sacrifie
unto death! But the Lord be praised, for your souls and my soul Christ Jesus
has died; and if now we but repent us of our sins, and believe in our Savior,
if now we will but deny our selves, and take up his cross and follow him; if
now we will but turn unto him, that he may turn his loving countenance unto us,
if now we will but become new creatures, and ever-hereafter walk in the holy
path, the narrow way which leads unto heaven, why then may our souls be saved.
This is that we had need to care for, Cur carnem adornas, and animam, non
adornas. Hugo de claustro animae.
not so much for the body, as for the souls good: to this purpose says Hugo,
Why cloth we the body in silks, which must rot in the grave, and adorn not the
soul with faith and good works, which one day must appear before God and his
Angels. O think of this day, this night, this hour of death, for then must your
Souls be taken from you.

Thus far you see the rich man's arrest: God injoyns it, death serves it, the
time was this night, and the party is, his Soul.] God give us grace to provide
our souls, that when death arrests we may be ready, and then, O God, have thou
mercy on our Souls. Shall be required]
THe original is (...), They shall require it: wherein you have, the
Sergeants, Arrest.


The Sergeants, They,] and the arrest it self, They require] his soul.

We Will first take a view of the Sergeants.

They: who? not God, he knows not sinners, what should he do with a drunken,
profane, covetous, sensual soul, he that never so much as thought on God in
this life, will God accept of the commending of his soul to him at his death?
no, the Lord of heaven will none of it: he that forsook God, is justly forsaken
of God: See the true weight of this balance, he would not receive Gods grace
into his soul, and God will not receive his graceless soul into heaven. But who
then? will the Angels take it? no, they have nothing to do with the soul of a
dying sinner, the Angels are only porters for the souls of the just: Poor
Lazarus that could neither go, nor sit, nor stand for sores, it is he must be
carried on the wings of Angels, but for this rich man, not the lowest Angel
will do him poorest service. Who then? will the Saints receive it? no, they
have no such commission to receive a soul: that blind opinion (which every one
may blush at) that Saint Peter should be heavens porter, and that none may go
in, but to whom he will open: if it be true, why may not a Saint help a
departing soul? Away with this dreaming folly! not Peter, nor Paul, nor all the
Saints of heaven have any such privilege; if God will not hear us, what will
our prayers do to Saints? Heaven is too far off, they cannot hear, or were it
nearer they will not, cannot help: it is God must save us, or we perish ever.
Who then are the Sergeants? not God, nor Saints, nor Angels: no, there is
another crew, Death and Devils stand in a readiness, and they are the parties
that arrest this prisoner.

Stay, what would death have? the soul cannot die, and for the body, no matter
who receives it. O yes! there is a death of the soul, as well as of the body: I
mean not such a death whereby it may be annihilated, but a second death that
shall ever accompany it: this is a death of the soul, that will always keep it
in deaths pangs. But not to speak of this death, there is another death
temperall, that shall sever the soul and body each from other: these two twins
that have lived together since their first espousall, these two lovely ones
that were made, and met, and married by the hands of God these two made one,
till death them depart, and make them two again, now is their rufull time of
divorce: when death comes he gives over the body to the grave, and arrests the
soul, to appear in presence before Gods high Tribunal. Such a Bayliffe has
now laid hands on this rich man's soul, when he least thought on it, death comes
on a sudden, and arrests his person. O wretched worldling! who is this behind
thee? call we this Gods Sergeant? What grim, ugly, monstrous visage is this we
see? have ever any of you seen the grisly picture of death before you? how was
it but with hollow eyes, open skull, grinning teeth, naked ribs, a few bones
knit together with dry strings, as presenting to your eyes the most deformed
image of a man in moldes? But what is that in his hands? an hourglass, and a
dart: the one expressing the decreasings of our life, and the other deaths
stroke, that he gives us in our death. Such emblemes are most fit to express
mortality: and imagine such a thing to arrest this rich man, would it not
terrify him, whilst looking back, death suddenly claps him on his shoulder,
away he must with this messenger, all the gold and pearl of East and West
cannot stay him one hour: now rich man, what avails all thy worldly pleasure?
Had thou in thy hands the reigns of all earthly kingdoms, were thou exalted
as the Eagle, Obad. 1.4.
and thy nest set among the stars, yet all this, and whatsoever else thou
can imagine, is not worth a button: where did that man dwell, or of what
cloth was his garment, that was ever comforted by his goods, or greatness, in
this last and sorest conflict? See worldling, death requires thy soul, no bribe
will be taken, no entreatie will prevail, no riches rescue, nothing at all
redeem, death, death is impartial.

But (O horror!) death is not all, see yet more Sergeants, Devils, and Dragons
are about thy bed, and these are they that will hurrie away thy soul to hell.
How? Devils; O worldling stay thy soul, and never yield it! better to die a
thousand deaths, then to leave it in their hands; but alas, thou can not
choose, thy last hour is come, and here is neither hope, nor help, nor place of
any longer terrying. See but the misery of a miserable soul! what shall it do?
whither shall it fly from these damned Furies? would they take it, and tear it
into nothing, it were somewhat tolerable: but to tear it in pieces, and never
to make end of tearing, to give it torments without all patience or resistance;
this is that load which it cannot bear. and yet (O extremity!) it ever, ever
must be born. Think on this, O my soul! and whilst thou have a minutes stay in
this body, call upon God to prevent this arrest of Devils: was it not (think
ye) a terror to this rich man, when so many hell hounds waited for his soul?
we read of one man, Hartmundus Schedel. in vit. Pap.
who being took away with a Devil through the air, was said so to roar and
yell, that many miles distant his noise was heard, to many a man's trembling.
And if a soul had but the organs of a sound, what a shreek would it make, being
seized on by a Devil? witness the cries of many desperate souls, when as yet
they are safe in their beds, how do they roar and rage? how do they call and
cry, Help, help us, save us, deliver us from these fiends about us! these are
those evening wolves enraged with hellish hunger, these are those ramping Lions
ever ready to devour our souls, these are those walkers up and down the earth,
which are now come and entered into this rich man's lodging. Matthew. 24.28.
Wheresoever the dead carcass is, thither (says our Savior) will the Eagles
resort: and wheresoever a damned soul is, thither with a lacrity will these
spirits come: O how they fly and flutter round about him, what fires do they
breathe to enkindle them on his soul? what claws do they open, to receive her
at the parting? and what astonishment is that poor soul in, that perceives
these Sergeants even ready to clasp their in her burning arms? See (O
Cosmopolite) what thy sin has caused! lust has transported thine eyes,
blasphemy thy tongue, pride thy foot, oppression thy hand, covetousness thy
heart, and now Death and Devils, they are the Sergeants that require thy soul.

souls, and consider with your selves, what may be your cases; it may be as yet
thou stand upright without any changes, hitherto thou have seen no days of
sorrow, but even washed thy steps with butter, and the rock has poured thee
out rivers of oil. Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14.
Alas! was not this the case of this wretched worldling? yet for all this, you
see a night came that paid for all: and so may it be with thee; a day, an hour,
Casaub. Dies, hora, momentum, etc.
a moment, is enough to overturn the things that seem to have been founded, and
rooted in Adamant; who can tell whether this night, this storm may fall upon
thee? art thou not strangely nailed and glued unto sense? art thou not stupidly
senceless in spiritual things, that for pelf, vanity, dung, nothing, wilt run
headlong and wilfully into easelesse, endless, and remediles torments? Yet
such is thy doing, (if thou be a worldling) to get riches to thy body, and
let death and devils have thy soul. O beloved, consider in time, and seeing you
have such a terrible example set before you, let this worldling be your warning.

We have done with the Sergeants, but what is their office? to beg? to sue? No,
but to force, to require, thy soul is required. How? requried? is any so bold
to approach his gates, and make a forcible entry? Yes, God has his special
Bailiffs that will fear no colors, riches cannot ransom, castles cannot keep,
hollows cannot hide, hills nor their forts protect: Sits Herod on his Throne?
there is a Writ of Remove, and the worms are his Bailiffs: is Dives at his
Table? Death brings the Mittimus, and Devils are his Jaylours: sits Lazarus at
his gates? the King greets him well, (we may say) and Angels are his keepers:
poor, rich, good, bad, all must be served at the Kings suit, no place can
privilege, no power secure, no valor rescue, no liberty exempt: with a non
omittas propter aliquam libertatem, runs this Warrant: 2. Sam. 22.5.
O rich man? what will thou now do? The sorrows of death compass thee, and the
floods of Belial make thee afraid. What? no friends to help? no power to
rescue, is there no other way but yield and die for it? O misery! enough to
break an heart of brass again: Imagine that a Prince a while possessed some
royal City, where (if you walk the streets) you may see peace flourishing,
wealth abounding, pleasure waiting, all his neighbors offering their service,
and promising to assist him in all his needs and affairs: if on a sudden this
city were besieged by some deadly enemy, who coming (like a violent stream)
takes one hold after another, one wall after another, one castle after another,
and at last drives this Prince only to a little Tower, and there sets on him;
what fear, anguish, and misery would this Prince be in? If he looks about, his
holds are taken, his men are slain, his friends and neighbors now stand aloof
off, and they begin to abandon him; were not this a woeful plight trow you?
even so it fares with a poor soul at the hour of her departure: the body
wherein she reigned like a jolly Princess, then droops and languishes; the
keepers tremble, Eccles. 12.3.
the strong men bow, the grinders cease, and they wax dark that look out at the
windows* no wonder, if fear be in the way, when the arms the legs, the teeth,
the eyes (as so many walls wherein the soul was environed) are now surprised
and beaten to the ground: her last refuge is the heart, and this is the little
Tower whither at last she is driven: But what, is she there secure? no, but
most fiercely assailed with a thousand enemies, her dearest friends ( youth,
and Physic, and other helps) which soothed her in prosperity do now abandon
her, what will she do? the enemy will grant no truce, will make no league, but
night and day assayls the heart, which now (like a Turret struck with thunder)
begins all to shiver? here is the woeful state of a wicked soul, God is her
enemy, the Devil her foe, Angels hate her, the earth groans under her, hell
gapes for her: the reason of all, sin struck the alarm, and death gives the
battle: it is but this night (a minute longer) and then will the raging enemy
enter on her. Death is no beggar to entreat, no suitor to woe, no petitioner to
ask, no soliciter to crouch and crave a favor: she runs raging, Quaque ruit
furibunda ruit
ruling, charging, requiring: hark this rich man's arrest, thy soul shall be
required] It shall? yes, the word is peremptory; what? be required? yes, it
comes with authority. Here Is a fatal requiring, when the soul shall be forced
by an unwilling necessity, and devils by force hurrie her to her endless
fury. Adieu poor soul! the Writ is served, the Goal prepared, the judgment
past, and Death (the Executioner) will delay no longer; This night thy soul
shall be required of thee.

that join house to house and call the lands after your own names: You may
trust in your wealth, and boast your selves in the multitude of your riches,
but none of you call by any means redeem his brother, no nor himself, Psalm.
49.6. Psalm. 49.6.7.
When Death comes, (I pray) what composition with the Lord of heaven? could
ever any buy out his damnation with his coin? howsoever you live, mirrily,
deliciously, go richly, yet Death will at last knock at your doors, and
(notwithstanding all your wealth, honors, tears, and groans of your dearest
friends) will take you away as his prisoners, to his darkest dungeon. Your case
is as with a man who lying fast asleep upon the edge of some steep high rock,
dreams merrily of Crowns, Kingdoms, Possessions; but upon the sudden, starting
for joy, he breaks his neck, and tumbles into the bottom of some violent sea:
Thus is your danger every hour, Satan makes you a bed, lulls you asleep,
charms you into golden dreams, and you conceive you are wallowing in the Sea of
all wordly happiness; at last death comes (against which there is no
resistance) and then are you suddenly swallowed up of despair, and drowned in
that pit of eternal death and perdition,

I have read of some, whom (in some sort) we might parallel with this rich man
concerning their fearful horrid departure out of this miserable world: yea, I
suppose the Books are so working, that any man whosoever he is, that would but
read them, and ponder them in a serious way, they would certainly work in him
much matter of humiliation, and make him to fly sin, as the very sting of a
scorpion.

William Rogers. The Young man's warning-piece, by Rob. Abbot.
One of them I mean to speak of was an Englishman: Abbot. that relates the
story, tells indeed of two in one year that died thus uncomfortably; the one so
many ways looking homewards, that he died miserably rich: the other so lashing
outward that he died miserably poor, both of different ways of life, yet both
of uncomfortable passages out of the world. The one coming to his deaths-bed,
the Author reports of him, that first the Devil presented himself unto him to
be his Physician, and after Christ appeared to him sitting on the Throne,
condemning his unprofitable life, and bidding him shift for himself, for he
would have nothing to do with him: The other (of whom I mean to speak) as if he
would prevent Christ, condemned himself to hell for ever and ever: O (said he)
that I might burn along time in that fire, so I might not burn in hell. -- I
have had (said he) a little pleasure, and now I must go to the torments of hell
for ever. Then praying to God (as he was pressed by others) to forgive him his
sins, and to have mercy upon him, he would add, but I know God will not do it,
I must go to hell for evermore. Whatsoever came between whiles, this was the
close, I must be burned in Hell, I must to the furnace of Hell, millions and
millions of ages. The Author of this story (who was Minister of the place
where he lived) went to him, offered him the comforts of the Gospel, opened to
him the promises of the largest size, showed him that God was delighted to save
souls, and not to destroy them, and that his sweet promises were without
exception of time place, person, or sin, except that against the holy Ghost,
which he assured him too, was not committed by him: and what was the issue? all
this could not fasten on him, but still he would answer, Alas, it is too late,
I must be burned in hell. That man of God (the Shepherd of his soul) seeing
his soul in this danger, came to him again and again, and at last secluding the
company, he presses him with tears in his eyes, not to cast away that soul for
for which Christ died; he told him, that Christ rejected none that did not
reject him: but for all this he could have no other answer, but that he had
cast off Christ, and therefore must go to hell. The Minister replies, Yet pray
with me (says he) that Christ would come again, there is yet an hour in the
day, and if Christ come, he can and will assist you, to do a great deal of work
on a sudden: no, he would not hear of that: former counsels and prayers might
have done me good, said he, but now it is too late.

O horror, that ever any soul should suffer these conflicts for sin! But
what sins were they? He was (says the Author) no Swearer, no VVhoormonger,
no Thief, no scoffer at Religion, no perjured wretch, no wilful liar at all,
only Drunkenness and neglect of men's bodies (for he was an Apothecarie)
neglect of Prayer, Gods Word, and his Sacraments, so awakt his trembling
Conscience, that he was forced to pass this fearful doom upon his soul, I
must be burned in the furnace of hell, millions of millions of ages: and at
last (the Lord knows) in idleness of thoughts, and talk, he ended his
miserable-miserable life.

The other I mean to speak of was an Italian, A relation of the fearful estate
of Fr. Spira. 1548.
under the Jurisdiction of Venice, called Francis Spira, who being excessively
covetous of money, and for fear of the world having renounced the truth, which
before he professed, he thought at last he heard a direful voice speaking to
him; Thou wicked wretch, thou have denied me, thou have broken thy vow; hence
Apostate, and bear with thee the sentence of thy eternal damnation: at this
voice he trembling and quaking fell down in a swoon; and after recovering
himself, he professed that he was captivated under the revenging hand of the
great God of heaven, and that he heard continually that fearful sentence of
Christ, now past on his own soul: his friends to comfort him propounded many of
Gods promises, recorded in Scripture; Oh but my sin (said he) is greater then
the mercy of God: nay, answered they, the mercy of God is above all sin; God
would have all men to be saved: it is true (said he) he would have all men that
he has elected to be saved; but he would not have Reprobates to be saved; and
I am one of that number: after this roaring out in the bitterness of his
spirit, he said, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God. These troubles of mind brought him to a distemper of body, which the
Physicians perceiving, they wished him to seek some spiritual comfort: those
comforters come, and observing the distemper to arise from the sense and
horror of hell pains; they ask him, Whether he thought there were any worse
pains then what he endured? he said, He knew there were far worse pains; yet
do I desire nothing more, said he, then that I may come to that place, where I
may be sure to feel the worst, and to be freed from fear of worse to come.

As on this manner he was speaking he observed (says my Author) diverse flies
that came about him, and some lighted on him; whereat, presently remembering how
Belzeebub signifies the God of Flies; Behold, said he, now also Belzeebub comes
to his Banquet, you shall shortly see my end, and in me an example to many of
the justice and judgment of God. Then he began to reckon up what fearful
dreams and visions he was continually troubled withal, That he saw the Devils
come flocking into his chamber, and about his bed terrifying him with strange
noyses; and that these were not fancies, but that he saw them as really as the
standers by: and that besides these outward terrors, he felt continually a
racking torture of his mind, and a continual butchery of his conscience, being
the very proper pangs of the damned wights in hell.

But of all the rest, most desperate was that last speech of his, when
snatching a knife (as intending to mischief himself, but stopped by his
friends) he roared with indignation, I would I were above God, for I know he
will have no mercy on me; and thus living a while, he appeared at length a very
perfect anatomy, expressing to the view nothing but sinews, and bones,
vehemently raging for drink; ever pining, yet fearful to live long; dreadful
of hell, yet coveting death; in a continual torment, yet his own tormentour;
consuming himself with grief and horror, impatience and despair, till at last
he ended his miserable-miserable life.

And now (beloved) if such be the departure of a sinnfull soul, O who would
live in sin to come to such a departure! For my part, I dare not say these
parties, thus miserable in their own apprehensions, are now among Devils in
hell: I find the Authors themselves to incline to the right hand; besides,
what am I, that I should sit in Gods Chair? only this I say, that their
miserable deaths may very well give warning to us all; nor need you think much
at me for uttering these (terribilia) terrible stories: for if sometimes you
did not hear of Gods judgments against sin; a day might come, that you would
most of all cry out on the Preacher: To this purpose, we have a story of a
certain rich man, who lying on his deathbed, My soul (said he) I bequeath to
the Devil, who owns it; my wife to the Devil, who drew me to my ungodly life,
and my Chaplain to the Devil who flattered me in it. I pray God I never hear of
such a Legacy from any of you: sure I had better to tell you aforehand to
prevent it, then not telling you to feel it. And let this be for my Apology in
relating these stories.

separate the precious from the vile. Now then to sweeten the thoughts of all
true penitents, the souls of Saints are not required, but received. Rejoice
then ye righteous that mourn in Sion; what though a while ye suffer? death is a
Jail-delivery to your souls, not bringing in, but freeing out of thraldom.
Here the good man finds sharpest misery, the evil man sweetest felicity;
therefore it is just, that there should be a time of changing turns; The rich
man's Table stood full of delicates, Lazarus lacks crumbs, but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. Luke 16.25.
Woe unto you that laugh, for you shall mourn, Luke 6.25. Luke 6.25.
Blessed are you that mourn, for you shall rejoice, Matthew. 5.4. Matthew. 5.4.
Happy Lazarus! who from thy beggary and loathsome sores were carried by Angels
into Abraham's bosom: happy Thief, who upon thy true repentance, and unfeigned
prayer, were received from the Cross to the Paradise of thy Savior: happy are
all they that suffer tribulation, Death shall lose their souls from bonds and
fetters, and in stead of a Bailiff to arrest them, shall be a Porter to conduct
them to the gates of heaven: There shall thou tread on Serpents, trample on
thine enemies, sing sweet Trophies: were not this enough? thy Conquests shall
be crowned by the hands of Seraphims, triumphed with the sound of Angels,
warbled by the Quire of Spirits, confirmed by the King of Kings, and Lord of
Hosts. Happy Soul! that art not required by Devils, but received by Angels: and
when we die, Lord Jesus send thine Angels to receive our Souls.

You see now Deaths Arrest, and what remains further, save to accept of some
Bail? But what Bail, where you have the Kings Commandment from his own mouth?
this requiring is not of any other, but himself; of no surety, but of thee
(says God) must thy Soul be required. Of thee]
ONce more (you see) I have brought this rich man on the stage, his doom is now
at hand, and Death (Gods messenger) summons him to appear by Requiring of his
soul] but of whom is it Required? had he any Sureties to put in? or was any
Bail sufficient to be taken for him? no, he must go himself, without all help
or remedy, it was he that sinned, and it is he must pay for it; Of thee] it is
required.

How? of thee? Sure Death mistakes; we can find thousands more fit, none more
fearful; there stands a Saul, near him his armor-bearer; behold a Judas, such
will outface deaths fury; nay, rather then if fail in its office, they will not
much question to be their own Deaths-men: but this Of thee (who art at league
with hell, in love with earth, at peace with all) is most terribly fearful.

Stay Death! there stands a poor Lazarus at the gates, like Job on his
dung-hil, his eyes blind, his ears deaf, his feet lame, his body struck with
Boyls, Job 7.15.
and his Soul choosing rather to be strangled and die, then to be in his bones:
were not this a fit object for deaths cruelty? would he spare the rich, he
should be welcome to the poor: but Death is inexorable, he must not live, nor
shall the Beggar beg his own death for another: Of thee] it is required.

But (Death!) yet stay thy hand, here is a better surety; what needs death a
press, when he may have volunteers? there stands an old man as ready for the
grave, as the grave for him; his face is furrowed, his hairs hoary, his back
bowing, his hammes bending, and therefore no song is fitter then old Simeons,
Luke 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace: Youth is loath, but Age is
merry to depart from misery; let Death then take him that stands nearest
deaths-door: No, the old must die, but the young may; he must die soon, yet be
sure thou shall not live long, Of thee] it is required.

Cannot this serve? let death yet stay his hand, there stands a servant waiting
at this rich man's beck, as if he would spend his own life to save his Masters;
he can make a Pageant of Cringes, act a whole speech of flatteries, every part
owes him service, feet to run, hands to work, head to crouch, and as the eyes
of a maiden unto the hand of a Mistress, so the eyes of his servants look unto
the hands of their Master: but where be these attendants when death comes? was
ever any Master better then Christ? were ever any servants truer then his
Apostles? yet see their fidelity, must their Savior die? one betrays him
another forswears him all run from him, and leave him alone in midst of all his
enemies: what then is the trust of servants? the rich man may command and go
without, if death should require them, they would not, or if they should desire
death, he will not; his arrest concerns not the servants, it is for the Master
himself he that command others, now death commands him: Of thee] it is required.

Will not all do? Let death but stay this once: there stands a friend, that
will loose his own, to save his life: Greater love then this has no man (says
our Savior) when any man bestows his life for his friends, John 15.13. John
15.13.
Riches may perhaps procure such love, and get some friend to answer deaths
quarrel which he ows this man: Jonathan loves David, David Absolon; and sure it
was a love indeed, when Jonathan preserves the life of David, and David wishes
a death to himself in the stead of Absolon: O my son Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.33.
would God I had died for thee: O Absolon, my son, my son. But where be any
friends so respective of this Worldling? He wants a Jonathan, a David; upon a
strict inquiry we find no friend, no father, no son, neither heirs nor
assigns to whom he may bestow his lands. But what if he had friends as near to
himself as himself? no man can die or another: Psalm. 49.7, 8.
or as the Psalmist, No man may deliver his brother, nor make agreement unto
God for him: for it cost more to redeem their souls, so that he must let that
alone for ever. Should the poor man beg, the old man pray, his servants kneel,
his friends lie at deaths feet, and all these offer up all their lives for this
rich man's recovery, all were but vain* it is thy Soul is arrested, and it is
thy self that must yield it: Of thee] it is required.

You see there is no way but one with him: to conclude then, we will bid him his
farewell (this is the last friendship we can do this rich man) and so we will
leave him. The hour is come, and the dawning of that dreadful day appears;
now he begins to wish that he had some space, some piece of time to repent him;
and if he might obtain it, O what would he do! or what would he not do? Relieve
the weak, visit the sick feed the hungry, lodge the stronger, cloth the naked,
give half his goods to the poor, and if he had done any wrong restore it him
again sevenfold; but alas! all is too late, the candle that but follows him
cannot light him to heaven; a sudden death denies his suit, and the increasing
of his sickness will give him no leisure to fulfill those duties: what cold
sweats are those that seiz upon him? his senses fail, his speech falters, his
eyes sink, his breast swells, his feet die, his heart faints such are the
outward pangs: what then are the inward griefs? if the body thus suffers, what
cares and conflicts endures the soul? had he the riches of Croesus, the Empires
of Alexander, the robes of Solomon, the fare of that rich man who lived
deliciously every day, what could they do in the extremity of these pangs. O
rich man, thou could tell us of pulling down barns, and building greater; but
now imagine the vast cope of heaven thy Barn, (and that were large enough) and
all the riches of the world thy grain (and that were crop enough) yet all these
cannot buy a minute of ease, now that death will have thy body hell thy soul. O
dark dungeon of imprisoned men! whose help will thou crave? whose aid will thou
ask? what release can thou exspect from such a prison? the disease is past
cure, the sickness wants remedy: alas! what may recover now the heart strings
break asunder? thy date exspires, thy last breath goes, and now is thy Soul and
Body required of thee.

I have hitherto with Nathan beat sinful David on a strangers coat. You must
give me leave to take off the mask, and show you your own faces in this glass.
Believe thou (O man) who read this, that shortly there will be two holes
where thine eyes now stand, and then others may take up thy skull, and speak of
thee dead, as I have done to thee living: how soon I know not, but this I am
sure of, Thy time is appointed thy months are determined, Job 14.14. Job 14.5.
Psalm. 90.12. John 11.9.
thy days are numbered, thy very last hour is limited. And what follows, but
that thy body lie cold at the root of the rocks, at the foot of the mountains?
Go then to the graves of those that are gone before us, and there see; are not
their eyes wasted, their mouths corrupted, their bones scattered? where be
those ruddy lips, lovely cheeks, sparkling eyes, comely nose, hairy locks? are
not all gone as a dream in the night, or as a shadow in the morning? alas! that
we neglect these thoughts and set our minds wholly upon the world and its
vanity! we are careful, fearful, and immoderately painful to get transitory
riches, like children following Butter-flies; we run, and toil, and perhaps
miss our purpose: but if we catch them, what is it but a fly to besmear our
hands? Riches are but empty, and yet be they what they will be all at last will
be nothing. Saladine that great Turk, after all his conquests, gets his shirt
fastened to his spear in manner of an Ensign, this done, a Priest makes
Proclamation, Knolls Turkish History, page 73.
This is all that Saladine carries away with him, of all the riches he has
gotten. Shall a Turk say thus, and do Christians forget their duties? Remember
your selves, ye sons of earth, of Adam; what is this earth you dote on? be sure
you shall have enough of it, when your mouths must be filled and crammed with
it, and (as your souls desire it, so) at that day shall your bodies turn to it.
O that men are thus given to gasping greediness! there is a generation, and
they are too common amongst us, that we may preach and preach (as they say) our
hearts out, yet will not they stir a foot further from the world, or an inch
nearer unto God, but could we speak with them on their deathbed, when their
consciences are awaked, then should we hear them yell out those complaints,
What has pride profited us? or what good has riches with our vaunting brought
us? Wisd. 5.8.
Assure your selves this day, or this night will come, and imagine (I pray)
that the ten, twenty, thirty, forty years, or months, or days, or hours,
which you have yet to live, were at an end; were you at this present stretched
on your beds, wearied with struggling against your wearied pangs, were your
friends weeping your Physicians parting, your children crying, your wives
houling, and your selves lying mute and dumb in a most pitiful agony.

Suppose thou now feeledst the cramp of death wresting thy heart strings, and
ready to make that rufull divorce betwixt thy body and thy soul; suppose thou
lie now panting for breath, swimming in a cold fatal sweat; suppose thy
words were fled, thy tongue struck dumb, thy soul amazed, thy senses frighted;
suppose thy feet beginning even to die, thy knees to wax cold and stiff, thy
nostrils to run out, thine eyes to sink into thy head, and all the parts of thy
body to lose their office to assist thee; upon this supposall lift up thy soul,
and look about thee, (O I can tell thee, if thou live and die in sin)
there would be no where any comfort, but a world of terror and perplexity:
look upwards, there should thou see the terrible sword of Gods justice
threatening; look downwards, there should thou see the grave in exspectation
ready gaping; look within thee, there should thou feel the worm of conscience
bitter gnawing; look without thee, there should thou see good and evil
Angels on both sides, waiting whether of them should have the prey: now alas!
(then would thou say) The soul to depart from the body were a thing
intolerable, to continue still therein were a thing impossible, and to defer
this departure any longer (supposing this hour thy last hour) no Physic could
prevail it were a thing unavoydable: what then would thy poor soul do, thus
environed with so many straights? O fond fools of Adams sin, that neglect the
time till this terrible passage! how much would thou give (if thus it were)
for an hours repentance? at what rate would thou value a days contrition?
worlds are worthless in respect of a little respite, a short truce would seem
more precious then the Treasures of Empires, nothing would then be so much
esteemed as a trice of time, which before by months and years thou lavishly
misspent, Think on thy sins, nay, thou could not choose but think, Satan
would write them on the curtains of thy bed, and thy agashed eyes would be
forced to look upon them, there would thou see thousands committed, not one
confessed, or thoroughly repented, then too late thou would begin to wish, O
had I lead a better life, and were it to begin again, O then how would I fast
and pray, how repent, how live! Certainly, certainly, if thou go on in
sin, thus would be thy departure, thy carcass lying cold among the stones of
the pit, and thy soul, by the weight of sin, irrecoverably sinking into the
bottom of that bottomless burning lake.

day or night of death comes, thou may then stand firm and sure: as yet thou
art in the way of a transitory life, as yet thou art not entered into the
confines of Eternity: if now therefore thou will walk in the holy path, if now
thou will stand out against any sin whatsoever, if now thou will take on thee
the yoke of our Savior Christ, if now thou will associate thy self to that
sect and brotherhood, that is every where spoken against; if now thou will
direct thy words to the glorifying of God, and to give grace unto the hearers;
if now thou will delight in the word, the ways, the Saints, the services of
God; if now thou will never turn again unto folly, or to thy trade of sin,
though Satan set upon thee with his baits and allurements, to detain thee in
his bondage, but by one darling delight, Psalm. 116.15.
one minion-sin, then I dare assure thee, dear, right dear would be thy death
in the sight of the Lord: with joy and triumph would thou pass through all
the terrors of death, with singing and rejoicing would thy soul be received
into those sacred mansions above. O happy soul, if this be thy case! O happy
night or day, whensoever the nevvs comes, that then must thy soul be taken
from thee!

You may think it now high time, that we bid this far-wel-funerall Text adieu.
then for conclusion let every word be thy warning. Lest this] be thy time
provide for this and every time; 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
lest the night] be dreadful, Do not sleep as do other, but watch and be
sober; lest thy soul] should suffer, desire the sufferings of thy God to
satisfy, lest death require] it of thee by foree, offer it up to God with a
cheerful devotion; and lest this of thee] be fearful, who have lived in sin,
correct these courses, amend your ways, and the blessing of God be with thee
all thy life, at the hour of death, now, henceforth, and for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.
Doomes-day
MATTHEW. 16.27. Then shall he reward every man according to his works.


THe dependence of this Text is limited in few lines, and that your eyes wander
no further then this verse, therein is kept a general Assize; the Judge,
Officers, Prisoners stand in array, the Judge is God, and the Son of man; the
Officers Angels, and they are his Angels; the Prisoners men, and because of the
Jail-deliver, every man. If you will have all together, you have a Judge his
circuit, his habit, his attendants, his judgments: a Judge, the Son of man; his
circuit, he shall come; his habit, in the glory of his Father; his attendants,
with his Angels: what now remains, but the execution of justice? then without
more ado see the Text, and you see all; the scales in his hand, our works in
the scales, the reward for our works, of just weight each to other; Then he
shall reward every man according to his works.

This Text gives us the proceeding of Doomes-day, which is the last day, the
last Sessions, the last Assize that must be kept on earth, or is decreed in
heaven; if you exspect Sheriffs, or Judges, Plaintiffs or Prisoners, all are in
this verse, some in each word. Then] is times Trumpet that proclaims their
coming. Hee] is the Judge that examins all our lives. Reward] is the doom, that
proceeds from him in his Throne. Man] is the malefactor, every man] stands
before him as a prisoner, Works are the inditements, and according to our
works] must go the trial howsoever we have done, good or evil.

Give me yet leave, this Judge sits on trials as well as prisoners; it is an
high Court of appeal, where Plaintiffs, Counselors, Judges all must appear and
answer: would you learn the proceedings? there is the Term, Then] the Judge,
hee] the sentence, shall reward] the parties, very man] the trial it self,
which you may find in all to be just and legal, every man his rewards
according to his works.]

We have opened the Text, and now you shall have the hearing.

Then.]
THen: when? the answer is Negative, Positive.


First, Negative, Then] not on a sudden, or (at least) not at this present.
This life is no time to receive rewards, the rain and Sun pleasure both the
good and bad, nay, oftentimes the bad fare best, and Gods own children are most
fiercely fined in the furnace of affliction, Job 9.24. Matthew. 16.24.
The earth is given into the hands of the wicked, says Job: but, if any man
will follow me, he must take up his cross, says our Savior. Joy, and
pleasure, and happiness attend the ungodly, while Gods poor servants run through
the thicket of briers and brambles to the kingdom of heaven: but shall not the
Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18.25.
a time shall come when both these must have their change; Mark the upright and
behold the just, for the end of that man is peace, but the transgressors shall
be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked shall be cut off: Psalm. 37.38.
Psalm. 37.37, 38.
The effect of things is best known to us in some issue of time, and then shall
we have our rewards, when the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father.
Let this admonish us to have patience in all our exspectations: what is it to
suffer a while, an inch of time, considering the reward is great indeed,
everlasting in durance? Rest in the Lord (says David) and wait patiently for
him, fret not thy self for him which prospers in his way: and will you know
the reason? for yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be, but the meek
shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
peace: Psalm. 37.10, 11. Psalm. 37.7, 10, 11.
So they shall indeed, if only they will exspect a little time; not now, but
Then] stay yet a while, and be sure anon the reward shall be given.

2. But to answer positively, this Then is no other then Doomes-day, and when
that shall be, will be known best by Conjectures, Signs.


We will begin with the former.

Elias (say the Jews) whose prophecy thus runs, two thousand years before the
Law, two thousand under the Law, and two thousand under the Gospel: how untrue
this sounds, any one may guess that considers: in the first number he fails
because it was too little; in the second number he erres, because it was too
much: and if Elias say amiss for the time now past, how should we believe him
for that yet to come? Others, besides testimony produce reason, that as God was
creating the world six days, so he must be a governing it six thousand years,
here is a seeming proportion, but upon what reason? Every day, (say they) must be
a thousand years with man, because a thousand years, are but as one day with
God. Psalm. 90.4.
It were too frivolous a pains to repeat any more, or to answer these: Is not
this sacrilege, Salviarus de guber. Dei, l. 3.
to break into Gods place and pry into his Sanctuary? Why should we presume to
know more then God would have us? Look at the Apostles, were they not Gods
Secretaries? Look at the Angels, are they not Gods Heralds? Look at Christ
himself, is he not the Son of God? and yet as he is the Son of man, he speaks
of all, Of that day and hour knows no man, no Angel, neither the Son, but
the Father only: Mark 13.32. Mar. 13.32. Ne nos addamus inquirere, quod ille
non addidit dicere. Aug. epist. 146. Acts 1.7.
It is not for us to seek where the Lord has not a tongue to speak Why should
we know more then other men, then all men, then Angels, then Christ himself,
who (as man) was either ignorant of it, or (at least) had no commission to
reveal it. It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father
has put in his own power, Act. 1.7. It is a better use which our Savior
makes, Take heed, watch, and pray, for ye know not when the time is, Mark
13.33. Mar. 13.33. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
As a thief in the night, so is Doomes-day, it come suddenly, it will come
shortly: would you needs know when? why then when you least imagine such a
matter, then when worldly honors profit nothing, then when kindred and
acquaintance fail, then when the world shall be set on fire, then] then] he
shall reward every man according to his works.

conjectures fail, the signs are certain: Jerome reports of fifteen miracles
for fifteen days, Test Tho. Aquin. Supplem. ad 3. part. q. 73. ar. t. 1.
which he writes to have found in the Hebrews Annals, and immediately must
precede the Judges coming. The first day (says he) the sea shall swell, and
lift up her waves at least fifteen cubits, above the height of the highest
hills. The second day unlike to the former, the sea shall ebb again, and the
waves be fallen till they scarce be seen. The third day the sea must return to
its ancient course, and so abide that day as it was before. The fourth day, sea
monsters shall appear above the sea, whose bellowing rores shall fill the air
with cries, which God alone understands, and men shall tremble at. The fifth
day, all the fowls of the air shall flock together, and meeting in the fields
shall there chatter, and starve for fear of the approaching times. The sixth
day, floods of fire shall rise up against the firmament, which kindling at the
falling Sun, shall run like a lightning to the rising morn. The seventh day,
all stars and planets shall shoot out fiery comets. The eighth day, there shall
be a general earthquake, and the motion so violent, that the ground shall
hop, and the living creatures not stand on their feet, that walk on the
tottering floores. The ninth day trees shall sweat blood. The tenth day, all
the stones of the earth shall war together, and with a thundering noise break
one upon another. The eleventh day all buildings shall be ruined, and all the
hills and mountains melt into dust and powder. The twelfth day, all beasts of
the field shall come from their woods and dens, and so abstaining from their
food, shall rore and bellow up and down the plains. The thirteenth day, all
graves shall be open, from the rising up of the Sun, unto the going down of the
same. The fourteenth day, all men shall come abroad, and such a distraction
seize on their heavy hearts, that they shall lose the speech and volubility of
their tongues. And the fifteenth (which is the last day) the living men shall
die, and the dead shall live again, all above earth be changed, and those in
their graves be raised and recovered.

I will not say these things are certain, (I leave you to the author that
recites them) but if any whit true, why (blessed Lord!) what a day of
appearance shall this be? I know not (says one) what others may think of it,
but for my self, it makes me tremble to consider it. It is a day of anger and
wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of obscurity and darkness, a day
of clouds and blackness, a day of the trumpet and alarm against the strong
cities, and against the high towers: Zeph. 1.15. Chrysostom. Hom. 77. in Matthew.
Zeph. 1.15.
I will but run through the signs, as we find them in Gods writ, and then see
if your hearts will not fail for fear.

Then] shall the Sun be darkened: Matthew. 24.29
can Nature stand and suffer a general Eclipse? when God died, the Sun could
discolor its beauty, and suit it self in black to its makers condition; and
now man dies, the Sun is clad again in mourning robes. Alas! what can it do but
mourn? God lives, but mankind dies: though he was the Creator, yet we are the
Creatures for whom it was created: when the householder dies, the family
grieves: Patrefamilias moriente turbatur domus. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 44.
were all eyes dry, here is the eye of the world weeps it self blind to see
this dissolution: Is man bereft of compassion, for whom the Sun it self
undergoes this passion? think on those times, when darkness that may be felt,
shall spread over all the earth; how should plants but whither? or beasts of
the field but waste? how should men but die, when they stumble at noonday?
their eyes shall fail them, the light forsake them: miserable men! the Sun
shill not shine on them, because God will judge them. But this not all.

Then] shall the moon not give her light: Matthew. 24.29.
as the day and night are both alike with God, so the day and night shall be
alike with man: the Sun will not lend his luster, nor can the Moon borrow any
more light: but what strange war makes this confusion of nature? the Sun shall
look black, Joel 2.31.
and the Moon be turned into blood. Here is a new Moon, and such a change as
before was never seen: there is no increase, no full, no wane, Genesis 1.14.
but all the light is at once exstinguished: unhappy creatures that depend upon
her influence! how should they live, when she her self wades in blood? God made
these Lights for signs, and for seasons, for days, and for years: but now
signs are out, seasons past days are done, years abolished: The Angels has
sworn by him that lives for ever, that time shall be no longer, Rev. 10.6. Who
will not believe that hears this sacred oath? was it a man? no, an Angel:] did
he say it? no, he swore it:] how? by himself? no, it was by him that lives for
ever:] and what? that time must be little? nay it must be no longer, time shall
be no more] How shall it be any more? the Sun is disfigured, the Moon disrobed,
both eclipsed. But this not all.

Then] shall the stars be shaken; the powers of Heaven shall move, and the
Lamps of Heaven shall tremble: these were Gods threats against the Babylonians,
Esaias 13.10. Esaias 13.10.
For the stars of Heaven, and the Planets thereof shall not give their light.
Against the Egyptians, Ezekiel. 32.7. Ezekiel. 32.7.
I will cover the heaven, and make the stars dark over thee: Against all his
enemies, Joel 3.15. Joel 3.15.
The Sun and Moon shall be darkened, (but not they alone, for) and the stars
themselves shall withdraw their shining: But what speak we of darkness, or the
stars not shining? they shall not only dim, Mark 13.15.
but down. In those days (says our Savior) after that tribulation, the Sun
and Moon shall darken, and the stars of heaven shall fall: Tymne, etc.
how fall? so thick (say Expositors) that the Firmament shall seem to be
without all light. I cannot say these signs shall be real; whether it is by
substraction of their light, or the conceit of brain-troubled sinners or the
fall of some inflamed vapors, or the Apostasy of some enlightened persons: for
certain (to speak literally) there shall be some change in the whole order of
Nature: Sun and Moon, Stars and Planets, all must lose their lights, and by
all likelihood, it is the glory of the Judge that will dazel those Candles.
Neither is this all.

Then] shall the Elements melt, the fire shall fall down from heaven, the air
turn it self into vapors, the Sea swell above all Clouds, the earth be full of
yawning Cliffes, and violent tremblings. 2 Pet. 3.18. Elementaris subtiliando,
terrestris consumendo, infernalis puniendo. Ioh. de Combis.
A fire shall first usher the Judge, and such a fire as shall have the property
of all fires; that fire in its sphere, this fire on earth, the fearful fire
which torments in hell, all shall meet in one, and according to their several
qualities, produce their several effects: the just shall be refined by one,
the wicked shall be tormented by another, the earth be consumed by a third:
There is no creature but it must be fuel for this fire; as the first world was
destroyed with water, to quench the heat of their lust, so must this be
destroyed with fire to warm the cold of our charity. But not the fire alone.

Then] shall the air breed wonders: what shall be seen but lightnings,
whirle-winds, coruscations, blazing stars, flashing thunders? here a Comet
runns round in a circuit, there a Crown compaseth that Comet; near them a fiery
Dragon fums in flames every where appears a shooting fire, as if all above us
were nothing but inflamed air. Yet not the air alone.

Then] shall the waters roar, Rivers shall wax dry, Luke 21.25.
the Sea froth, and foame, and fume: those that dwell near shall wonder at the
swelling tides, others a far off shall tremble at the roaring noise: what
threats are those which the Surges murmur? war is proclaimed by noise, set on
by blasts, continued by storms, the floods and tides shall run over all the
plains, the the Sea and waves shall mount up to the very skies; now would they
war with Heaven, then overwhelme the earth, anon will they sink to hell: and
thus shall they rove and rage, as if they would threat all the world with a
second inundation. Nay yet again.

Then] shall the earth be shaken in diverse places (says Matthew) in all places
(says Joel) for all the earth shall tremble before him: here is an Earthquake
indeed; Matthew. 24.7. Joel. 1.10.
not some part of the land, by reason of some cloystered wind, but the Rocks,
Mountains, Castles, Cities, Countries, some shall remove, others be ruined;
thus all the earth shall be as a swallowing gulf, that all things here
situated, may be then devoured. What can I more?

Then] shall Plants cease their growth, Beasts want their sense, men loose
their reason: were this but little? you may wonder more. The Sibylls could
affirm, that Nature should both cease, and change her being, the Trees in stead
of growth should sweat out blood, the Beasts should bellow up and down the
fields, then want their sense. Men should have disfigured faces, astonished
hearts, affrighted looks, then lose their reason: nay, what marvail then, if at
the worlds end, they be at their wits end? O fearful signs, enough to move
flintie stones! if this be the Term, what is the Suit, the Bill, the Doom, the
Execution? a Trump shall summon, Death will arrest, God must have appearance,
and Then] is the day: Then] he shall reward every man according to his works.

What a Chaos is here, when the world must be thus turned topsie torvie? the
Sun the Moon, the Stars; come yet lower, the Fire, the Air, the Sea, the
Earth; nay Trees, and Beasts, and Men, all must be out of order in the whole
course of Nature. Doomsday, and not wonder at the signs which shall hang over
our heads? we see by experience when any out-ragious storm happens on Sea or
Land, how wonderfully men are dismayed, how strangely astonished: now then,
when the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, the Air shall be wholly distempered and
disordered; when the Sun shall threaten with mourning, the Moon with blood, the
Stars with their falling: yea when all the heavens shall shrink and pass away
as a paper scroule, who then dares eat or drink, or sleep, or take a minutes
rest? Be sure these days shall come, and the signs shall pass: Joel 1.5, 13
15.
Awake ye Drunkards, and weep all ye drinkers of Wine, because of the new
wine; for it shall be pulled from your mouths. Gird your selves, and lament ye
Priests, howl ye Ministers of the Altar: alas! for the day, for the day of the
Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come. What are
ye insensible of these signs? the imprisoned thief fears at the news of the
assize: and is the sinner so impudent that he fears nothing? The day shall come
when the men of earth shall fear, and be full of fear; every sign shall breed a
wonder, and ever sight shall breed a wondrous terror, men shall hide
themselves in the caves of beasts, and the beasts seek shall to save themselves
in the houses of men: where then shall the wicked stand, when all the world shall
be thus in uprore.

Sodom; yet is Jonas in the streets of Nineveh: yet the Prophet wooes, Hos. 6.4.
O Judah, how should I entreat thee? yet the Apostle prays, nay, we pray you
in Christ's stead that ye will be reconciled unto God: 2 Cor. 5.20.
to conclude, yet the Bridegroom stays the Virgins leisure; Lord that they
would make speed, seeing the joys of heaven tarry for them. This Term is at
hand, and is it not time to petition to the Judge of heaven? what a dangerous
course is it, never to call to mind that Time of Times, until we see the Earth
flaming, the Heavens melting, the Judgment hastening, the Judge with all his
Angels coming in the Clouds, to denounce the last doom upon all flesh, which
shall be unto some Woe, woe, when they shall call to the mountains to cover
them, and for shame of their sins, hide themselves (if it were possible) in
hell fire: if we have any fear this should move fear, if we have any care this
should move us all to be careful indeed. We have not two souls that we may
hazard one, neither have we two lives, that we may trust to another, but as thy
last day leaves thee, so will this Doomes-day find thee. Who would not but
axcept the fatherly fore-warning of Christ our Savior? See you not how many
signs, as the Heralds and fore runners of his glorious coming? Matthew. 24.7,
12.
The abounding of iniquity the waxing cold of charity, the rising up of Nation
against Nation. Was there ever less love? was there ever more hatred? Where is
that Jonathan that loves David as his own soul? nay, where is not that Joab,
that can embrace friendly, but carries a malicious heart toward Abner? sure we
are near the end indeed, when charity is grown thus cold. You then that would
have the comfort of the day, take these signs for warnings, provide for him who
has thus long waited for you; 2 Pet. 3.14.
and seeing you look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him
in peace, without spot, and blamless. Who would endanger their souls for a
little sin? busy Clients heed nothing but their cause, and if you would
recover heaven, be sure that ye mark this Term. The time draws on, now the
Writs are out, anon comes the Judge, and Then is the day. Then] he shall reward
every man according to his work.

You see the Term, and now you may exspect to view the Judge: the Term is
Then] the Judge is He.] Stay a while and the next time you shall see him in his
judgment seat. He.]
HE? who? if you look at the foregoing words you may see who he is: The son of
man shall come in the glory of his father, and it is he that shall reward us
according to our works.

hoc facit ut ad infimam se sortem hominum abjiciat. Musculus in Matthew. cap. 8.
Psalm. 8.4.
This title of the Son of man, denotes unto us the humility of the Son of God;
what is the Son of man, but man? and this tells us how humble he was for us,
that being God* was made man, or the Son of Man, which is as all one, according
to that, Psalm. 8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man
that visitest him?

It is true, God is the Judge of all: Heb. 12.23. Heb. 12.23.
and yet it is as true, this God is man, Acts 17.31. Acts 17.31.
God (says Paul) will judge the world, but it is by that man whom he has
ordained. God has the power, but God as man has only the Commission. He (who
is God) has given him Authority to execute judgment. And would you know the
reason? it is only because he is the Son of man, Joh, 5.27. John 5.27.
In a word, God shall judge, the whole Trinity by prescription, Christ only in
execution: the Father judges but by the Son; or as the Evangelist John, the
Father judges no man but has committed all judgment to the Son: John 5.22.
John 5.22.


But because as man, there appears in him a double form, as humbled, as
glorified; we will discuss these questions, which resolve all doubts.

1. Whether Christ, as man shall appear unto us, when he will reward us. 2.
Whether man, as glorified shall appear unto us, when he will reward us.
To the first we say, that only as man he will appear our judge, who as man
appeared when himself was judged; what better reason to express the benefit of
our redemption then so to judge us as he did redeem us? Tunc manifestus veniet
inter justos judicaturus, qui occulte venerat judicandus ab injustis. August de
civit. dei.
was he not man that suffered, died, and was buried? and is he not man that one
day shall come to judge both the quick and dead? he that came obscurely to be
judged by the unjust, shall then appear openly to judge all the just: the same
man, who is God and man, shall be our judge in his humane nature, by his divine
power. Thus we say, God, (who is the ancient of days) has the power
original; but man (who is the Son of God) has the power traduced, and
therefore says Daniel, One like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven,
and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him here before him, Dan.
7.13, 14.
and there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom.

Jews, stuborn Gentiles, wicked Christians, when every eye shall see him, and
they also which pierced him: This is the man (shall they say) that was
crucified for us, Apoc. 1.7.
and again crucified by us: why alas! every sin is a Cross, every oath is a
Spear, and when that day is come, you must behold the man, whom thus you do
crucify by your daily sins: Sure this will be a fearful fight; where is the
bloody swearer, that can tear his wounds, and heart, and blood and all? at this
day of Doom Sic Aug. habet suum (fortasse) de Christ; and martyrum vulneribus,
et quod non sit deformitas iis, sed dignitas. novi quod quaeritur an cicatrices
remaneant in corpore perfecto et glorificato? attamen Christus apparuit Thomae
cum cicatricibus ad fidem ejus confirmandam. Ioh. 20.27. Matthew. 26.24.
those wounds shall appear, that heart be visible, that body and blood be seen
both of good and bad, and then shall that fearful voice proceed from his
Throne, this was the heart thou piercedst, these are the wounds thou racedst,
and this is the blood thou spilledst: Here is the fearful judgment, when thou
that art the murderer shall see the slain man sit thy Judge, what favor can
thou exspect at his hands, whom thou have so vilely abused by thy daily sins?
be sure the Son of man will come, as it is written of him, but woe be unto that
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it had been good for that man if he had
not been born, Matthew. 26.24.

To the second question we answer; that as Christ shall appear in the form of
man, so this man shall appear in a glorious form: he that is a Mediator
betwixt God and man, must both intercede for man to God, and communicate those
things which are of God to man, to this purpose both these offices are
agreeable to him, in that he participates of both extremes; he is man to abide
the judgments due from God, he is God to convey all his benefits unto man: as
then, in his first coming, he pleased God by taking the infirmities of man upon
him, so in his second coming will he judge us men, by appearing in that glory
which he derives from God. But look about you! who is this Judge arrayed in such
a majesty? Joel. 2.3, 6.
A fire devoures before him, and behind him a flame burns up, on every side the
people tremble, and all faces shall gather blackness: here is a change indeed,
he that was in a cratch, now sits on a Throne; then Christ stood like a Lamb
before Pilate, now Pilate stands like a malefactor before Christ, he that was
once made the footstool of his enemies, Psalm. 110.1.
must now judge, till he has made all his enemies his footstool. Where shall
they run? and how shall they seek the clifts of the rocks, and hollow places?
the glory of his Majesty kindles a flame, while the heaven and earth shall fly
from the presence of this Judge. Revel. 21.17.
O ye heavens! why do ye fly away? what have ye done? why are ye afraid? it is
the Majesty of the Judge that will amaze the innocent, the greatness of whose
indignation, will be able to strike all the heavens with terror and admiration;
when the Sea is out-ragious, and tempestuous he that stands on the shore will
be struck into a kind of fear: or when the Father goes like a Lion about his
house, in punishing his bond-slave, the innocent son stands in great fear and
trouble: and how then shall the wicked tremble, when the very heavens shall be
afraid? Greg. in Mor.
If the goodly Cedars of Lebanon be shaken, what shall become of the tender
twiggs in the Desert? if the sturdy Rams stoop and tremble, how will the
bleating Lambs cry and run away? 1 Pet. 4.18.
and if the just and righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear? The mountains and heavens shall melt before the Lord; and
what stony hearts have we, that (for all this) are nothing at all yet moved?

But (may be) I prevent you exspectation, if here be a Judge where is the
guard? behold him coming from above with great power and glory: would you know
this habit? he is clothed with Majesty: seek you the color; it is the
brightness of his Father: would you view his attendants? they are an host of
Angels: look you for the guard? they are a troop of shining Cherubims: nay,
yet see a longer train, a further company, the souls of Saints descend from
their imperial seats, and attend the Lamb with great glory, and glorious
majesty: never was any Judge Lord of such a circuit: his footstool are the
Clouds, his seat the Rainbow, his justices Saints, his officers Angels, and
the Archangels Trump proclaims a silence, whilst a just sentence comes from
his mouth on all the world. Thus are the Assizes begun to be solemnized the
thrones (as Daniel saw in in his vision) were set up, and the ancient of days
sat down, his garments white as snow, Dan. 7.9.
and the hair of his head like pure wool his Throne like the fiery flame, and
his wheels as burning fire, Dan. 7.9. Dan. 7.9.
This is the Judge whose coming is so fearful, ushered by a fiery flood,
apparelled in snowy white, carried in his circuit on burning wheels, and
attended with the number of thousand thousands. O ye Jews, behold the man,
whom before you crucified like a Malefactor, behold him in his Throne, whom you
said, his Disciples had stolen by night out of his grave: behold him in his
Majesty, Matthew. 28.13. Greg. sup. ill. Matthew. 24. in nubibus coeli.
whom you would not deigne to look upon in his humility; the baser you esteemed
his weakness, the heavier must you find and feel his mightiness. The Son of man
appears, and the kindred of the earth must mourn; such a shout of fury follows
the sight of his Majesty, that the vaults shall echo, the hills resound, the
earth shake, the heavens change their situation, and all be turned to a
confusion; then shall the wicked weep and wail, and yet their tears not serve
their turn, their sins past betray them, their shame present condemns them, and
their torment to come confounds them; thus shall they bewail their miserable
hap, their unfortunate birth, and their cursed end: O fearful Judge, Cant.
6.4, 5.
terrible as an Army with Banners; turn away thine eyes from us, which overcome
the proudest Potentates: the Kings of the earth shall be astonished, and the
Nations of the Isles shall fear from far: Every eye shall see him whom they
have pierced, and tremble at the presence of his sight. Conceive the guilty
prisoner coming to his trial, will not the red robes of his Judge, make his
heart bleed for his bloodshed? does not that scarlet Cloth present a
monstrous hew before his eyes? O then! what sight is this, when the man slain,
sits in the judgment seat, the rosy wounds of our Savior still bleeding (as
it were) in the prisoners presence? These are the wounds, not as tokens of
infirmity, but victory, Aquin. supplem. Q. 90. A. 2. ad secundum.
and these now shall appear, not as if he must suffer, but to show us he has
suffered. See here an object full of glory, splendour, majesty, excellency, and
this is He] the man, the judge the rewarder of every man according to his works.

The Judge we have set in his Throne, and before we appear, let us practice our
repentance, that we answer the better. kiss his cups, and drink his
bodies-health, till he bring his soul to ruin: but remember for all these
things God will bring thee to judgment. Eccles. 11.9.
Cold comfort in the end: the Adulterer shall fatisfie his lust, when he lies
on a bed of fire, all hugged and embraced with those flames; the swearer shall
have enough of wounds and blood, when Devils torture his body, and rack his
soul in hell, the Drunkard shall have plenty of his Cups, when scalding lead
shall be poured down his throat, and his breath draw flames of fire in stead of
air: as is thy sin, so is the nature of thy punishment, the just Judge shall
give just measure, and the balance of his wrath poize in a just porportion.

Job rejoiced being cast on the Dunghill, that his Redeemer lived, and that he
should see him at the last day stand on the earth: John longed and cried; Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly; and had we the same precious faith, we have the same
precious promises: why then are we not ravished at the remembrance of these
things? certainly there is an happy faith (wheresoever it shall be found) that
shall not be ashamed at that day* Now therefore little children abide in him, 1 John 2.28.
that when he shall appear, we may have confidence* Confidence; what else? I
will see you again (says our Saviour-Iudge) and your heart shall rejoice, Joh.
16.22.
and your joy no man takes from you. O blessed mercy, that so triumphs
against judgment; our hearts must joy, our joys endure and all this occasioned
by the sight of our Savior; for Hee] shall reward every man according to his
works.

We have prepared the Judge for sentence: he has rid his circuit in the
Clouds, and made the Rainbow his chair of state, for his judgment seat; his
Sheriffs are the Saints, that now rise from the Dust to meet their Judge, whom
long they have exspected: the summons is sent out by a shout from heaven; the
cry no sooner made, but the graves fly open, and the dead arise: stay a while
till I ready them; you have seen the Judge, and now we prepare the judged. He]
is the Judge; every man] the judged: and He shall reward every man according to
his works. Every man.]
THe persons to be judged are a world of men, all men of the world, good, and
bad, elect and reprobates, but in a different manner: To give you a full view
of them, I must lead your attentions orderly through these passages, there must
be a Citation, Resurrection, Collection, Separation: follow me in these paths,
and you may see both the men and their difference, before they come to their
judgments.

First, there is a summons and Every man must hear it; it is performed by a
shout from heaven, and the voice of the last Trump; Surgite mortui, venite ad
judicium. Jeronymus super Mathaeum. Verc vox tubae terribilis, cui omnia
obediunt elementa, petras scindit, inferos, etc. Chrysostom. 1. ad Corin. 15.
the clangor of this Trump could ever sound in Ieroms ears, Arisr ye dead,
and come to judgment: the clangor of this Trump will sound in all men's ears,
it shall wake the dead out of their drouzy sleep, and change the living from
their mortal state, make devils tremble, and the whole world shake with
terror: A terrible voice, a Trumpet shall sound, that shall shake the world,
rend the rocks, break the mountains, dissolve the bonds of death, burst down
the gates of hell, and unite all spirits to their own bodies. What say you to
this Trump, that can make the whole Universe to tremble? no sooner shall it
sound, but the the earth shall shake, the mountains skip like Ramms, and the
little hills like young sheep: it shall pierce the waters, and fetch from the
bottom of the Sea the dust of Adams seed, it shall tear the rocky Tombs of
earthly Princes, and make their haughty minds to stoop before the King of
heaven; it shall remove the center, and tear the bowels of the earth, open the
graves of all the dead, and fetch their souls from heaven or hell, to reunite
them to their bodies. A dreadful summons of the wicked, whom this sudden
noise will no less astonish, then confound; the dark pitchy walls of that
infernal pit of hell, shall be shaken with the shout, when the dreadful soul
shall leave its place of terror, and once more re-enter into her stinking
Carrion, to receive a greater condemnation: what terror will this be to the
wicked wretch? what woeful salutations will there be between that body and
soul, which living together in the height of iniquity, must now be reunited to
enjoy the fullness of their misery? Joh. 5.28, 29.
The voice of Christ is powerful, the dead shall hear his voice, and they
shall come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.

You hear the summons, and the next is your appearance; death the Jailer brings
all his prisoners from the grave, and they must stand and appear before the
Judge of heaven.

The summons is given, and every man must appear: Death must now give back all
their spoils, and restore again all that she has took from the world. What a
ghastly sight will this be, to see all the Sepulchers open, to see dead men rise
out of their graves, and the scattered dust to fly on the wings of the wind,
till it meet together in one compacted body? Ezekiels dry bones shall live:
thus says the Lord, I will lay sinews upon you, and make flesh grow upon you,
and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and you shall know that I am
the Lord, Ezekiel. 37.6. Ezekiel. 37.6.
This dust of ours shall be devoured of worms, consumed by Serpents, which
craul and spring from the marrow of our bones: look in a dead man's grave, and
see what you find; but dust, and worms, and bones, and skuls, putrified flesh,
an house full of stench and vermin; Behold then the power of God Almighty, out
of this grave and dust of the earth; from these chambers of death and darkness,
shall arise the bodies of the buried, the graves will fly open, and the dead
go out; not an hair, not a dust, not a bone shall be denied, but whatsoever
holds their dust shall yield their bodies: I saw the dead (says John) small
and great stand before God; Revel. 20.12, 13.
and the Sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up
the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man according to their
works, Revel. 20.13. what a wonderful sight will this be, to see the sea and
earth bring forth in all parts such variety of bodies: to see so many sorts of
people and nations to come together? huge armies, innumerable, as the
Caterpillars of Egypt, all shall arise, and every one appear before the Lords
Tribunal: worms, and corruption, cannot hinder the resurrection, he that said
to Corruption, Job 17.14. Job 19.25.
thou art my father, and to the worm thou art my sister and mother, said also,
I know that my Redeemer lives, and mine eyes shall behold him. O good God! how
wonderful is thy power? this flesh of ours shall turn to dust* be eat of
worms, consume to nothing, if there be any relics of our ashes, the wind may
scatter them, the blasts divide them, our feet trample them, the beasts digest
them, the vermin devour them; if nothing, yet time will consume them. But for
all this, God is as able to raise us from the dust, as to create us of the
dust, not one dust of this clay shall perish, though scattered, divided
trampled, devoured, consumed, it shall be gathered, recovered, revived, refined
and raised; and as one dust shall not be lost of one man, so neither shall one
man be lost of all the world: this is that general day that shall congregate
all, they shall come from the four winds and corners of the world, to make an
universal appearance; all the children of Adam shall then meet together; yea,
all the kindreds of the earth shall meet together, and mourn; Assemble your
selves, and come all ye heathen to the valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I
sit to judge all the heathen, Joel 3.12. Joel 3.11, 12.


The summons are sounded, the dead raised, and yet to give you a fuller view of
the parties, see how God the Judge now sends his messengers, to fetch the living
bodies to his Court. He shall send his Angels (says our Savior) and they
shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to
another, Matthew. 24.31. Matthew. 24.31.
True it is, all shall be gathered, yet with a difference, some with a swift
pace fly to the Throne, where is the hope of their diliverance; others draw
and pull back, whiles the Angels hale them to the Judgment seat; the righteous
have nimble swift bodies, that fly to the Judge, as a Bird to her nest and
young ones; but the wicked have their bodies black and heavy, they cannot fly,
but flagge in the air, and the Angels do not bear, but dragge them to the
judgment seat: how can this choose but fear the wicked, when like malefactors,
they are brought before the wrathful judge? as they were born or buried, so
must they rise again naked and miserable; what a shame is this? and yet the
more horrible, in that their nakedness shall be covered with a filthy
blackness; needs must desperate fears sieze one the soul, when it is again
united to her body, transformed to such an ugly form: is this the body fed with
delights and delicates? is this the flesh pampered with ease and lust? is this
the face masked from the wind and Sun? are these the hands decked with Rings
and Diamonds? how become these so swarthy horrible, which before were so fair
and amiable? this the change of the wicked, when through sorrow and confusion
they shall cry to the Rocks, cover our nakedness, and to the hills hide our
ugliness; nay, rather than appear, let the infernal Furies tear and totter us
into a thousand pieces. Look your beauties (Beloved) in this glass: such is
the end of this worlds glory, so vain the pleasure of this body. Now is the end
of all things come and what remains, but a sea of fears and miseries rushing on
them: before shall the Angels drag them, behind shall the black Crew follow
them, within shall their consciences torture them, and without shall hot flames
of fire fume, and fry and furiously torment them; fear within, and fire
without: but worse then all, a Judge above all, thither must they go, Angels
usher them, Devils attend them, the Crier has called them, the Angels trump
has summoned them, and now they must appear.

We have brought all together, now we must part them asunder, the sheep shall
be put on the right hand, and the goats on the left, as every man has
deserved. Two travelers go together, feed together, lie together, sleep
together, but in the morn their ways part asunder: thus the sheep and goats
eat together, drink together, sleep together, rot together but at this day
there shall be a separation, let them grow together, corn and tares until the
harvest: this world is the flloor, Matthew. 13.30.
fan while you will, there will be some chaff; love peace like lambs their will
be some goats to trouble; the sheep and goats live both together in one fold,
the world; lie both together in one cote, the grave: the world is a common
Inn, which entertains all manner of passengers: the rode-way to death, is the
Kings highway free for all travelers: after the passage of this weary day,
death has provided a large bed to lay all in, the grave: all live together,
and all lie together, all rest together, and all rot together: but when this
night is past, and the last day is sprung, then is the woeful separation; some
turn on the right, and those are the blessed; others on the left hand, and
those are the cursed. Here is the beginning of woes, when the wicked shall
curse, and houl, like the fiendes of hell. O Lord, punish me here (says one
devoutly) rack me in pieces, cut me in shreds, burn me in fire, so that I may
be there placed at thy right hand: Domine hic ure, hic seca, modo in aeternum
parcas. Aug.
Blessed are they that have a place amongst those elect sheep; what now remains
but their doom, which is a lot that must befall every man? for he shall reward
(not one, or some, but every one) every man according to his works.

The Summons are given, the dead are raised, the prisoners conducted to the
bar, and the sheep and goats severed asunder each from other. summoned, raised,
gathered, severed; is not here a world of men to be judged all in one day?
Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision, Joel 3 14.
for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. Joel 3.14. Blessed
God! what a multitude shall stands before thee? all tongues, all nations, all
people of the earth shall appear at once, all we shall then behold each son of
Adam, and Adam our grandfather shall then see all his posterity. Consider
this, high and low, rich and poor, one with another, God is no accepter of
persons. Hark, O beggar, petitions are out of date, and yet thou need not
fear thou shall have justice, this day all causes shall be heard, and thou
(though a poor one) must appear with others to receive thy sentence. Hark, O
Farmer, now are thy lives and leases together finished, this day is the new
harvest of thy Judge, who gathers his wheat into his garner, Matthew. 3.12.
and burns up the chafe in fire unquenchable, no boon, no bribe, no prayers,
no tears can avail thy soul: but as thou have done, so art thou sentenced at
the first appearing. Hark, O Landlord, where is thy purchase to thee and thy
heirs for ever? this day makes an end of all, and happy were thy soul, if thou
had no better land then a barren rock, to cover and shelter thee from the
Judges presence. Hark, O Captain, vain now is the hope of man to be saved by
the multitude of an host: had thou command of all the armies on earth and
hell, yet could thou not resist the power of Heaven: see, the trump sounds,
and the alarm summons thee, thou must appear. Hark, O Prince, what is the
crown and scepter against thunder? the greatness of man, when it comes to
encounter with God is weakness and vanity. Hark, all the world, Ecclus 40.3, 4.
From him that sits upon the glorious throne, unto him that is beneath in
earth and ashes; from him that is clothed in blue silk and wears a crown,
even to him that is clothed in simple linen: all must appear before him, the
Beggar, Farmer, Landlord, Captain, King, and Prince, and every man, (when that
day is come) shall receive his rewards according to his works.

Every man must appear, but Every man will not think on it: would you know the
sign of that man which this day shall be blessed? it is he, and only he, that
again and again thinks on this day, that Ierome-like meditates on this summons,
and resurrection, and collection, and separation. Examine then your selves by
this rule; is your mind often carried to these objects? soar you on high with
the wings of faith; and a sound eye to this hill? why then, you are right
birds, truly bred, and not of the bastard brood? I pray you mark it, every
cross and disgrace, and slander, and discountenance, loss of goods, disease of
body or whatsoever calamity if you are the children of God, and destined to sit
at the right hand of our Savior) they will ever and anon, be carrying your
minds to those objects of Doomes-day. And if you can but say that
experimentally you find this true in your selves, if ordinarily in your
miseries, or other times, you think on this time of refreshing, then be of good
comfort, for you are of the brides company, and shall enter into the
marriage-chamber to abide there there for ever. But if you are destitute of
these kind of motions, O then strive for these properties, that are the
inseparable breathings and movings of an holy heart, sound mind, and blessed
person: every day meditate that every man shall appear one day, and receive his
reward according to his works.

You see how we have followed the cause, and wel-neer brought it to final
sentence, the term is discovered, the Judge revealed, the prisoners prepared,
and the next time we shall bring them to the bar, to receive their rewards.
This time depart in peace, and the God of peace keep your souls spotless
without sin, that you may be well prepared for this day of judgment. According
to his works.]
We have brought the prisoners to their trial, and now to go on, how should
this trial be? I answer: not by faith, but works; by faith we are justified,
by works we are judged: faith only causes, but works only manifest that we
are just indeed. Here then is the trial, that every soul of man must undergo
that day. Works are the matter that must be first enquired of: and is there any
wicked man to receive his sentence? let him never hope to be saved by another
super-erogating, the matter of enquiring is not aliena, but sua, not another,
but his] works. Or is there any good man on whom the smiling Judge is ready to
pronounce a blessed doom? Let him never boast of meriting heaven by his just
deservings; see the reward given, not propter, but secundum, (as Gregory Greg.
1. in illa verba 7. Psalm. poenit. Auditam fac mihi mane misericordiam.
tells us) not for his works, as if they were the cause, but according to his
works] as being the best witnesses of his inward righteousness.

But the better to acquaint you with this trial, there be two points, of which
especially we are to make inquiry.

First, how all men's works shall be manifest to us? Secondly, how all men's
works shall be examined by God?
1. Of the manifestation of every man's work, Revel. 20.12.
John speaks, And I saw the dead small and great stand before God, and the
books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and
the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books
according to their works, Revel. 20.12. God is said to have books, not
properly, but figuratively: all things are as certain and manifest to him, as
if he had registers in heaven to keep records of them. Remember this, O
forgetful! you may commit, add multiply your sins, and yet run on score till
they are grown so many, that they are out of memory; but God keeps them in a
register, and not one shall be forgotten, there is a book and books, and when
all the dead shall stand before God to receive their sentence, then must these
books be opened.

That is, the book of Gods memory, Man's conscience, Eternal life.


There is a book of Gods memory, and herein are all the acts and monuments of
all men whatsoever, enrolled and registered; A book of remembrance was written
before God, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name, Malac.
3.16. Malach. 3.16.
This is that which manifests all secrets, whether mental or actual; this is
that which reveals all doings, whether good or evil. In these Records are
found at large Abels sacrifice, Cains murder, Absolons rebellion, David's
devotion, the Jews cruelty, the Prophets innocence, good men's intentions, and
the sinners actions; nothing shall be hid when this book is opened, for all may
run and read it, stand and hear it. How fond are we that imagine heavens eye
(such is this book) to be shut upon us? Do we not see many run to corners to
commit their sins? there can they say, Let us take our fill of love until the
morning, for darkness has covered us, and who sees us? who knows us? Esai.
29.15. Prove. 7.18. Esaias 29.15.
But are not the Angels of God about you? 1 Cor. 4.9.
We are a spectacle to the Angels (says the Apostle) I am sure we must be to
both, to Angels, and to men, and to all the world: O do not that before the
Angels of God, yea before the God of Angels, which you would shame to do in the
sight and presence of an earthly man! Alas, must our thoughts be known, and
shall not dark-corner sins be revealed? must every word and syllable we speak
be writ and recorded in Gods memorable book: and must not ill deeds, ill
demeanours, ill works of darkness be disclosed at that day? yes; God shall
bring every work unto judgment, with every secret thing, be it good or evil,
Eccles. 12.14. Eccles. 12.14.
Wail ye wicked, and tremble in astonishment. Now your closet-sins must be
disclosed your private faults laid open, Gods keeps the account-book of every
sin, every transgression: Imprimis, for adultery, Item for envy, blasphemy,
oaths, drunkenness, violence, murder, and every sin, from the beginning to
this time, from our birth to our burial, the total sum, eternal death and
damnation: this is the note of accounts, wherein are all thy offenses written,
the debt is death, the pay perdition, which fury pays over to destruction.

But there is another book, that shall give (a more full, I cannot say, but) a
more fearful evidence then the former, which is the book of every man's
conscience: Some call it the book of testimony, which every man still bears
about him. There is within us a Book and Secretary, the Book is Conscience, and
the Secretary is our soul: whatsoever we do is known to the soul, and writ in
our book of conscience: there is no man can so much as commit one sin, but his
soul, that is privy to the fact, will write it in this book. In what a woeful
case will thy heart then be? in what strange terror and trembling must it
stand possessed, when this must be opened, and thy sins revealed? It is now
perhaps a book shut up and sealed, Liber signatue and clausus, in die judicii
aperiendus.
but in the day of judgment shall be opened: and if once opened, what shall be
the evidence that it will bring forth? there is a private Sessions to be held
in the breast of every condemned sinner, the memory is Recorder, grief an
Accuser, truth is the Law, damnation the Judgment, hell the Prison, Devils the
Jaylours, and Conscience both Witness and Judge to pass sentence on thee.
What hopes he at the general Assize, whose conscience has condemned him
before he appear? Look well to thy life, thou bear about thee a book of
testimony, which though for a time it be shut, till it be full fraught with
accusations, yet then (at the Day of Doom) it must be opened, when thou shall
read, and weep and read, every period stop with a sigh, every word be enough to
break thy heart, and every syllable reveal some secret, thy own conscience
(upon the matter) being both witness, Judge accuser and condemner.

But yet there is another book we read of, and that is the book of life: Herein
are written all the names of Gods elect, from the beginning of the world till
the end thereof: these are the golden leaves; this is that precious book of
heaven, wherein if we are registered, not all the powers of hell, or death, or
devils shall blot us out again. Here is the glory of each devout soldier of
our Savior, how many have spent their lives, spilt their bloods, run upon
sudden deaths to gain a perpetual name? and yet for all their doings, many of
these are dead, and gone, and their memories perished with them; only Christ's
soldier has immortal fame, he, and only he is writ in that book that must
never perish. Come hither ye ambitious! your names may be writ in Chronicles,
yet lost; writ in durable marble, yet perish; writ in a monument equal to a
Colossus, yet be ignominious. O were you but writ in this book of life, your
names should never die, never suffer any ignominy! It is an axiom most true,
they that are written in the eternal leaves of heaven shall never be wrapped
in the cloudy sheets of darkness. Here then is the joy of Saints, at that Day
of Doom this book shall be opened, and all the elect whom God has ordained to
salvation, shall see it, read it, hear it, and greatly rejoice at it. The
Disciples casting out devils, return with miracles in their mouths, O Lord (say
they) even devils are subject to us through thy name. True (says Christ) I saw
Satan as lightning fall from heaven, notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that
the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice because your names are
written in heaven, Luke 10.20. Luke 10.20.
And well may the Saints rejoice that have their names written in Gods book,
they shall see them (to their comfort) writ in letters of gold, penned with the
Almighties finger, engraven with a pen of a diamond: thus will this book give
in the evidence, and accordingly will the Judge proceed to sentence.

books one day must be set before thee: a time will come when every thought of
thy heart, every word of thy mouth, every glance of thy eye, every moment of
thy time, every office thou have born, every company thou have used, every
sermon thou have heard, every action thou have done, and every omission of any
duty or good deed thou have left undone, shall be seen in these books at the
first opening of them: thy conscience shall then be suddenly, clearly, and
universally enlarged with extraordinary light to look upon all thy life at
once; Gods memory shall then shine forth, and show it self, when all men
looking on it as a reflecting glass, they shall behold all the passages of
their misspent lives from their births to their burials. Where is the wicked
and deceitful man? will thou yet commit thy villainies, treacheries, robberies,
murders, debates, and impieties? Let me tell thee (if so) to thy hearts-grief,
all thy secret sins, and closet villainies, that no eye ever looked upon (but
that which is a thousand times brighter then the Sun) shall then be disclosed
and laid open before Angels, men, and devils, and thou shall then and there be
horribly, universally, and everlastingly ashamed: never therefore go about to
commit any sin, because it is midnight, or that the doors are locked upon
thee, suppose it be concealed, and lie hid (in as great darkness as it was
committed) till Doomsday again, yet then shall it out with a witness, and be
as legible in thy forehead, as if it were writ with the brightest stars, or the
most glistring Sun beam upon a wall of crystal.

your selves to account while it is called to day, search and examine all your
thoughts, words, and deeds, and prostrating your selves before God, with broken
and bleeding affections, pray and sue that your names may be writ in heaven, in
that Book of life.] This will be the joy of your hearts, the peace of your
souls, the rest of your minds: yea how glad will you then be to have It is a
question, whether the sins of Gods people shall be manifested at that day?
some say, they shall be manifested, not for their ignominy or confusion, but
only that the goodness and grace of God may be made the more illustrious; and
for this they urge, Matthew. 12.36. 2 Cor. 5.10. Revel. 20.12. Others say they
shall not be manifested. 1. Because Christ in his sentence only enumerates the
good works they had done, but takes no notice of their sins. 2. Because this
agrees best with those expressions, that God blotteth out our sins, and that
they are thrown into the bottom of the sea. 3. Because Christ is their
bridegroom, friend, advocate, and how ill would it become one in such relations
to accuse or lay open their sins? which of these opinions is truest is hard to
say. Heb. 6.10.
all these books laid open? by this means (I speak it to the comfort of all
true hearted Christians) shall your obedience, and repentance, and faith, and
love, and zeal, and patience, etc. come to light and be known. God is not
unrighteous to forget your works of labor and love. No, all must out,
especially at that day when the books shall be open, our works manifested, and
as we have done, so must we be rewarded, for then he shall reward every man
according to his works.]

The books are opened, and now are the matters to be examined: there is first a
view, and then a trial. Law-book whereby we are tried contains three leaves,
Nature, the Law, and the Gospel: the Gentiles must be tried by the first the
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles by the second, and the faithful Jews and
Gentiles by the last. Those that confess no God but nature, must be judged by
the law of nature: those that confess a God, no Christ, must be judged by the
Law of God without the merits of Christ: those that confess God the Father,
and believe in God the Son, shall be judged by the Gospel, which reconcileth
us to God the Father by the merits of Christ. Atheists by the law of nature,
infidels by the law of God, Christians by the Gospel of our Savior Christ. To
the statutes of the former who can answer? our hope is in the latter, we appeal
to the Gospel, and by the Gospel we shall have our trial: They that have
sinned without the law; Romans 2.12.
shall perish without the law; and they that have sinned under the law, shall
be judged by the law. Romans 2.16.
But God shall judge the secrets of all hearts (of all our hearts) by Jesus
Christ according to my Gospel, Romans 2.12.16.

Vel te totaliter absolvit, vel te capitaliter damnat. John 16.9.
Let this then forewarn us what we have to do: It is the Gospel that will either
thoroughly justify thee, or extremely condemn thee. The Spirit shall convince
the world of sin, (says Christ) and why so? but because they believe not on
me, John 16.9. There is no sin but infidelity, no righteousness but faith:
not that adultery, intemperance, malice, are no sins; but if unfaithfulness
remain not all, these sins are pardoned, and so they are as if they were no
sins indeed. How quick a riddance true repenting faith makes with our sins?
they are too heavy for our shoulders, and we cannot bear them; faith only
turns them over unto Christ, and we are disburthened of them: whereas there
would go with us to judgment an huge kennell of lusts, an army of vain words,
a legion of evil deeds, faith instantly discharges them all, and kneeling down
to Jesus Christ, beseeches him to answer for them all, howsoever committed. O
then make we much of faith! but not of such a faith neither, as goes alone
without works: it is nothing at this judgment to say, I have believed, and not
well lived: the Gospel requires both, faith to believe, and obedience to work:
not only to repent and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15. Mark 1.15.
but to obey from the heart that form of doctrine, Romans 6.17. Romans 6.17.
True indeed, thou shall be saved for thy faith, not for thy works, but for
such a faith as is without works thou shall never be saved; we say therefore, A
justificando, non a justificato.
works are disjoined, from the act of justifying, not from the person
justified: heaven is given to us for Christ's merits, but we must show him the
fair copy of our lives. O then let this move us to abound in knowledge, and
faith, and repentance, and love, and zeal, and clothing, and feeding, and
lodging the poor members of Christ Jesus, and howsoever all these can merit
nothing at Gods hands, yet will he crown his own gifts, and reward them in his
mercy. Say then, do thou relieve a poor member of Christ Jesus? do thou
give a cup of cold water to a Prophet in the name of Prophet? Matt. 10.42.
Christ does promise thee of his truth he will not let thee lose thy reward:
certainly he will not, so thy works be done in faith: why this is the covenant,
the glad tidings, the Gospel, to live well and believe well. O let not that
which is a word of comfort to us, be a bill of indictment against us! albeit in
our justification we may say, Be it to us according to our faith; yet in our
retribution it is said (as you have it before you in this Text read unto you)
Then he shall reward every man (for manifestation of his faith) according to
his works.

A little to recall our selves, The Prisoners are tried, the Verdict's brought
in, the indictment is found and the Judge now sits on life and death, even
ready with sparkling eyes to pronounce his sentence. This we must defer a
while, and the next time you shall hear what you have long exspected. The Lord
grant us an happy issue, that when this day is come, the sentence may be for
us, and we may be saved to our endless comfort. Shall reward.
What Assize is this that affords each circumstance of each prisoners trial?
the time is Then,] the Judge is He,] the Prisoners Men,] the evidence Works,
Non coronat Deus merita tua tanquam merita tua, sed tanquam donasua. Aug. lib.
de great. and lib. arbit. cap. 7.
] which no sooner given in, but the sentence follows, which is, to reward]
every man according to his works.

This reward is nothing in effect but a retaliation, if we live well here, God
will then crown his own gifts; but if we sin without repentance, we may not
escape without punishment. There is a God that sits and sees, and anon will
reward us.

But to unfold this Reward,] there lies in it a Doom, and Execution.


God speaks it in the first effects it in the second: he gives it in our doom,
and we receive it in the execution.

The doom is of two sorts, according to the parties that receive it. One is an
absolution, which is the doom of Saints; the other is a condemnation, which is
the doom of reprobates: there is a reward on the right hand bestowed on the
blessed, and an heavy judgment which falls on the left hand upon the heads of
the wicked.

To begin with that in our meditation, which our Savior begins with in action:
Imagine what a blessed day will this be to the godly, when standing on the
right hand of the Judge, they shall hear the heavenly music of their happy
sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.34.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

In which gracious speech we may observe four gradations. First, a gentle
invitation, Come. Secondly, a sweet benediction, Ye blessed of my Father.
Thirdly, heavens possession, inherit the Kingdom. Fourthly, a glorious
ordination to felicity, prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

First, you have Come.] It is the sweet voice of Christ inviting the Saints
before, and now giving their welcome to his heavenly Canaan? he has called
often, Come all that labor, Come all that travel: Matthew. 11.28. Rev. 22.17.
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that hears, say, Come; and
let him that is a thirst Come. Thus he calls all men to his grace, but only
the elect to his glory: now he desires every man to Come, but the righteous
alone shall have this Wel-come. O how leaps that soul with joy, that hears this
voice of her sweet Savior! all the music of Angels cannot so ravish the mind,
as this voice of our Savior glads the soul, now are the gates of heaven open,
and the Judge, who is Master of the feast, bids the guests Come and Wel-come.

But who are they? Ye blessed of my Father,] a word able to make them blessed,
when pronounced. Down on your knees rebellious sons; and so long as you live
on earth, beg, pray, sue for the blessing of your Father in heaven. They that
are Gods servants, are no less his sonns, therefore every morn, night, and
noon, ask blessing boldly, and God will bestow it liberally. The first Sermon
that ever Christ preached, was full of blessings, Matthew. 5. Matthew. 5.
Blessed are the poor in spirit. Blessed are they that mourn. Blessed are the
meek. Blessed are the merciful. And as he begun, so he concludes, Come ye
blessed, ye blessed of my Father.

Must they come? for what? to inherit the kingdom.] Of all tenures inheritance
is best, of all inheritances a kingdom is most excellent, Sic aeterna sine
successione, distributa sine diminutione. communis sine invidia, beata sine
omni miseria.
but that all shall inherit, and that there is no scantling, this is heavens
wonder, and the Angels bliss. An heavenly inheritance sure, that is cintinued
without succession, divided without diminution, common without envy, for ever
happy, and without all misery. This is the inheritance of the just, the
possession whereof makes every Saint no less glorious then a King. Kings are
they indeed, whose dominions are not limited nor their borders bounded, nor
their people numbered, nor the time of their reign prescribed. Such glorious
things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God.

Is this your inheritance? but upon what right? it is prepared for you from the
beginning of the world.] Had the Lord such care to provide for his children
before they were? how may his sons triumph born to such dignity? God will so
certain their salvation, that he has prepared it for them from before the
foundation of the world. O blessed souls, if you be Gods servants! though a
while you suffer sorrow and tribulation, yet here is the hope of Saints, Luke
12.32.
it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Heaven is prepared
of old, there is the place of Gods majesty, and there the Saints of God shall
receive the crown, the reward of victory.

Hear yonder a quire of Angels, a song of Sion, an heavenly consort, sounding
to the Judge whilst he is pronouncing of thy sentence. Blessed souls! how pant
you dances at the uttering of each syllable? Come] says our Savior, and if he
but say Come, joy, happiness, glory, felicity, all come on heaps into the
indeared soul. Ye blessed] says our Savior, and if he but say Blessed, the
Angels, Archangels, Cherubims, Seraphims, all joy at the enjoying of this
blessed company. Inherit the kingdome] says our Savior, and if he but say
inherit, crowns, scepters, garlands, diadems, all these are the inheritance of
Gods adopted children. Prepared for you] says our Savior, and if he but say
Prepared, the love, mercy, election, compassion of our Lord will shine forth to
the soul to her everlasting comfort. O ravishing voice! Cantic. 5.8.
I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my welbeloved, th^^ you
tell him I am sick of love. What else? you that are Gods servants are no less
his spouse, your soul is the bride, and when the day is come (this day of doom)
God give you joy, the joy of heaven for ever and ever.

But I must turn to the left hand, and show you another crew, prepared for
another sentence. And what a terrible sentence will that be, which at first
hearing will make all ears glow and tingle? His lips (says the Prophet) are
full of indignation, and his tongue like a consuming fire, Matt. 4.25, 41.
Esaias 30.27. Esa. 30.27.
What fire so hot as that fiery sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Here is every particular full of
horror, gradually inhancing their judgment. First, a grievous refusal,
Depart. Secondly, the loss of salvation, from me. Thirdly, that deserved
malediction, ye cursed. Fourthly, the horror of pains, into everlasting fire.
Fifthly, the preordinance of their torments, prepared for the devil and his
angels.

First, they must depart.] This seems nothing to the wicked now: depart? why
they are contented to be gone, much more delight have they in sin, then in
Gods service. But as when a gracious Prince opening his long locked up
treasury, bids in some to receive, but others to depart, this must needs be a
disgraceful vexation: so when the glory of heaven, and those unvaluable
treasures shall be opened, and dealt about to the faithful, what horror will
it be to the reprobates to be cast off with a depart? no share accrues to them,
no not so much as one glimpse of glory must cheer their dejected countenances,
but as ill-meriting followers they are thrust from the gates with this
watchword to be gone, Depart.

But whence? there is the loss, from me,] and if from me, then from all that
is mine, my mercy, my glory, my salvation. Here is an universal spoil of all
things, of God in whom is all goodness, of the Saints in whom is all solace,
of the Angels in whom is all happiness, of heaven, wherein all pleasures live
ever and ever. Whither O Lord shall the cursed go that depart from thee? into
what haven shall they arrive? what Master shall they serve? is it thought so
great a punishment to be banished from our native soils? what then is this to
be banished from Almighty God? and whither, but into a place of horror; to
whom? but to a cursed crew of howling reprobates. Depart from me.

Who are they? Ye cursed] Christ has before invited you with blessings, but
these refused, now take you the curse to your despite: Psalm. 109.17.
the wicked man (says the Prophet) as he has loved cursing so let it come
unto him: has he loved it? let him take his love: as he has clothed himself
with cursing, as with a garment, so let it come into his bowels, like water,
and like oil into his bones, Psalm. 109.18. Psalm. 109.18.
No sooner our Savior cursed the Fig Tree, but leaves and boughs, body and
root, all wither away, and never any more fruit grows thereon; and thus shall
the wicked have a curse, like the Ax which put to the root of the tree, Matthew.
3.10.
shall hew it down, and cast it into the fire. Go ye cursed.

But whither must they go? into everlasting fire:] O what a bed is this for
delicate and dainty persons? no feathers but fire, no friends but furies; no
ease but fetters, no light but smoke, no Chimes nor Clock to pass away the
night, but timelesse eternity. A fire? intolerable, a fire burning, never
dying? O immortal pains! Esai. 33.14.
which of you (says the Prophet) is able to dwell in the burning fire? who can
endure the everlasting flames? it shall not be quenched night nor day, the
smoke thereof shall go up evermore; the pile is fire, and much wood, Esai.
30.33.
and the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone kindles it. What torment,
what calamity can be compared with the shadow of this? the wicked must be
crowded together like brick in a fiery Furnace: there is no servant to fan
cold air on their tormented parts, not so much as a chink, where the least puff
of wind might enter in to cool them: it is a fire, an everlasting fire.

For whom? prepared for the Devil and his Angels] heavy company for distressed
souls: the Serpents policy could not escape hell, nor can the craft of our age
so deal with this Serpent, as thereby to prevent this fire: it was sure
prepared for some, as some have prepared themselves for it; burning in lust, in
malice, in revenge, until themselves, their lust, malice, revenge, and all
burn together in hell. Tophet is prepared of old, Esai. 30.33.
whither that day star as fallen from heaven, and a black crew of Angels
guard him round in that lake of hell: there must these howling reprobates keep
their residence; the last sentence that never is recalled, is now pronounced:
what! Go; Who? ye cursed: Whither? into everlasting fire: to what company? to
a crew of Devils and their Angels. O take heed that ye live in Gods fear! least
that leaving his service he give you this reward; Depart ye cursed.

you, what fearful tremblings seiz on their souls that have their sentence for
eternal flames? If a Lord have Mercy on thee, Take him away Jaylour, will
cause such shedding of tears, folding of arms, and wringing of hands, what will
this sentence do, Go ye cursed? etc. O which way will they turn? or how will
they escape the Almighties wrath? to go backward is impossible, to go forwards
intolerable; whose help will they crave? God is their Judge, heaven their fo,
the Saints deride them, Angels hate them, all creatures cry for vengeance on
them. God Lord! what a world of misery has seized on these miserable souls?
their Executioners are Devils, the Dungeon Hell, the earth stands open, and the
cruel Furnace ready-boyling to receive them: into what a shaking fit of
distractions will these terrors drive them? every part shall bear a part in
this doleful ditie, eyes weep, hands wring, breasts beat, hearts ache, voices
cry, horror, dread, terror, confusion are lively equipages of this tragic
Scene. Now (O man of earth) what will all thy wealth avail thee? what can all
thy pleasures profit thee? one drop of water to cool thy fiery tongue in hell,
is more worth then a world of treasures: all the gold and precious stones the
world affords, will not buy one bottle of water: all thy golden gods, and
silver plates cannot prevail one drammme of comfort; but rather as they were
thy bane on Earth, so they will aggravate thy pain in Hell. Who pities not the
vilest creature, to see it suffer torments, and no way to release it? who then
will not pity this end of the wicked, when they must suffer, and suffer, yet
never feel ease of pain, nor end of torments? A sentence not to be revoked, yet
unsufferably to be endured; torment on torment, anguish on anguish, fire upon
fire, and though a River (nay, a sea) of tears drop from their eyes, yet cannot
one spark be quenched, the worm never dies, Mark 9.44.
the fire never goes out. Go ye into everlasting fire, not piled of consuming
wood, or the black moulds, turning to white ashes, but kindled, by the Judges
breath, of pitch and sulphur; Rivers of boiling Brimstone run from
everlasting springs: in these hot Bathes was that Dives dived, when those
fiery words came flaming from his mouth as spitting fire: Luke 16.24.
Let Lazarus dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my tongue: Alas! what
should a drop of water do on a finger, when rivers cannot quench the tip of his
tongue? he lies on a bed of never-dying flames, where brimstone is the fuel,
devils the kindlers, the breath of an offended God the bellows, and hell the
furnace, where body and soul must ever lie and fry in scorching torments. O
let the heat of these flames quench the heat of our sin: if once the sentence
pass, there is no reprieve to be hoped for; this is the last Day of Doom, when
our sins must be revealed, our Reward proportioned, and as we have done, so we
must be sentenced: for then he shall reward] every man according to his works.

Thus you have heard the sentence of the just and wicked: and now is the Judge
rising from his glorious seat; the Saints that were invited guard him along,
and the sentenced prisoners are delivered to the Jaylers to be bound in burning
Steel and Iron, the reward of Execution. The sentence being past in all
prescribed order, the Execution must needs follow: but as there is a double
sentence, so a double retribution: first, for the wicked, who immediately after
the sentence shall be chased into hell, the Execution being speedily and
fearfully done upon them, with all horror and haste by the Angels. O what a
scriech of horror will be heard? what woes and lamentations will be uttered,
when Devils, and Reprobates and all the damned crew of hell, shall be driven
into hell, whereunto they shall be thrust with violence, never to return again?
How desperate is their case, when none will comfort them? the Saints deride
them, Angels mock them, their own friends scoff them, devils hate them, the
earth groans under them, and hell will swallow them. Down they go howling, and
shrieking, and gnashing their teeth, the effect of a most impatient fury. The
world leaves them, the earth forsakes them, hell entertains them, there must
they live and die, and yet not live nor die, but dying live, and living die;
death in life, life in death, miserable ever. If the drowning of the old world,
swallowing up of Korah and his accomplices, burning up of Sodom with brimstone,
were attended with such terrors and hideous outcries, how infinitely
transcendent to all possibility of conceit, expression, or belief, will the
confusions and tremblings of that red-dread-fiery day be? It is not a few but
many; nor many only, but all the wicked of the earth, being many millions of
men, shall be dragged down, with all the Devils of hell to torments without
end, or ease, or past imagination; then to speak it again, that I may the
deeper imprint it in your minds and memories: sure there was horrible
shrieking, when those five filthy Cities first felt fire and brimstone drop
down upon their heads; when those Rebels saw the ground cleave asunder, and
themselves and all theirs, Go down quick into the pit: Number. 16.33.
when all the sons and daughters of Adam found the flood rising, and ready to
overflow them all at once. But the most horrid cry that ever was heard, or
ever shall be heard in Heaven, or in Earth, in this world, or in the world to
come, will be then when all the forlorn condemned reprobates upon sentence
given, shall be violently and unresistably haled down to hell; neither shall any
tears, or prayers, or promises, or suits, or cries, or yellings, or calling
upon Rocks and Mountains, or wishes never to have been, or now to be made
nothing, be then heard, or prevail in their behalf: nay, (yet more to increase
their torments) there is not one in Earth or Heaven that will speak one word in
their behalf: but without mercy, without stay, without any farewell at all,
they shall be immediately and irrecoverably cast down into the bottomless pit
of easeless, endless, and remediless torments. Oh! what then will be the
gnawings of the never-dying worm? what rage of guilty consciences? what furious
despair? what horror of mind? what distractions and fears? what tearing their
hair, and gnashing of teeth? In a word, what wailing, weeping, roaring,
yelling, filling heaven, and earth, and hell? O miserable Caitiffs, caught and
wrapped in the snares of Satan! What need we more? this is the Judges charge,
the Sheriffs Commission, Matthew. 22.13.
the sinners execution, Take them away, cast them into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. A darkness indeed, that must ever be
debarred from the sight of heaven: no sunshine ever peeps within those
Walls, no light, no fire, no candle, alas! nothing is there but Clouds and
darkness, thick smoke, and fiery sulphur: and such is the portion of
sinners, the Reward of the wicked.

Solomon's fool, that runs, and swiftly runs to the stocks? Prove. 7.22.
is this our pleasure, to sin a while, and burn for ever? for one small spark
of silly joy, to suffer universal and perpetual pains? Who buys at so dear a
rate? Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of the
Earth, and he that flees from the noise of the fear, shall fall into the pit,
and he that comes up out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare: for the
windows from an high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake: the
earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved
exceedingly, the earth shall reel to and fro, like a drunken man, and shall be
removed like a Tent, and the iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it, so that
it shall fall, and rise no more, Esaias 24.17. Esaias 24.17, 18, 19, 20, 22.
O miserable fear to the wicked! If the Earth fall, how shall the sinners
stand? Nay, They shall be gathered together as prisoners in the pit, and they
shall be shut up in the prison, never more to be visited, released, or
comforted. Be forewarned then (beloved!) least you also come into this place of
torment. Luke 16.28.
It is a fearful prison, and God give us grace so to arraigne, judge, cast,
and condemn our selves here, that we may escape this execution of the damned
hereafter.

I have no will to end with terror: Then to sweeten your thoughts with the joy
of Saints, look upwards and you may see a blessed company. After the wicked are
cast down into hell, Christ and the blessed Saints ascend into heaven. From the
Tribunal Seat of Judgment Christ shall arise, and with all the glorious
company of Heaven, march toward the Heaven of Heavens. O what comely march is
this? what songs of triumph are here sung and warbled? The voice of thy
Watchmen shall be heard, they shall lift up their voice and shout together, for
they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion, Esaias 52.8.
Esaias 52.8.
Here is a victory indeed, the soldiers in arrayed order both Marching and
Triumphing: Christ leads the way, the Cherubims attend, the Seraphims burn in
love, Angels, Archangels, Principalities, Powers, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Priests, Evangelists, Martyrs, Professors, and Confessors of Gods Law and
Gospel, following, attend the Judge and King of glory; singing with melody, as
never ear has heard, shining with Majesty as never eye has seen, rejoicing
without measure, as never heart conceived. O blessed train of soldiers, goodly
troop of Captains! each one does bear a palm of victory in his hands, each one
must wear a Crown of glory on his head; the Church Militant is now Triumphant,
with a final overthrow have they conquered Devils, and now must they enjoy
God, life, and heaven: And thus as they march along, heaven opens unto them: O
infinite joy! Tell me, O my soul, what an happy hour will that be, when thou
shall first enter into the gates of heaven, when the Blessed Trinity shall
gladly entertain thee, and with a Well done good and faithful servant, Matthew.
25.21.
bid thee, Come, and enter into thy Masters joy: When all the Angels, and
Archangels shall salute thee, when Cherubims and Seraphims shall come to meet
thee, when all the powers of heaven shall congratulate thy coming, and joy for
thy arrival at the Port of peace? Here is the end of the Godly, the fruits of
his end, the Reward it self. What can I say? but live in GODS fear, and the
LORD reward you; nay, he will so, if you live so, for Then he shall reward
every Man according to his works.

And now this Sermon done, you see the Court is dissolved: Stay but to receive
A Writ of review, and you shall hear in a word all the news of this Assize,
from the beginning to the ending. What a strange Assize was this, where every
circumstance was to the wicked so terribly fearful? the Term full of horror,
the Judge full of Majesty, the Prisoners full of anguish, the Trial full of
fear, the Doom full of grief to the wicked, as of comfort to the elect. 2 Pet.
3.11.
Seeing therefore that all these things are thus, what manner of Persons ought
ye to be in holy conversation and godliness? A word of judgment could make
Jeremiah weep, just Job be afraid, Felix to tremble, and cannot this usual
sound of the hammers a little mollify our stony hearts? Esaias 1.22.
how is the gold become dross, and the silver iron? we run over reason, and
tread upon conscience, and fling by counsel, and go by the word and post to
death; but will you not remember, that for all these things you must come to
judgment? Eccles. 11.9.
Be sure there is a Term for our appearance, Then] there is a Judge that will
sit upon us He.] There is a band of Prisoners Every man.] There is a Bill of
Indictment framed, according to our works.] And last of all, there is a
sentence after which follows the Execution, the reward] due to us, which then
he will give us: only now bestow on us those graces of thy Spirit, and then (O
Lord) Reward us according to our works. AMEN.

FINIS.
Hels horror.
MATTHEW. 13.30. Bind them in bundles to burn them.


THis Text is the harvest of Tares, and that that you may know the husbandry,
here is first the sowing, verse. 25. Verse. 25.
Secondly, the coming up, verse. 26. 26.
Thirdly, the overseers of it, verse. 27. 27.
Fourthly, their intent to weed it, verse. 28. 28.
Fifthly the sufferance of its growth till the harvest verse. 29. 29.
Sixthly, the harvest it self, verse. 30. 30.
Or yet to give you the Parable in a more ample wise, here is a man sowes good
seed in his field, and the enemy whilst his servants sleep, sows tares
amongst the wheat: the seeding done, and the fertile soil made fruitful by
heavens showers the blade of the corn springs up, and the tares appear in their
kind amongst them: those heavenly Angels, which are Gods stewards of this field
pitching their watchful eyes about, first see, then run to their Master with
this message, Master, sowedst thou not good seed in thy field? from whence then
has it tares? God, whose all-knowing wisdom can resolve all doubts, tells them
expressly, an enemy had done this: an enemy sure, 1 Pet. 5.8.
yea as Peter calls him, a devouring enemy: such is the fruit issuing from so
bad an author. Yet see the sedulous care of Gods holy servants, they will not
spare to root up what envy sows, and with a willing obedience exspect only
his command, Will thou that we go and gather them up? nay, see the Almighty
disparkling a while his beams of mercy, all must stay till the harvest, and
then goes forth his royal command to the reapers: Gather ye together first the
tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them.

But, me thinks, I hear you say to me as the Disciples to our Savior, Declare
unto us this Parable; Verse. 36.
for the doing of which I shall place before you a field, the world; the
reapers, Angels; the householder, God; good men, as corn; the wicked, as Tares;
the harvest that must gather all, is the end of the world, and then are the
reapers enjoined this heavy task, Separate the bad from the good, and cast
them into hell fire to burn them.

See here the miserable condition of impenitent souls, each circumstance
aggravates their torment, and that you may in this text view a Series of the
causes, here is first the efficient, Bind] the material, them] the formal, in
bundles] the final, to burn them.] Every word like so many links, makes up
this fiery chain of torment. Bind:] heavy doom to be fettered in hell fire!
them:] miserable souls to be captived in those bands! in bundles:] cruel
anguish to be crowded in throng heaps! to burn them:] intolerable heats to be
scorched, blistered, burned. And yet see here at once, this heavy, miserable,
cruel, intolerable doom, fall on the wicked; the command is out, what? Bind]
whom? them] how? in bundles] for what? to burn them.] Not a word, but it speaks
horror to the damned, either Binding, or bundling, or burning: Bind them in
bundles to burn them.

The work you see, is ordered now we put in our sickle, only God prosper our
labor, till we have done the harvest.

Them]
WE will begin first with the subject, that you may know of whom it is spoken,
Bind them] Them? whom? If you will view the precedent words, the text tells you
they are Tares, Gather ye first the Tares, and bind them. In Gods field there
is Corn and Cockle, and as for the one there is provided a barn, so for the
other there is nothing better then binding and burning.

The Greek word calls them (...), tares; the Hebrews call them Hadul, thistles,
or thorns; and both are apt expressions of the matter in hand: what are tares
for? but to be gathered, bound, and burned, says our Savior: and what are
thorns for? but to be rejected, cursed, and burned, says the Apostle, Heb.
6.8. Heb. 6.8.
Such is the penalty of this weed of the earth (for they are neither better)
that as men deal with thorns, who first cut them up with bills, then lay them up
to wither, and lastly, burn them in the furnace; so God deals with Tares, he
weeds them, binds them, burns them; not a Tare escapes the fire, but all come
to combustion.

But only to follow the Original, they are called (...), Tares; and that of a
double derivation, the first is (...), quasi (...) because they hurt the corn
wherewith they are joined; the second is, (...) quasi (...), because they
innitiate, associate, and so unite themselves with the corn, as if they were
the very same. To begin with the last.

We all come together to the Church, and amongst us are Tares and Wheat, good
and bad; in all companies there will be evil intruders, Satan among the Angels,
Saul among the Prophets, Judas among the Apostles, Demas among the Professors,
yet who can discern the tares, but God alone who knows our hearts? Hypocrites
can work dissimulation in a web, and this so cunningly is platted, that no
difference is discerned: such are hot meteors in the air, which shoot and show
like stars, but are indeed nothing less: your eyes may be fixed on heaven,
your ears all listening to this Sermon, yet (as I condemn none, so) I never
knew, but Darnell has ever been in Gods field. The Church Christ calls a net,
an house, a floor, a field: a net that takes fish, good and bad; an house, that
harbors vessels of wrath and honor; a floor, whereon is powered wheat and
chaff; a field, wherein is sowed Corn and Cockle: thus good and bad seed are a
while as that treasure hid in the field, Matthew. 13.44.
which cannot be discovered: but is there not a God that searches both the
heart and reins? Gal. 6.7.
Be not deceived, ye deceivers of the world! God is not mocked; it is not a
false heart with a fair look, it is not a mere show of Religion which God
accepts: Silly Tares, hide close your sins in the darkest sorrows, or mount up
your heads amongst the flourishing wheat, Matthew. 13.12.
yet know there is a fan that will purge the floor; you would grow, and you
shall grow till the harvest, God suffers that seed till the fruit grows ripe,
but then, Gather the tares, and bind them (wicked dissemblers) bind them in
bundles to burn them.

Secondly, as the Tares are hypocritical, so are they hurtful, they seem at
unity, but are at enmity with the wheat about them: and these Tares are either
heretics, as most Fathers understood them; or any sinner whosoever, that is a
child of the wicked one, Verse. 38.
as our Savior did expound them.

First, they are heretics, wicked Tares indeed: and that you may know who are
these: (...) is a choice, or election, at first a good word in Philosophy,
taken for a right form of learning: but now in Divinity it is a word of
disgrace, and intends a stubborn deviation from the deceived truth. This
infection (like the Tares) first begins whiles men sleep, the Pastors
negligence gives way unto it, and because of its little seed, or small
beginning, it is never heeded, or regarded, till the whole house he infected:
thus Popery crept up in the dark, like a thief putting out the lights, that he
might rob the house more securely; and as it began with a little, so it went on
by degrees, till an universal Apostasy was (as it were) over the face of the
world. Vna scintilla fuit. Totum orbem ejus flamma populata est.
Austin says of Arrius his heresy, It was at first but a little spark, but it
spread so at last, that the flame of it singed the whole world: so the Pope
rose by degrees, first above Bishops, then above Patriarchs, then above
Councels, then above Kings, then above Scriptures, even so the Apostle speaks
of Antichrist, He has exalted himself above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians.
2.4. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Heresy creeps in at a little hole, like a plague that comes in at the
windows, and then propagates it self beyond all measure: O that these Tares
were weeded, that Ishmael were cast out of doors, so that Sara and her son
Isaac might live in quiet and peace; or if they must grow until the harvest,
what remains, but, I beseech you, brethren, Romans 16.17.
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine that ye
have learned, and avoid them.

But as heretics, so all reprobates whatsoever are the Tares here spoken of,
they are offenders on all hands, both in doctrine and conversation: and thus
our Savior interprets, The good seed are the children of the kingdom, but the
Tares are the children of the wicked one, ver. 38. Verse. 38.


And most fitly are the reprobates called Tares, in respect of their Intrusion
here. Separation hereafter.


First, as the Tares grow amongst corn, so the wicked all their life associate
themselves with the godly; the Church (says Austin) is full both of wheat and
chafe. Fugio paleam ne hoc sim, non aream, ne nihil sim. Augustine.
I avoid the chafe lest I become chafe, but I keep the floor lest I become
nothing. What else? in this life the best company is not free from the
intrusion of Tares, therefore cries David, Woe is me that I am constrained to
dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar, Psalm.
120.4. Psalm. 120.4.
No greater discomfort then to cohabit with the wicked: are they not pricks in
our eyes, and thorns in our sides? yea they are thorns indeed, says the Lord
to Ezekiel, Number. 33.55.
Lo the thrones and briars are with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions,
Ezekiel. 2.6. Ezekiel. 2.6.
Sure we had no need of security, that are thus compast with enemies, the
briars may scratch us, the thorns prick us, the Scorpions sting us, we can
hardly so escape, but some of these will hurt us. A good man with ill company,
is like a living man bound to a dead corpse, and (may I appeal to your selves)
is the living likely to receive the dead? or the dead more likely to suffocate
the living? O ye children of the kingdom, bless you whiles you live, lo the
Tares are among you like wolves amongst lambs; be wise then in your carriage,
and save your selves, your own souls.

Secondly, as the Tares, so reprobates shall one day be separated from the
Wheat, the good: In the time of harvest (says our Savior) I will say to the
reapers Gather ye first the Tares; here is that woeful separation between true
Christians, and the profane wretches of this world. It is begun at death, and
then must they part till the day of doom, but when that comes, there must be a
final separation, Matthew. 25.32.
He shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered
all nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd
divides his sheep from the goats, Matthew. 25.32. Here is a separation indeed,
not for a day, or a year, but for timeless eternity. Lo a vast and immeasurable
gulf betwixt heaven and hell, so that as Abraham tells the rich man, They that
would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us, that would
come from thence, Luke 16.26. Luke 16.26.
This is that endless divorce of the Wheat and Tares, this is that unpassable
distance twixt heaven and hell, through all eternity. O miserable Tares! what a
loss has befaln you? now you live with the Wheat, and you o'retop them,
trouble them, vex them with your society, but hereafter you must shake hands
for ever; for the wheat must be gathered into Gods barn, his kingdom, whilst
the miserable Tares are gathered by Angels, and bound up in bundles for the
burning.

Lo here a world of Tares, and that I may give you them in a map, what are they
but hypocrites, heretics, reprobates; all children whosoever, that has Satan
to their father, for of them] is this spoken. Ill weeds grow apace, nay they
are so common, that it is hard to set the foot besides them* Look into your
hearts, you sons and daughters of Adam, (...) ^ot your furrows full of cockle
and darnell? the earth (says the Philosopher) is now an own mother to weeds,
but a stepmother to good herbs; man by a proclivity to his own inclination, is
apt to produce weeds and tares* but ere he can bring forth herbs and graces,
God must take pains with him indeed: no husbandman so labors his grounds, as
God does our hearts: happy earth that yields him an exspected harvest; and that
our parts may be herein, what shall we say unto thee, O thou preserver of men?
Awake O north wind, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out, yea let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruits, Cantic. 4.16. Cantic. 4.16.


And yet again, that I may weed the Tares amongst us, consider with your
selves, you that go on in your sins, will you run upon ruin, and can we say
nothing to keep you out of the fire? O sweet Savior! what did thou endure
for us, that we might escape this durance? and yet we are secure, and care not,
vilifying that blood that was of more value then a world. Think of it, you that
are in the blade ere the harvest come: No man desires to purchase land, that
will bring forth nothing but weed; and shall God buy so base a ground, that
will be no better, at so inestimable a price, as the incorruptible blood of his
only Son? O ye weed of the earth, turn your selves, or be ye turned into
wheat, call, and sue, and cry for the mercy of God in Christ our Savior: yea
again, and again, beg of your Jesus that he may root up your weed, and plant in
you his graces, that like good corn you may fructify here, and when the
harvest comes, you may be gathered into his barn, and remain in his kingdom.

Thus far you see the prisoners, the next point is the chains wherewith these
prisoners are bound: but of that hereafter. Remember in the mean time the
Tares, and as good seed bring ye forth good fruit, some thirty, some sixty,
some an hundred fold, that when the reaping comes, we may be ready for the
barn, and then Lord Jesus, come when thou will, even Lord Jesus come quickly.
Amen. Bind.]
THe ma^^^^ctor, whose hands are pinioned, legs chained, feet corded, may lie
restless in his thoughts, easeless in all parts: the wicked are cast into a
prison under lock and bolts, where the devil is jailer, hell the prison, and
the bolts such other as burning steel and iron. See here a jailer, jayle, and
manacles, all which are provided for the damned: and because of their relation
each to other, give me leave to produce them in their order.

The Tares must be bound, and for the executing of this doom, the Judge here
delivers them over to the jailer. Jailer? whom? good and bad Angels: for both
these are the executioners of Gods direful sentence.

First the good Angels, so says our Savior, The reapers are the Angles, ver.
39. Verse. 39.
and he will say unto the reapers, ver. 30. Verse. 30.
Gather ye first the Tares, and bind them up in bundles. They which are all
mercy to the good, are here the executioners of Gods judgments on the wicked.
Thus was Sodom destroyed by an Angel, Genesis 19. Genesis 19.
The army of Senacherib was overthrown by an Angel, 2 King 19. 2 King. 19.
Seventy thousand men of Israel were struck with pestilence by an Angel, 2 Samuel 24. 2 Samuel 24.
Blasphemous Herod was smitten by an Angel, Act. 12.23. Act. 12.23.
Yea the Tares themselves must be gathered by Angles, who will bind them in
heaps like faggots, and then cast them into hell fire to burn them.

How fearful is it, to fall into the hands of Gods host? no power can resist,
no policy prevail, all the stratagems of war are but folly to Gods wisdom;
then into what moats and atoms shall the proud dust of sinful man be torn?
what? dares he struggle against heaven? See God and Angels are become his
enemies, and whose help should he have, when heaven it self makes war?
Mountains and rocks are no defense against God: shields and spears cannot keep
safe the Tares: no, God has his warriors that will pluck, and tear, and
torture reprobates: the Angels are his reapers, that must Gather the Tares, and
binde] them in bundles to burn them.

But secondly, good and bad Angles both join in this office to bind the Tares:
if there be any difference, it is in this, the good Angles begin, and the bad
continue, to make the binding everlasting. Here is a jailer indeed, and if you
would see him in his form, you may take the description from that great
Leviathan, Job 41.18. By his neesings a light does shine, and his eyes are like
the eye lids of the morning, out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of
fire leap out; out of his nostrils goes smoke as out of a seething pot or
cauldron; his breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth, Job
41.18, 19, 20, 21. Job 41.18, 19, 20, 21.
What an ugly devil is this, whom God only mystically describes with such
terrible shapes? his neesing flames, his eyes stare, his mouth shoots fire, his
nostrils smoke, his very breath sets all a burning round about him. Such a
jailer has God prepared for hell-prisoners. As God has fettered him, so he
lays fetters on them, revenging his own malice on his fellow sufferers. The
devil first tempts, and then he fetters Tares: whiles men live on earth, he
lays snares for souls: thus he prepared flatterers for Rehoboam, liers for
Ahad, concubins for Solomon, sorcerers for Pharaoh, witches for Saul, wine for
Benhadad, gold for Achan, a ship for Jonas, and a rope for Haman: but he that
makes gins, and nets, and snares on earth, makes bolts, and hammers, and whips
in hell; thus he has prepared darkness for Herod, a fire for Dives, plagues
for Pilate, brimstone for Judas, snares for Demas, and fiery fetters for all
Reprobate Tares: what need poor souls any further fetters, whom the Devil once
shuts within his Den? Dare you live in such a nest amongst speckled poisons?
there Serpents girdle the loins, and Cockatrices kill with their eyes, and
Dragons spit fire from their mouths, and Wolves all devour men's souls, and
Lions roar for the prey, and Vipers sting and strike with their Tayls: O
fearful Jailers! what strange kind of furies live in hell.

You see the Jailer, now turn your eyes from so bad a spectacle, and let us
view the Den where this Monster lies. The Hebrews call it Sheol, a great Ditch
or Dungeon; the Greeks (...), even darkness it self; the Latins Infernus, a
place under ground: all agree, it is a Dungeon under earth, containing these
two properties. Deepness. Darkness.


1. It is deep: as heaven is high so (most probable it is) that hell is deep.
John calls it a bottomless pit, Revel. 9 1. Revel. 9.1.
as if Reprobates were always falling, yet never could find bottom, where to
rest; or howsoever this be a Metaphor, yet without question, heaven and hell
are as opposite as may be: and whether the Center be the place of torment, or
(as others think) all the gulfes of the Sea, Kecker. Syst. Theo. de inferno.
and hollows of the earth, as being more capable to contain the damned, I leave
it to the Schools; as for the Pulpit, I think this prayer more fit, Lord show
us what it is, but never where.

Secondly, the deepness is yoaked with darkness; such a dungeon fits the Tares,
they committed works of darkness, and are cast into utter darkness; a darkness
that may be felt, thick Clouds that may be handled, dampes and mists that
strike at their hearts with sensible griefs. This is that bottomless pit in the
heart of the earth: there shines no Sun, no Moon, nor Stars; there is no light
of Candle, Torch, or Taper; shine the Sun never so fair, it is still night
there; the Dungeon is dark, and this makes the place more sad, more
uncomfortable. Let Poets faign of Tantalus tortures, Prometheus Vultures,
Ixions Wheel, and Charons rowing, these come far short to express the pains of
those that rage in hell: there plagues have no ease, cries have no help, time
has no end, place no redemption: it is the dark prison where the Tares are
chained, and the wicked bound in fetters of fire and darkness. Could men have a
sight of hell whiles they live on earth, I doubt not their hearts would tremble
in their bosoms: yet view it in a way of meditation, and see what you find?
are there not wonderful engines, sharp and sore instruments of revenge, fiery
Brimstone, pitchy Sulphur, red hot chains, flaming whips, scorching darkness?
will you any more? the worm is immortal, cold intolerable, stench indurable,
fire unquenchable, darkness palpable: This is that prison of the damned, then
whose eyes dare behold such amazing objects? but if not see, yet listen with
your ears, is there any charm in hell to conjure away Devils, or to ravish
souls? what music affords the place, but roaring, and crying, and houling?
cursing their Hymns, wailing their tunes, blasphemies their ditties, lachrymae
their notes, lamentations their songs, scrieching their streins, these are
their evening and their morning songs; Moab shall cry against Moab, one against
another, all against God. O fearful Prison! what torments have the Tares that
lie here fettered? their feet are chained in the stocks, and the Iron pierces
their souls; it is a Dungeon where the light never shined, but the walls are as
black as pitch, the vaults are smoaked as Chimneys, the roof as dark as hell,
nay the Dungeon is hell, where the Tares lie bound and fettered. Think of this
Iayle, ye offenders of Gods Law, and Majesty; the Angels see our doings, the
Judge now exspects our returning, the Tares grow till the harvest, and if still
they offend, death apprehends them, God will judge them, the Iayler take them,
Hell imprison them, there are they bound: You hear the Evidence brought in, and
the sentence gone out, Take them, Bind them. bind them in bundles to burn
them.

And if this be the Iaylers Goal, what then be the Bonds or Chains? The Angles
which kept not their first estate (says Jude) God has reserved in everlasting
Chains, Jude 6.
and God spared not the Angels that sinned (says Peter) but cast them down to
hell, 2 Pet. 2.4.
and delivered them into Chains of darkness. Thus Christ doomed him that had not
on his wedding garment, Bind him hand and foot: Matthew. 13.22
and what may these Chains and Bonds insinuate, but that the Tares are tied to
their torments? might they but remove from place to place, this would afford
some ease; might they but stir a foot, or but turn about, or have any little
motion to refresh their tormented parts, this would yield some comfort; but
here is an universal binding, hand and foot body and soul, all must be bound
with everlasting Chains. The Reprobates are packt and crowded together, like
Bricks in a fiery furnace, having not so much as a Chink where any wind may
enter in to cool them. O ye that live in the sinful wealth of this world,
consider but this one punishment of hell, and be afraid! if a man enjoying
quietment of mind, and health of body, should lie chained on a soft Down-bed
for a month, or a year, how would he abide it? but this is nothing: If a man
should lie sick of a Fever, swollen in a Dropsy, pained with the Gout, and
(though it were for the recovery of his health) without any turning, tossing,
stirring, this were a great torture sure, and a question it were, whether the
disease or the physic were more intolerable? Vermis conscientiam, ignis
comburet carnem.
witness poor Patients, who change their sides, wish other beds, seek other
rooms, and all these shifts but to mitigate their pains: how wretched then are
the Tares bound in Chains? they are not in health, nor bound for a month, nor
sick of a Fever, nor lie for a year, their pain is grievous, their bonds heavy,
their torments durable, their restless rest eternal. The worm shall gnaw
their spirit, the fire torture their flesh; were these nothing, yet small
sorrows grow great with continuance; the fire shall torture, yet never cease;
worms gnaw the heart, yet never gnaw in sunder the strings: wretched souls are
bound indeed, whose bonds are never out of date: A seven years prentiship would
ere long exspire, but what are seven years to a world of ages? the reprobates
must serve years, ages, even to a million of millions, and yet are never free:
O bondage not to be uttered, yet must be endured! Is it not a Bedlam fury, that
must have such bonds? a little to express their torments by our sufferings,
which yet are nothing, nothing in comparison: what means these Chains, and
whips, and links, and scourges? Iron Chains, whips of steel, fiery linkes,
knotty scourges? furies shake their bolts to afrighten souls, the Irons strike
through their ears, and the hooked Engines tear their Bowels, as if the
torment of Tares were the delight of Devils. Here is a prison indeed, where is
nothing heard but yells, and groans, and sudden cries; the fire slakes not,
the worm dies not, the chains loose not, the links wear not, revenge tyres not,
but for ever are the torments fresh, and the fetters on fire, as they came
first from their Forge.

What a strange kind of torture falls upon the wicked? they are bound to fiery
pillars, and Devils lash at them with their fiery whips: Is there any part of
man scapes free in such a fray? the flesh shall f^^, the blood boil, the veins
be scorcht, the sinews rackt, Serpents shall eat the body, furies tear the
soul; this is that woeful plight of Tares, which he bound in Hell. The sick man
at Sea may go from his ship to his boat, and from his boat to his ship again:
the sick man in his bed, may tumble from his right side to his left, and from
his left to his right again; only the Tares are tied hand and foot, bound
limme and joint, their feet walk not, their fingers move not, their eyes must
no more wander as before, lo all his bound. O these manacles that rot the
flesh, and pierce the inward parts! O unmatchable torments, yet most fit for
Tares! sin made them furious, hell must tame their Frenzy; the Judge thus
commands, and the Executioners must dispatch; fetter them, fire them, Bind]
them in bundles to burn them.

I have lead you through the Dungeon, let this fight serve for a terror, that
you never come nearer: To that purpose (for exhortation) consider:

Alas! all hangs on life, there is but a twine thread betwixt the soul of a
sinner, and the scorching flames, who then would so live, as to run his soul
into hazard? the Judge threatens us, Devils hate us, the bonds exspect us, it
is only our conscience must clear us, or condemn us. Search then thy ways,
and stir up thy remembrance to her Items: have thou dishonored God, blasphemed
his name, decayed his image, subduing thy soul to sin, that was created for
heaven? repent these courses, ask God forgiveness, and he will turn away thy
punishments. I know your sins are grievous, and my soul grieves at the
knowledge: many evils have possessed too many, drunkenness, and oaths, and
malice, and revenge, are not these guests entertained into all houses? banish
them your hearts, that the King of glory may come in: Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live (says the Lord) I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. Would God bestow mercy? and should we refuse
his bounty? as you love heaven, your souls, your selves, leave your sins.

if we love him who has first loved us, Ephesians. 5.2.
all the chains, and pains of hell can neither hold, nor hurt us.

Adam (suffer a reproof) what do ye, that ye do not repent you of your sins? is
it not a madness above admiration, that men (who are reasonable creatures)
having eyes in their heads, hearts in their bodies, understanding like the
Angels, and consciences capable of unspeakable horror never, will be warned,
until the fire of that infernal Lake, flash and flame about their ears? Let
the Angels blush, heaven and earth be amazed, and all the Creatures stand
astonished at it. I am sure a time will come, when the Tares shall feel, what now
they may justly fear; you hear enough, such weed must be bound, thus straight
is the Lords command; Binde] them in bundles to burn them.

But all is not done, Chains have their links, and we must bring all together.
Sinners are coupled in hell as Tares in Bundles: But of these when we next
meet, in the mean while let this we have heard, Bind us all to our duties,
that we hear attentively, remember carefully, practice conscionably, that so
God may reward accordingly, and at last crown us with his glory. The tares must
be bound up in bundles; but Lord make us free in Heaven, to sit with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in thy blessed kingdom.

In bundles.]
THe command is out: what? Bind] whom? them] how? in bundles.] The tares must
on heaps, which gives us a double observation. General, Special.


In the general it intimates these two points; the gathering of the weed, and
its severing from the wheat: both are bound in bundles, but the wheat by it
self, and the tares by themselves: as at that doom (when all the world must be
gathered, and severed) some stand at the right hand, others at the left; so at
this execution, some are for the fire, and others for the barn; they are
bundled together, yet according to the difference of the several parties, each
from the other.

the tares must together: Woe is me (says David) that I am constrained to
dwell with Mesech: Psalm. 120.4.
and if David think it woeful to converse with his living enemies, then what
punishment have the wicked, whom the Devil and damned, the black angels and
everlasting horror must accompany for ever? The tares must be gathered, and
bundled, and the more bundles, the more and more miseries: Company yields no
comfort in hell fire; nay what greater discomfort then to see thy friends in
flames, thy fellows in torments, the fiends with flaming whips, revenging each
others malice on thy self and enemy? It was the rich man's last petition, when
he had so many repulses for his own ease, to make one suit for his living
brethren; he knew their company would increase his torment, to prevent which he
cries out, I pray thee, father Abraham, Luke 16.27, 28.
that thou would send Lazarus to my fathers house, for I have five brethren,
that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
Why, it may be God will hear him for them, especially making such a reasonable
request as this was, that Lazarus might only warn his brethren of future
judgment: no, but to teach you, if you sell your souls to sin, to leave a rich
posterity on earth, you shall not only your selves (without all remorse and
pity) be damned in hell; but your posterity shall be a torment to you whilst
they live, and a greater torment, if they come to you when they are dead. To
converse with Devils is fearful, but altogether to accompany each other, is a
plague fit for tares: In this life they flourished amongst the wheat, Let them
grow both together, corn and tares until the harvest. But the harvest come,
God will now separate them both asunder, and as in heaven there are none but
Saints, so in hell there are none but reprobates: to increase this torment, as
they grow together so all their conference is to curse each other: Moab shall
cry against Moab, father against son, son against father: what comfort in this
company? The Devil that was author of such mischiefs) appears in most grisly
forms, his angels (the black guard of hell) torture poor souls in flames: there
live swearers with their flaming tongues, usurers with talent hands, drunkards
with scorched throats, all these tares like fiery faggots burning together in
hell flames? this is the first punishment, all the tares must meet, they are
bundled together.

as the tares must together, so they must together by themselves; thus are they
bundled, and severed, bundled all together, but from the wheat all asunder.

Quia damni poenam infert, Basil. Ascer. in c. 2. p. 255. Chrysostom. in Matthew.
Hom. 24. Bern. de inter. domo. cap. 38.
Hell is called damnation, Because it brings Heavens loss, and this by consent
of most Divines, is the more horrible part of hell: so Basil; To be alienated
or separated from the presence of God, his Saints, and Angels, is far more
grievous, then the pains of hell. So Chrysostom, The pain of hell is
intolerable indeed, yet a thousand hels are nothing to the loss of that most
glorious kingdom. So Bernard, It is a pain far surpassing all the tortures in
hell, not to see God, and those joys immortal, which are prepared for his
children. O then what hels are in hell, when besides the pains of sense, there
is a pain of loss, the loss of God, loss of Saints, loss of Angels, loss
of Heaven, loss of that beatificall vision of the most Sovereigne Good; our
everblessed Maker. Consider with your selves, if at the parting of the soul and
body there be such pangs, and gripes, and stings, and sorrows: what grief then
will it be, to be severed for ever from the Highest and supreamest Good,
Suppose your bodies (as some Martyrs have been used) should be torn in sunder,
and that wild horses, driven contrary ways, should rack and pull your arms and
legs, and heart, and bowels, one piece from another, what an horrible kind of
death would this be, think you? and yet a thousand rentings of this member from
that, or of the soul from the body, are infinitely less then this one
separation of the soul from God. When Jacob got the blessing from his brother
Esau, Genesis 27.31.
it is said in the Text, that he roared with a great cry and bitter, saying to
his father, Have thou not reserved one blessing for me also? Imagine then, when
the wheat must have the blessing how will the tares (figured in Esau) roar and
cry, and yell, and howl again? and yet notwithstanding this unspeakable rage,
all the tears of hell shall never be sufficient to bewail the loss of heaven.
Hence breeds that worm that is always gnawing at the conscience, a wor^^:
(says our Savior) that dies not, Mark 9.44. Mark 9.44.
It shall lie day and night, biting, and gnawing, and feeding upon the bowels
of the damned persons. O the stings of this worm! no sooner shall the damned
consider the cause of their misery, to wit, the mis-spending of their time,
the greatness of their sin, the many oportunities lost, when they might have
gotten Heaven for a tear, or a sigh, or groan from a penitent heart; but this
worm (or remorse) shall at every consideration give them a deadly bite, and
then shall they roar it out, Miserable wretch, what have I done? I had a time
to have wrought out the salvation of my soul, many a powerful searching Sermon
have I heard, any one passage whereof (had I not wickedly and wilfully forsook
mine own mercy) might have been unto me the beginning of the new birth; but
those golden days are gone, and for want of a little sorrow, a little
repentance, a little faith, now am I burning in hell fire: O precious time! O
days, months, years, how are ye vanished, that you will never come again? And
have I thus miserably undone my self? Come Furies, tear me into as many pieces
as there are moats in the Sun, rip up my breast, dig into my bowels pull out my
heart, leave me not an hair on my head, but let all burn in these flames, till
I moulder into nothing. O madness of men, that never think on this all the
days of your visitation, and then when the bottomless pit has shut her self
upon you, thus will this worm gnaw your hearts with unconceivable griefs. Be
amazed, O ye Heavens! tremble thou Earth! let all creatures stand astonished;
whilst the Tares are thus sentenced, Bundle them, and burn them.

Thus far of the word in general: but if we look on it with a more narrow
eye, it gives to our hands this special observation. The tares must have
chains proportionable to their sins: Observe.
Bind them in bundles] says my Text, not in one, but in many faggots, an
Adulterer with an Adulteress, a Drunkard with a Drunkard, a Traitor with a
Traitor, as there be several sins, so several Bundles, all are punished in
the same fire, but all are not punished in the same degree; some have heavier
chains, and some have lighter, but all in just weight and measure. The Proud
shall be trod under foot, the Glutton suffer inestimable hunger, the Drunkard
feel a burning thirst, the Covetous pine in wants, the Adulterer lie with
Serpents, Dragons, Scorpions, Give me leave to bind these in bundles, and so
leave them for the fire; they are first bundled, then burned.

Pride and her followers? see them piled for the furnace: Esaias 3.
you that jet it with your bals and bracelets, tyres and tablets, rings and
jewels, and changeable suits, think but what a change will come, when all you
(like birds of a feather) must together, to be bound in bundles. What then will
your pride avail, or your riches profit, or your gold do good, or your
treasures help, Job 20.26.
when you must be constrained to vomit up again your riches, the increase of
your house departing away, and a fire not blown utterly consuming you and them.
The rich man in the Gospel could for a time go richly, fare sumptuously, and
that not only on Sabbaths or Holy Days, but (as the text) every day: yet no
sooner had death seized on his body, but he was fain to alter both his suit and
diet; hear him how he begs for water, that had plenty of wines, and see him
that was clothed in purple, now apparrelled in another suit, (yet of the same
color too) even in purple flames: O that his delicate morsels must want a drop
of water, and that his fine apparel must cost him so dear, as the high price
of his soul! why rich man is it come to this? the time was that purple and fine
linen was thy usual apparel, that banquets of sumptuous dishes were thy
ordinary fare, but now not the poorest beggar (even Lazarus himself) that
would change estate with thee: Change, said I? marry no: Remember (says old
Abraham) that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented: Luke
16.25. Luke 16.25.


Bundles, where is Gluttony and her surfetters? Do we not see how the earth is
plowed, the sea furrowed, and all to furnish one Epicures table? Sivill sends
fruit, Canary sugars, Moluques spices, Egypt balsamum, Candy oils, Spain sweet
meats, France wines, our own land cannot satisfy, but foreign kingdoms and
countries must needs be sacrificed to our belly-gods: but what dainties have
such Nabals when they come to hell? there is a black banquet prepared for
devils and reprobates; the first dish is weeping, the second gnashing of teeth,
and what mirth is there where these two courses must last all the feast? The
lazy Friar sweating at (...) long meats and meals, Heu quantum patimur cries
he? alas how much do we suffer which are Friars? but alas how much must you
suffer at this supper, where the meat is poison, the attendants furies, the
music groans, and time without end the sauce of every dish? See here the
provision for the damned, their chains loose not, their fire cools not, their
worm dies not, their woes end not, such gall and vinegar bitters every morsel.
God has proportioned this punishment for these sheaves, they are sent from
surfets to an empty dungeon, that sent away beggars empty from their doors.

Bundles yet, where is Drunkenness with her rioters? Lo they are trodden under
foot, says the Prophet, Esaias 28.3.
they whose tables were full of vomit and filthiness, are now driven to that
scarcity and want, that not a cup of wine, nor a draught of beer, nor a drop
of water can be got in all hell for them. Sin must have its punishment in a
just proportion: the tongue of that rich man that had turned down so many ^uns
of wine, cannot procure in hell one pot of water to cool it: in his tongue he
sinned, in his tongue he is tormented: fiery heats breed a scorching thirst,
yet because he denied Lazarus a crum of bread, Lazarus must not bring him a
drop of water: how? a drop of water? alas, what are ten thousand rivers, or the
whole sea of water unto that infinite world of fire? here is a poor suit
indeed, what begs he, but a cup of water, an handful of water, a drop of
water, nay were it but a wet finger, to cool the tip of his scorched tongue?
Hearken ye drunkards, and fear these flames that one day must parch your
tongues. Here you may recreate your selves by sleep when you have too much, or
by idle company when you would have more, but hereafter you shall find no means
to qualify these pains: sleep there is none, though it be nothing but an
everlasting night: friends there be none, though all could profess their
everlasting loves; you may indeed commerce with some company, but who are they
save devils and reprobates, (miserable comforters) in the same condemnation?
Who is not sober, that knows what portion must befall these reprobates? their
mouths dry as dust, their tongues red as fire, their throats parcht as coals,
all their bowels clung together as the burning parchment. He that sows iniquity
shall reap vanity; the drunkard that abuses so much wine, must there want a
little water, his tongue shall cleave to the roof of his mouth, and goblets of
boiling lead run down his throat: as the pleasure, so the pain, he was
comforted, and is tormented.

Bundles, where is Covetousnes and her gripers? O the iron age we live in! was
there ever less love? ever more dissembling? the covetous hoardeth, holds,
oppresses, or it may be puts out to usury, but never without sureties,
pledges, morgages, bills or bonds; Think of those bonds ye covetous, that must
hind you in bundles; had you then ten thousand worlds, and were they all
composed of purest gold, and brim-full with richest jewels, yet would you call
them all at the foot of some Lazarus, for one drop of water, or one puff of
wind, to cool any part or piece of your tormented members. See the cruel
effect of sin, he that has no pity, shall not be pitied, no, he shall have
j^d^ement without mercy, that has showed no mercy, James 2.13. Jam. 2.13.
Thus to pay the covetous in his own coin, coffers and chests shall be brought
before him, there shall devils ring him a peal of this damned coin, of pounds,
of shillings, of pence, these accounts shall sound through his ears; and to
satisfy his heart, melted gold shall be poured down his throat, yea he shall
be served too with his meat in pl^^^ and plate and meat all boil together to
his loathed supper; thus has God satisfied him that could never satisfy
himself, his gold now wants no weight, his silver is not scarce, mountains and
loads are prepared for him to his greater torments.

Bundles, where is Adultery with her minions? Lo ugly fiends do embrace them,
and the furies of hell be as their bosom concubines. I have read somewhere*
but I will not deliver it as a truth) that a voluptuous man dying, and going to
this place of torment, he was there saluted in this fearful manner: First,
Lucifer commands to fetch him a chair, and forthwith an iron chair red-hot with
sparkling fire was brought, and he set thereon: this done, Lucifer commands
again to fetch him drink, and a drink of melted lead was brought in a cup,
which they straightway pouring into his open mouth, anon it came running out of
all his members: this done, Lucifer commands again, that according to his use
they should fetch him musicians to make him merry, and a sort of musicians came
with hot glowing trumpets, and sounding them at his ears (whereto they laid
them) anon there come sparks of fire leaping out of his mouth, his eyes, and
nostrils, all about him; this done, Lucifer commands again, that according to
his wonted manner he should have his Concubines, and upon this they bring him
to a bed of fire, where Furies give him kisses, fiery Serpents hug about his
neck, and the gnawing worm sucks blood from his heart and breasts, for ever and
ever. Howsoever in this story, it may be altogether truth was not brought a
bed, yet imagine what a welcome shall be to the damned souls? their eyes shall
startle, their ears glow, their nostrils suck up flames, their mouths taste
bitterness, and for the sense of feeling (according to the measure of their
sin) they are wrapped in the grisly embracements of stinging and stinking
flames: where now are those dainty delights, sweet music, merry company?
are all left behind? and is there no recreation in those smokie vaults?
Unhappie dungeon, where there is no order but horror, no singing but houling,
no ditties but their woes, no consorts but shrieks, no beauty but blackness,
and no perfumes or odor, but pitch and sulphur. Let the heat of this fire cool
the heat of your lust, pleasure ends with pain. In as much (says God) as the
harlot glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give ye to her
torment and sorrow: Rev. 18.7. Rev. 18.7.


You see now (Beloved) what Tares are in bundles, the Proud, Gluttons,
Drunkards, Covetous, Adulterers; these and such others are bundled by the
Reapers at the general harvest. Hels horror? let the Proud be humbled the
Epicure fast, the Drunkard pray, the Adulterer chastise himself to pull down
his body, and for the Covetous wretch let him with all holy greediness lay out
his bags for the eternal good of his soul: Alas, one foot in heaven is better
then all your lands on earth. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my
God, Psalm. 84.10.
then to dwell in the Tents (in the houses, in the Palaces) of the wicked. Now
then in the fear of God, reform your lives, and your harvest without question,
shall be the joy of heaven; or if Tares will be Tares, what remains but
Binding, and Bundling? Bind them, Bundle them, Burn them.

The harvest is done, and the Angels sing and shout for their ended task: the
Tares are reaped, the furrows cleansed, the sickles laid aside, the sheaves
Bundled: and to shut up all, they must be Burned: But stay we them a while, and
at our next meeting we will set them on fire. God make us better seed, that we
may receive a better crop, even that Crown of glory in the highest heavens. To
burn them.]
WE have followed the Prisoners from the Bar, and brought them to the stake,
what remains further, but to kindle the Faggots, and so to shut up all with the
burning?

Hellfire (at the first naming) makes my soul to tremble, and would the
bouldest courage but enter into a serious meditation, what it were to lie
everlastingly in a red hot scorching fire, how could he choose but stand
astonished at the consideration? it is a furious fire: Rouse up (beloved) for
either this, or nothing will awake you from the sleep of sin wherein you snort
too securely.

Some differences there are about this fire: many think it a Metaphorical,
others a material fire; be it whether it will, it is every way fearful, and
far above the reach either of humane or Angelical thoughts to conceive.

If it be Metaphorical (as Gregory and Calvine are of mind) then is it either
more, or nothing less terrible, when the Holy Ghost shadows unto us the joys
of heaven by gold, and pearls, and precious stones, Revel. 21. Rev. 21.
there is no one thinks but those joys do far surpass these shadows: and if
the pains of hell are set out by fire and flames, and brimstone, and burning,
what pains are those, to which these are nothing but dumb shows or types?

Or if hell fire be material (as Austine and Bullenger do conjecture) yet is
it far beyond any fire on earth: mark but the difference: our fire is made
for comfort: hellfire is created for nothing else but torment: our fire is
blown with some ayrie breath of man, but hell fire is blown with the angry
breath of God; our fire is fed with the fuel of Wood or Cole, but hell fire is
tempered with all the terrible torturing ingredients of Sulphur, and Brimstone;
or (to cut the way nearer) I will reduce all the differences to some of these
four, and so proceed in their order; they differ first in heat, secondly in
light, thirdly in their object, fourthly, in durance.

First, in heat, The pile thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the
Lord, like a stream of brimstone does kindle it, Esai. 30.33. Esai. 30.33.
This fire is not made by the hand of man, nor blown from the bellows of some
forge, nor fed with any fuel of combustible matter: no, it is the arm of God,
and the breath of God, and the anger of God that kindles it sharply, and
continues it everlastingly; and (I pray) if the breath that kindles it, be like
a stream of brimstone, what is the fire it self? you know there is a great
difference betwixt the heat of our breath, and the fire in our chimnies: now
then if the breath of God that kindles hell fire be dissolved into brimstone:
What a fearful fire is that, which a great torrent of burning Brimstone does
ever mightily blow? A torrent of Brimstone said I? no, it is not Brimstone, but
like Brimstone, like to our capacity, although for the nature this like is not
like; nay, could we know exactly what this breath were, you would say (I
warrant you) it were far more hotter then ten thousand Rivers of Brimstone,
were they all put together: Our God (says the Apostle) is a consuming fire,
Heb. 12.29. Heb. 12.29.
And if God be a fire, what then is hell fire, kindled by the breath God? O my
soul, how can thou but tremble at the thought of this fire, at which the very
Devils themselves do quake and shiver? Pause a while and consider, were thou
arraigned at some earthly bar, thy doom past, the execution at hand, and thy
body now ready to be cast, (as many a Martyrs was) into some burning fire, or
boiling Caldron: O how would thou shout and roar, and cry through the
extremity of torment? but what is a boiling Caldron, to that boiling sea of
fire and brimstone? pitch and sulphur, boil altogether, were not this enough?
see there the perplexing properties of such heats; they burn as Brimstone,
darkly to grieve the sight, sharply to afflict the sense, loathsomly to
perplexe the smell: it is a fire that needs no bellows to kindle it, nor admits
of the least air to cool it; the fuel wastes not, the smoke vents not; the
chimnies are but Reprobate credits, where they lie scorching, burning, houling
their lullabies, and their nurses furies. The flames of Nebuchadnezzars fire,
could ascend forty nine Cubits; but if hell be a bottomless pit, sure these
flames have an endless height, how hot then is that glowing Oven, where the
fire burns lively the blasts go strongly, the wheels turn roundly, and the
darkened fuel are those damned souls that burn in an heat surpassing ours,
unspeakable of us, here is one difference.

Secondly, as hell fire differs from ours in heat, so in light. Cast that
unprofitable servant (says our Savior) into utter darkness, Mat. 25.30.
Matthew. 25.30.
Vtter] to perplexe the mind, Darkness] to confound the eye. Consider but the
terror of this circumstance, if a man alone in darkness, should suddenly hear
a noise of ghosts, and spirits coming toward him, how would his hair bristle,
his tongue faulter, his blood run to the heart? yea, (I dare say) although he
felt never a lash from them on his body, yet the only houling of devils, would
make his very inmost heart to shake and shudder? O then, what horror is that
when darkness must surround thee, and devils hollow to thee, and reprobates
shrick at the lashing of their bodies, and all hell be filled with the cries
and echoes of Woe. woe. wo^ for their torments, and the darkness? May be you
will object, if there be fire, there is assuredly light: nay, (without
question) this fire has heat, no light; it is a dark smoaky flame, that burns
dimm to the eye, yet sharp to the f^nce; o^ it may be^ (as some do imagine)
this fire affords a (...) p^^i^eous o^ obscure light, but how? not for
comforts, but confusion. Conceive it thus, he that in twilight sees deformed
Images, or in the night beholds shapes of Ghosts, and spirits, by a dimm dark
light, why better he saw nothing, then suck t^^^^le vis^^ns* such fears, nay a
thousand times worse are prese^ved to the (...) of Reprobates, they may discern
through darkness, the ugly face^ of fiend ^f the foul visages of Reprobates,
the furious torments of their friends, or parents, while all lie together in
the same condemnation. What comfort affords this light, where nothing is seen
but the Judges wrath, and the prisoners punishment? O (will they cry) that our
eyes were out, or the flames were quenched, or that some period were put to
this endless night of darkness! but all in vain, lo pillars of smoke arise
out of the infernal pit, which darken the light, as the fire lightens the
darkness: and this the second difference.

Thirdly, there is yet another difference, in the fuel or object of this fire;
ours burns not without materials, this works also on spirituals. It is (I
confess) a question whether devils suffer by fire? and how may that be? some
are of opinion, that they are not only spirits, but have bodies, not
organicall as ours, but aereall, or somewhat more subtle then the air it self:
this opinion howsoever most deny, yet Austin argues for it; for if men and
devils (says he) are punished in the same fire, and that fire be corporeal,
how are Devils capable of the suffering unless they have bodies, (like men)
fit for the impression? And yet if we deny them to have bodies, I see no
impossibility, but that spirits themselves may suffer in hell fire: August. de
civit. dei lib. 21. cap. 10.
is it not as easy with God to join spirits and fire, as souls and bodies? as
therefore the soul may suffer through the body, so likewise may those spirits
be tormented by fire. I will not argue the case either with, or against Austin,
yet safely may we put this conclusion; not only men in their bodies, but
devils and souls must together be tormented in hell fire. thus our Savior
couples them in that last heavy doom, Matthew. 25.41.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his Angels. What
a fire is this? it tryes the reins, it searches the bowels, it pierces the
very soul and inmost thoughts. O fire above measure! where spirits are the
tormentors damnation the punishment, men and devils the fuel and the breath of
an offended God the Bellows. Think not on your fires, that gives you heat for
warmth, or light for comfort, neither fear you him that kills your bodies, but
has no further commission to hurt your souls: here is another fire, another
Judge, a fire that kindles souls, a Judge that sends bodies and souls to
everlasting fire: such heats, such darkness, such objects accompany this
fire, the heat is intolerable, darkness palpable, body and soul both
combustible, all burn together that have sinned together. This the third
difference.

Lastly, there is a difference in durance, our fire dies quickly, but hell fire
lasts for ever. This is done (says Austin) admirably, Miris, sed veris modis.
Aug. ibid. Aug. de civit. dei. l. 21.
yet actually, the burning bodies never consume, the kindled fire never wastes
with any length of time. We read of a certain salt in Sicilia, that if put into
the fire, it swims as in water, and being put into water crackles as in fire;
we read of a fountain in Libya, that in a cold night is so hot, that none can
touch it, and in a hot day so cold that none could drink it: If God thus work
miracles on earth, do thou seek a reason of Gods high and heavy judgment in
hell? I see the pit, I cannot find the depth; there is a fire that now stands
as it was created, it must be endured, yet never, never must be ended. The
custom of some countries, that burn malefactors, use the least fires for
greatest offenders, that so the heat being lessened, the pains might be
prolonged, but if this be so terrible to them, whose fire is but little, and
whose time cannot be long, what an exceeding horrible torment is this in hell,
where the fire is extreme great, and the time for ever and ever lasting?
Suppose you, or any one of you, should lie one night grievously afflicted with
a raging fit of the Stone, Colic, Strangurie, Toothach, Pangs of travail, and
a thousand such miseries incident to man, how would you toss and tumble? how
would you turn your sides, tell the clock, count the hours, exspect every
moment for the gay-bright morn, and till then esteem every hour a year, and
every pang a misery matchless, and intolerable: O then what will it be (think
you) to lie in fire and brimstone, kept in highest flame by the unquenchable
wrath of God, world without end? how tedious will be that endless night, where
the clock never strikes, the time never passes, the morn never dawns, the Sun
never rises; where thou can not turn nor toss, nor tumble, nor yet take any
rest; where thou shall have nothing about thee but darkness, and horror, and
wailing and yelling, wringing of hands and gnashing of teeth for evermore? Good
Lord, that for a smile of present pleasure, men should run upon the rock of
eternal vengeance! Come, ye that pursue vanity, and see here the fruit of sin
at this harvest of Tares, Pleasures are but momentany, Momentaneum quod
delectat, aeternum quod cruciat.
but the pangs are eternal: Eternal? how long is that? Nay, here we are
silenced, no Limner can set it forth, no Orator can express it; if all times
that ever were, and ever shall be should be put together, they would infinitely
come short of this fiery eternity; the latitude thereof is not to be measured,
neither by hours, nor days, nor weeks, nor months, nor years, nor Lustra's,
nor Olympiads, nor Indictions, no Jubilees, nor ages, nor Plato's years, nor by
the most slow motions of the eighth sphere, though all these were multiplied by
thousands, or millions, or the greatest multiplyer, or number numbering that
can be imagined. Plainly in a word, count if you please, ten hundred thousand
millions of years, and add a thousand myriads of ages to them, and when all is
done, multiply all again by a thousand, thousand, thousand of thousands, and
being yet too short, count all the thoughts, motions, mutations of men and
Angels, add to them all the sands of the sea, piles on the earth, stars in
the Heavens, and when all this is done, multiply all again by all the numbers,
squares, cubicks of Arithmetic, and yet all these are so far short of
eternity, that they neither touch end nor middle, nor the least part or parcel
of it: what then is this which the damned suffer? eternal fire? we had need to
cry out Fire, fire, fire: Alas, to what end? there is no help to extinguish
fire that must burn for ever: your Buckets may quench other fires, not this; no
milk nor vinegar can extinguish that wildfire: it is a fire which no means can
moderate, no patience can endure, no time can for ever change, but in it
whosoever woefully lies, their flesh shall fry, their blood shall boil, their
hearts consume; yet they shall never die, but dying live, and living die; death
in life, life in death, miserable ever. This is that consideration, which shall
bring all the damned Reprobates to shriek and houl everlastingly: were they
persuaded that after millions of years they should have one year of pleasure,
or after thousands of millions they should have some end of torment, here would
be a little hope; but this word Ever] breaks their hearts asunder: this ever,
ever, gives new life again to those insufferable sorrows; and hence it is, that
when all those millions of years are done and gone, then (God knows) must the
wheels of their torment whirl about and about: Alas? the fire is durable, the
heat continual, the fuel immortal, and such is the end of Tares, they must
burn without end: Bind them in bundles to burn them.

Lo here the fire of hell, which compared to ours on earth, it differs in heat,
in light, in fuel, in durance: Let your souls work on these objects, that they
never come nearer to those flames.

Who amongst us would dwell with devouring fire, who amongst us would dwell
with everlasting burnings? Esaias 33.14.
Beloved, as you tender your souls, and would escape the flames, reform your
lives whiles you have yet a little time. You hear it sounded in Synagogues, and
preached in pulpits: what sound? but heaven or hell, joys or torments; the one
befalling the good, and the other the just end of the wicked. Do we believe
this truth? and dare we commit sin, whose reward is this fiery death? upon
due consideration, how is it that we sleep, or rest, or take a minutes ease?
lesser dangers have bestraught some out of their wits, nay bereaved many of
their lives: how is it then that we run headlong into this fire, yet never
weigh whither we are going, till we are dropping into the pit, whence there is
no redemption. Look about you while it is called to day, or otherwise woe and
alas that ever you were born, be sure a time will come, when miseries shall
march, Angels beat alarms, God sound destruction, and the tents of his enemies
be all set on fire, Bind them in bundles to burn them.

how much (would you say?) surely not for all the pleasures and treasures that
all this world can afford you. How is it then, that for a little sin, that
endures but a moment, so many of you so little regard eternal punishment in
hell fire? If we should but see a little child fall into the fire, and his very
bowels burnt out, how would it grieve us, and make our very hearts bleed within
us? how much more then should it grieve you to see, not a child, but your own
bodies and souls cast away for a momentany sin into the lake of fire, that
never shall be quenched? If a man should come amongst us, and cry Fire, Fire,
thy house is all on Fire, thy corn, thy cattle, thy wife, thy children, and
all thou have are burning all together, how would this astonish us, making both
the hair to stand upright on our heads, and the tears to gush out of our eyes?
Behold then, and see the spirit of God cries out, Fire, fire; even the
dreadful fire of hell gapeth ready to devour, not thy house, thy corn, or thy
cattle, but t^^ poor soul, and that for evermore: O then how should this break
your flinty hearts asunder, and make your souls bleed again and again: if you
have any spark of grace, this (me thinks) should move you to a strict (...), if
you have any care of your souls, this (me thinks) should make you to walk
humbly, and purely; carefully and consci^^^^bly toward God, and toward man:
if not, what remains but fire, fire: Bind them in bundles to burn them.

O torment, torment! how am I tormented in this fire? my head, my heart, my
eyes; my ears, my tongue, my tongue is all on fire, what shall I do? whither
shall I fly for succor? within me is the worm, without me is fire, about me
are devils, above me is Abraham, and what glorious star is yond I see, but
Lazarus, poor Lazarus in his bosom? what is a beggar exalted, and am I in
torments? Why Abraham father Abraham, have (...) on me: See here a man burning,
schorching, frying in hell (...), one dram of mercy, one drop of water to a
tormented soul; Oh I burn, I burn, I burn without ease or end, and is there
none to (...) me? Come Lazarus ( if Abraham will not hear) let me beg of thee ^
beggar, and howsoever I denied thee a (...) ^f bread, yet be so good, so
charitable, as to dip the tip of thy finger in water, and cool my tongue. It is
a poor suit I ask not to dive, but dip; not thy hand, but finger; not all, but
the tip of it; not in s^^^, but water; not to quench, but to cool; not my body,
but my least member, be it my tongue only: no ease so little, no grant so
poor, no remedy so small, but happy were I if I could obtain it, though I
begged it with tears and prayers of a thousand thousand years continuance: But
see Abraham and Lazarus deny my suits; I burn, and neither God, nor Saint, nor
Angel takes pity on me: and shall I cry for help on devils? alas! they are my
tormentors that lash me, and cut me with their whips of burning steel and iron.
O beloved! what shall we say to the roaring rage of this tormented wretch?
Alas! alas! how little do men think on this? they can pass away time sporting
and playing, as if they went to prison but for a few weeks, or days, just like
men, who having the sentence of death past upon them, run fooling and laughing
to the execution; but when once hell mouth has shut her self, then shall they
find nothing but eternity of torments: in the fear of God take heed in time of
this eternity, eternity, lest you also come into this place of eternity,
eternity of torment: it is the doom of Tares, woe to them whosoever, that are of
the number, for they they] must be gathered, and bound, and bundled, and burned.

We have now done our task, and ended the harvest: if you please to cast back
your eye upon the particulars delivered, they amount to this sum. Whatsoever
a man sowes that shall he reap, Gal. 6.7. Gal. 6.7.
If the enemy sow Tares, and we nourish the seed, what think you is the
Harvest? Gather ye together first the Tares, says our Savior to the Angels:
they are branded in their name, Tares] sped in the time, first] cursed in their
doom, gathered] but worst in the hands of their executioners, it is by Angels]
and yet what is all this to the latter work in hand? If the Tares weeded up
might rot in the furrows, the punishment were less; but as they are gathered,
so they must be bound.] Is that all? nay, as they are bound, so they must be
bundled] Is that all? nay, as they are bound and bundled, so they must be
burned] Bind them in bundles to burn them. I must end this Text, yet am loath
to leave you where it ends: As there is an harvest of Tares, so there is a
better harvest of Wheat, Psalm. 126.5.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; if we repent us of our sins, we
shall have a blessed harvest indeed: how? forty grains for one? nay, (by the
promise of our Savior) an hundred fold. A measure heapen, and shaken, and
thrust together, Luke 6.38.
and yet running over. Every Saint shall have joy and glory, fountains of
pleasure, and rivers of delight, where they may swim, and bathe their souls for
ever and ever: what though Tares must to the fire? the Wheat is gathered into
Heaven. Pray you then with me, that we may be Wheat, not Tares; and God so
bless the seed, that every soul of us may have a joyful harvest in the
kingdom of Heaven. AMEN.

FINIS.
Right Purgatory.
HEB. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins.


THe point is not full, but to make it up, the Text stands compast with words
of wonder, concerning the word, our Savior; he that is the Son of God, heir
of all things, creator of the world, the brightness of his glory, the image
of his person, and upholder of all things by the word of his power, stands here
as the subject of humility and glory: he purged our sins, and sits on the
right hand of the majesty on high. He purged our sins, by his suffering on the
cross, he sits on Gods right hand, by obtaining the crown: he purged our
sins by dying for them, he sits on Gods right hand, by ruling with him; what
need we more? here is his passion and session in the same order he performed
them, for then he sat down on the right hand of his Father, when he had by
himself purged our sins.

But to come nearer the words, they are as the drugs of an Apothecary, and we
will examine the ingredients. O I am sick of love, says the Church in
Canticles, Cant. 5.8. Cant. 5.8.
Sick indeed, not of love only, but of sin also; a disease that infatuates
the mind, gripes the conscience, distempers the humors, disturbs the passions,
corrupts the body, indangers the soul: Is not he blessed that can help this
malady? Come then ye that labor of sin, and to your endless comfort see here
the manner of the cure: there is a Physician he,] the patient himself,] the
physic administered when he had purged,] the ill humors evacuated, when he had
purged our sins.]

Or to gather up the crumbs, lest in this costly receipt or physic any thing be
lost; see here the remedy girt and compast with each necessary circumstance,
the time when,] the person he,] the matter purged,] the manner, by himself,]
the disease, sin,] the extent of it, ours.] Observe all, and you find no time
more dismal then this when,] no person more humbled then this he] no physic
more operative then this purge,] no disease more dangerous, no plague more
spreading then sin,] our] sin, for which he suffered, When he by himself
had purged our sins.]

We have opened the body of the Text, now look on the parts, and you may see
the Anatomy of our Savior in every member of it. When]
Ne sedendo videatur purgare: Annot. Erasm. in text.
THe Text begins with the time, When] he had purged:] and this time (says
Erasmus) according to the original denotes the time past, lest that we had
thought he had purged our sins by his sitting him down at the right hand of
God. First therefore (says the Apostle) he purged,] and then sat:] he first
purged by his death, and when that was done, he sat at the right hand of the
Majesty, in the highest places. Whence observe:

The time that Christ purged was in the days of his humiliation. Then was he
born, Matthew. 1.18. Matthew. 1.18.
then was he tempted, Matthew. 4.1. Matthew. 4.1.
then was he circumcised, Luke 2.21. Luke 2.21.
then was he traduced, Matthew. 11.19. Matthew. 11.19.
then was he persecuted, John 8.59. John 8.59.
then was he betrayed, Matthew. 26.16. Matthew. 26.16.50.
then was he apprehended, Matthew. 26.50. then was he mocked, Matthew. 27.29.
Matthew. 27.29, 35.
then was he crucified, Matthew. 27.35. But all his life was full of infirmity,
so (according to the nature of all infirmities) he had those four times
mentioned by Physicians in his life, the beginning, the increase, the Akmen or
state, and declination. Give me leave but to prosecute these times, and by that
time we have done, the hour (I know) will summon us to a conclusion.

beginning, and that was the first time of his purging, even at his birth; then
took he our infirmities upon him, and in some measure evacuated the brightness
of his glory, to become for us a poor, a weak, a silly babe on earth. Mark (I
pray) how this purge works with him at his first entrance into the world, it
brings him into so poor and low estate that heaven and earth stand amazed at so
great a change: where was he born, but at Bethlehem, a little city? where did
the shepherds find him, but in a poor sorry cottage? and there if we look after
majesty, we find no guard but Joseph, no attendants but Mary, no heralds but
Shepherds, none of the bedchamber but beasts and oxen, and howsoever he is
styled King of the Jews, yet the Jews cry out, They have no King but Caesar. His
mother indeed descended of kings, and he himself gives crowns to others, of
victory, of life, of glory, but for his own head no crown is prepared but a
crown of thorns: Rev. 4.10.
anon you may see him clothed in purple, anointed with spittle, but for the
crown we speak of, they can afford him no richer then of the hedge, no easier
then of thorns.

Thus for the beginning, what then is the increase of this?

increase (say Physicians) is when the symptoms more manifestly appear either
of life or death; and no sooner was our Savior born, but he had manifest
tokens evidently showing that for us he must die. If you run through his life,
what was it but a sickness and a purge? Consider his parcitie in abstinence,
his constancy in watching, his frequencie in prayer, his assiduity in labor.
But how soon, and Herod makes him flee into Egypt, and live an exile in a
strange land? At his return he dwells at Nazareth, and there is accounted Jesus
the carpenter. Mark 6.3.
When he enters into his Ministry, he has no house to repose him, no money
to relieve him, no friends to comfort him. See him first set on by Satan, then
by men; he is led into the wilderness by the spirit, and there he fasts forty
days and forty nights, without bit of bread, or drop of water. The devil
(seeing this opportunity) begins his temptation, who presently overcome, the
Jews follow after him with hue and cry: mark but their words and works: In word
they call him a glutton, a drunkard, a deceiver, a sinner, Matt. 11.19.27.63.
John 9.24.10.20.8.48. Psalm. 35.12.
a madman, a Samaritane, and one possessed with a devil. Good words I pray! is
not he the anointed of God? the Savior of men? yes, but they rendered me evil
for good, and hatred for my good will, said the Psalmist in his person. When
therefore he did miracles, he was a sorcerer; when he reproved sinners, he was
a seducer; when he received sinners, he was their favourer; when he healed the
sick, he was a breaker of the Sabbath; when he cast out devils, it was by the
power of devils; what and how many unjust contumelies endured he of the
Pharisees, who sometimes cast him out of the city, accused him of blasphemy,
cried Out upon him, he was a man not worthy to live. And as they say, they do;
observe but their works: First they send officers to apprehend him, but they
being overcome with the grace of his speeches, return only with this answer,
John 7.46.
Never man spoke like this man. Then took they up stones to stone him, but by
his miraculous passage (whiles they are a conspiring his death) he escapes out
of their hands: John 10.39.
then lead they him to an hill, thinking to throw him down headlong, and yet
all would not do for ere they are aware of it, Luke 4.30.
he fairly passes through the midst of them all. At last his last passion
draws near, and then men and devils combine in one to make him at once wretched
and miserable: He is despised and rejected of men: yea he is a man full of
sorrows (says the Prophet) and has experience of infirmities, Esaias 53.3. Esaias
53.3.


Or for a further inquiry, let us do what our Savior bids, Search the
Scriptures, John 5.39.
for they are they which testify of him. We have but two Testaments in the
whole Bible, and both these give full evidence of Christ's miserable life. In
the Old Testament it was prefigured by Adams penalties, Abels death, Abraham's
exile, Isaacs offering, Jacobs wrestling, Joseph's bonds, Jobs suffering, David's
mourning; yea, the Prophets themselves were both figures, and delivered
prophesies of our Saviors afflictions. Thus Esaias of him: Surely he has born
our griefs, and carried our sorrows, yet we did not esteem him stricken,
smitten of God, and afflicted, Esa. 53.4. Esaias 53.4.
Thus Jeremy of him: He gives his cheeks to him that smites him, he is filled
full with reproach, Lam. 3.30. Lam. 3.30.
Thus Daniel of him, After threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be slain: and
shall have nothing, Dan. 9.26. Dan. 9.26.
Thus Zechary of him, What are these wounds in the midst of thy hands? and he
shall say, With these wounds was I wounded in the house of my friends, Zach.
13.6. Zech. 13.6.
But come we to the New Testament; and in every Gospel, we may not only read,
but see him suffer: Matthew who relates the history of his life, what writes he
but a tragedy, wherein every chapter is a scene? Look through the whole book,
and you read in the first Chapter, Matthew. Chap. 1,
Joseph will not father him; in the second 2,
Herod seeks to kill him; in the third 3,
John the Baptist would needs out his humility deny him baptism; in the fourth
4,
he fasts forty days, and forty nights, and is tempted in the wilderness; in
the fifth 5,
he fotetells persecutions, and all manner of evil against his Apostles; in
the sixth 6,
he teaches his church that strict course of life, in fasting, praying, giving
of alms, and forgiving of enemies; in the seventh 7,
he concluds his Sermon made on the top of a mountain; in the eighth 8,
he comes down, and toward night has no house to harbor in, nor pillow to
rest his head on; in the ninth 9,
he is rebuked of the Pharisees for not fasting; in the tenth 10,
all men hate his disciples for his sake; in the eleventh 11,
they call him that knew no excess, a glutton and a drunkard; in the twelfth
12,
they tell him how he casts out devils through Beelzebub prince of devils; in
the thirteenth 13,
they are offended at him, and derive his pedigree from a Carpenter; in the
fourteenth 14,
Herod thinks him to be John Baptists ghost; in the fifteenth 15,
the Scribes reprehend him for the breach of their traditions; in the sixteenth
16,
the Sadduces tempt him for a token; in the seventeen 17,
he pays tribute to Caesar; in all the rest he foretells and executes his
passion: now count not chapters, but hours, from that hour wherein he was
saught for, until the sixth hour of his crucifying: one betrays him, another
apprehends him, one binds him, another leads him bound from Pilate to Herod,
from Herod back again to Pilate; thus they never leave him, till his soul leave
the world, and he be a dead man amongst them.

You have seen the beginning and increase, and we'll now draw the Curtains,
that you may behold the Bridegroom where he lies at Noon day, to wit, in the
state or vigor of his grievous sufferings. This state, or Akmen (say
Physicians) is when nature and the disease are in greatest contention, when all
the symptoms are become most vehement, so that neither nature or the
infirmity, must needs, have the victory; and although (say Divines) all Christ's
life was full of miseries, Kecker. Syst. l. 3. c. 4.
yet principally and chiefly is, that called his passion in Scripture, which he
endured two days before death: and to this extreme passion (says a Modern) is
the purging of sins chiefly attributed. Come then, ye that pass by, behold,
and see, if there was ever any sorrow like unto this sorrows; which is done
unto him in the day of Gods anger. Lament. 1.12.
His infirmities are now at full, and the symptoms which make it evident unto
us, are some inward, some outward, inward in his soul, outward in his body:
we'll take a view of them both.

Matthew. 26.37. Mar. 14.33. Luke 22.44. Ioh. 12.27.
First, his soul, it began to be sorrowful, says Matthew: to be amazed and
very heavy says Mark: to be in an agony says Luke: to be troubled says John:
Here is sorrow, and heaviness, and agony, and trouble, the estimate whereof we
may take from his own words in the garden; My soul is exceeding sorrowful,
Matthew. 26.38. John 12.77.
even unto death: Now was the time he purged, not only in his body, but his
soul too; now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from
this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour. A fatal hour sure, of
which it was said before often, his hour was not yet come, but being come, he
could then tell his Disciples, the hour is at hand, and after tell the Jews,
Matthew. 26.45. Luke 22.53.
this is your very hour, and the power of darkness: Now was it that Christ
yielded his soul for our souls, to the susception of sorrow, perpession of
pain, and dissolution of nature: and therefore even sick with sorrow, he never
left sweating, Heb. 5.7.
weeping and crying, till he was heard in that which he feared.

Secondly, as his soul, so his body had her symptoms of approaching death: Our
very eye will soon tell us, no place was left in his body where he might be
smitten and was not: his skin was torn, his flesh was rent, his bones
unjoynted, his sinews streyned; should we sum up all? See that face of his,
fairer then the Sons of men, Psalm. 45.2. Revel. 1.14.
how it is defiled with spettle, swollen with buffets, masked with a cover of
gore-bloud; see that head, white as white wool, and snow, how is it Crowned
with thorns, beaten with a reed, and both head and hair dyed in a sanguine red
that issued from it; see those eyes that were as a flame of fire, how they swim
with tears, are dim with blood, and darken at the sad approach of dreadful
death: Revel. ibid.
see that mouth which speak as never man spoke, how it is won with strokes,
grim with death, John 7.46.
and embittered with that tartest potion of gall and vinegar: Should we any
lower? See those arms that could embrace all the power of the world, how they
are strained and stretched on the Cross; those shoulders that could bear the
frame of Heaven, how they are lasht with knotty cords, and whips; those hands
that made the world, and all therein, how are they nailed and clenched to a
piece of wood; that heart where never dwelt deceit nor sin, how it is pierced
and wounded with a soldiers spear: those bowels that yearned with compassion
of others infirmities, how they are dry and pent with straining pulls: those
feet that walked in the ways of God, how they are boared, and fastened to a
Cross with nayls: from hand to foot there is no part free, but all over he is
covered in a mantle of cold blood, whose garments were doft before, and took of
them that were his hangmen: Poor Savior, what a woeful sight is this? A bloody
face, thornie head, watery eyes, wan mouth, strained arms, lashed shoulders,
nailed hands, wounded heart, griping bowels, boared feet: Here is sorry pains,
when no part is free: and these are the outward Symptoms of his state that
appear in his Body.

We have thus far seen our Sun (the Sun of righteousness) in the daybreak,
and rising, and height of his suffering: Mal. 4.2.
what remains further, but that we come to the Declination, and so end our
journey for this time?

This Declination (say Physicians) is, Galen. lib. 3. de Cris. cap. 5.
when Nature overcomes sickness, so that all diseases attain not this time,
but those, and those only that admit of a Recovery: yet howsoever (says my
Senert. institution. medicinae lib. 2. par. 1. cap. 12. de morb. temp.
Author) there is no true declination before death: there is at least a
seeming declinatian, when sometimes the symptoms may become more remiss,
because of weak nature yielding to the fury and tyranny of death overcoming
it. I will not say directly, that our Savior declined thus, either in deed, or
in show: for neither was the cup removed from him, nor died he by degrees; but
in perfect sense, and perfect patience both of body and soul, he did
voluntarily, and miraculously resign his Spirit (as he was praying) into the
hands of his Father. Here then was the true declination of this Patient, not
before death, but in death, and rightly too: for then was it that this Sun
went down in a ruddy Cloud; then was it that this Patient received the last
dregs of his Purge; then was it that Gods Justice was satisfied, the
consummatum est was effected, all was finished: as for his burial,
resurrection, and asscension which follow after this time they serve not to
make any satisfaction for sin, but only to confirm it, or apply it, after it
was made and accomplished.

Humility, a grace most prevailing with God for the obtaining of all graces;
this was it that made David King, Moses a Governor: nay, what say we to Christ
himself, who from his first entrance, until his departure to his Father,
Matthew. 11.29.
was the very mirror of true Humility it felf? Learn of me (says he) to be
humble and lowly in spirit, and you shall find rest unto your souls. Hereunto
accorded his Doctrine, when he pronounced them Blessed who were poor in spirit,
Matthew. 5.3.
hereunro accorded his reprehension, when he disliked their manners who were
wont to choose out the chief rooms at feasts: Luke 14.7. John 13.5.
hereunto accorded his practice, when he vouchsafed to wash his Disciples feet,
and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girded. O Humility, how great
are thy riches, that are thus commended to us! thou please men, delightest
angels, confoundest devils, and bring thy Creator to a Manger, where he is
lapped in rags, and clothed in flesh! Had we Christian hearts to consider the
Humility of our Redeemer, and how far he was from our haughty dispositions, it
would pull down our Pharisaicall humors, and make us far better to remember
our selves.

humility from his birth, so we may learn patience from his life. Matthew. 16.24.
If any man will come after me (says our Savior) let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me. Dear Christian, if thou will be saved, mind
thy Christ: Art thou abused by lies, reproaches, evil sayings, or doings? we
cannot more show how we have profited in Christ's School, then by enduring them
all: if patience be in our calamities, they are no calamities, but comforts:
this is that comfort that keeps the heart from envy, the hand from revenge,
the tongue from contumely, and often overcomes our very enemies themselves,
without any weapons at all. Come then, and do you learn this lesson of our
Blessed Redeemer! are you stricken? so was Christ of the Jews: are you mocked?
so was Christ of the Soldiers: are you betrayed of your friends? so was Christ
of his Apostle: are you accused of your enemies? so was Christ of the
Pharisees: why complain you of being injured and maligned, when you see the
Master of the house himself called Beelzebub? Hereunto ye are called (says
Peter) for Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should
follow his steps, 1. Pet. 2.21. 1. Pet. 2.21.


Patience from his life, so we may learn Remorse from his Passion, Is it
nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Lament. 1.12
O look on him, and let this look breed in you a remorse and sorrow for your
sins: Our Savior labors in the extremities of pangs, his soul is sick, his
body faints, and would you know the reason? Why, thus is the head wounded that
he might renew health to all the body; we sin, and Christ Jesus is heavy,
and sore, and sick, and dies for it: his soul was in our souls stead, his body
endured a Purgatory for us, that we both in body and soul might escape
hellfire, which our sins had deserved: who but considers what evils our
sins have done, that will not grieve and mourn at the sin he has
committed? Oh that my head were a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night for the sins of the daughters of my people! We have sinned, we have
sinned, and what shall we say to thee, O Savior of men? Alas! our sins have
whipped thee, scourged thee, crowned thee, crucified thee; and if I have no
compassion to weep for Thee, yet, O Lord, give me grace to weep for my self,
who have done thus to Thee: O my Savior! O my sins! It is I that offend, it
is thou must smart for it.

Fourthly, we may yet learn another lesson, Christ (says Paul) humbled
himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross, Phil.
2.8. Philip. 2.8.
and is it not our parts to be obedient to him who became thus obedient for us?
We may gather Humility from his birth, and Patience from his life, and Remorse
from his Passion; and to make up the posie, here is one flower more, Obedience,
which that Tree also yielded whereon he suffered. John 14.15.
If you love me (says our Savior) keep my Commandments. How, blessed Savior?
If you love me? Who will not love thee, who have so dearly loved us, as to give
up thy dearest life for the ransom of our souls? But to tell us that there is
no better testimony of our love, then to obey his commands, he woes us with
these sugared words (whose lips like Lillies, Cant. 5.13.
are dropping down pure Myrrh) if you love me: If you love me, learn obedience
of me, keep my Commandments: and to move us the more (if all this cannot) what
love and obedience was there in him think you? Consider, and wonder! That the
Son of God would banish himself thirty three years from his glorious
Majesty; and what more? would be born man; and what more? would be the meanest
amongst men; and what more? would endure the miseries of life; and what more?
would come to the bitter pangs of death; Quo descendit humilitas. Aug. medit. 7.
and what more? would be made obedient to the death, even the death of the
Cross; a degree beyond death. O Son of God, whither does thy humility
descend? but thus it must be, the Prophets had foretold it, and according to
their prophesies the days were accomplished, When he himself must be purged:
He was born, he lived, he suffered, he died, and thus run round the wheels
of those miserable times; When] he had by himself purged our sins.

You see the Time's past, and a new Time must give you the remainder of the
Text; the Time is when,] the Person He,] and he it is that in order will next
come after, only have you the patience, till we have the leisure to dravv out
his picture, and then you shall see him in some mean proportion, Who had by
himself purged our sins. He]
WE have observed the time When he purged, and now time it is that you know
the Physician who administers it: the Apostle tells you it is He] that is,
Christ our Savior, who seeing us labor in the pains and pangs of sin, he
bows the heavens and comes down; he takes upon him our frailty, that we through
him might have the remedy to escape hell fire. Come then, and behold the man,
who undertakes this cure of souls; Cant. 2.8.
He comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills, says Solomon in
his Songs: and would you know his leaps, says Gregory? Greg. hom. 39.
See then how he leaps from his Throne to his Cratch, from his Cratch to his
Cross, from his Cross to his Crown; downwards and upwards, like a Roe or a
young Heart upon the mountains of spices.

His first leap downwards was from heaven, and this tells us how he was God from
everlasting: so said the Centurion, Surely this man was the Son of God, Mark
15.39. Mar. 15.39.
How else? the sin of man could no otherwise be expiated, but by the Son of
God; man had sinned and God was offended, therefore God became man, to
reconcile man to God: Had he been man alone, not God, he might have suffered,
but he could not have satisfied; therefore this man was God, that in his
manhood he might suffer, and by his Godhead he might satisfy: O wonderful
Redemption! that God must take upon him our frailty: had we thus far run upon
the score of vengeance, that none could satisfy but God himself? could not he
have made his Angels Ambassadors, but he himself must come in person? no;
Angels, or Saints could neither super-erogate, but if God will save us, God
himself must come and die for us: it were sure no little benefit, if the King
would pardon a Thief; but that the King himself should die for this Malefactor;
this were most wonderful, and indeed beyond all exspectation; and yet thus
will the King of heaven deal with us, he will not only pardon our faults, but
satisfy the Law: we sin against God, and God against whom we sin, must die
for it: this is a depth beyond founding, an height above all humane reach, what
is he? God.

But we must fall a note, the Creator is become a Creature; if you ask what
Creature? I must tell you, though it were an Angel, yet this were a great leap,
which no created understanding could measure; what are the Angels in respect of
God? he is their Lord, they but his servants, ministers, messengers, and
howsoever it would dazzle us to behold their faces, yet cannot the brightest
Angels stand before God, but they are fain to cover their own faces with a pair
of wings: the difference may appear in Revel. 5.13, 14. Rev. 5.13, 14.
where the Lamb is said to sit upon the Throne, but the four Beasts and four
and twenty Elders fall down and worship him. Esai. 6.2.
Is not here a great distance betwixt the Lamb in his Throne, and the Beasts at
his feet? and yet thus far will the Lamb descend that for our sakes he will
disthrone himself, reject his state, take the office of an Angel, to bring us
the glad tidings of salvation in purging our sins.

And was he an Angel? nay that was too much, he was made (says the Apostle) a
little lower then the Angels for the suffering of death, Heb. 2.9. Heb. 2.9.
What? the Son of God to be made lower then the Angels? here was a leap beyond
the reach or compass of all humane thoughts; he that made the Angels, is made
lower by a little then the Angels; the Creator is not only become a creature,
but inferior to some creatures that he did create: O ye Angels, how stand ye
amazed at this humility? that God your Master should become meaner then his
servants, that the Lord of heaven should deny the dignity of powers,
principalities, Cherubims, Seraphims, Arch-Angell, or Angel: O Jesus! how
contrary art thou to thy aspiring Creatures? some Angels through pride would
needs be as God, but God through humility is made lower then the Angels, not
equal with them, but a note below them, as David that sweet singer of Israel
sung, thou made him little lower then the Angels, Psalm 8.9. Psalm. 8.9. cited
also in the person of Christ. Heb. 2.7.


But how much lower? by a little (says Paul) and if you would know what that
little was, he tells you again, that he took not on him the nature of Angels,
but he took on him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. Heb. 2.16.
Here is that great abyss, which all the powers of heaven could no less but
wonder at: Abraham's Lord is become Abraham's Son; the God of Abraham, the God of
Jsaac, and the God of Jacob, has took upon him the seed of Abraham, the seed
of Isaac, and the seed of Jacob; wonder above wonders! that God should take the
shape of Angels, is more then we can think, but to take on him the nature of
man, is more then the tongue of Angels can express; that the King of heaven
should leave his glorious mansion, and from the bosom of his Father come into
the womb of his mother, from that company of Angels, and Archangels, to a rude
rout of sinful men: Tell ye the daughters of Sion, behold thy King comes unto
thee, says the Prophet Esaias in the 62. Chap. 11. verse. Isai. 62.11.
what could he less? and what can thou more? wonderful love that he would
come, but more wonderful is the manner of his coming; he that before made man
a soul after the image of God, now makes himself a body after the image of man;
and he that was more excellent then all Angels, becomes lesser, lower then the
Angels, even a mortal, miserable, wretched man.

But what man? as he is King of heaven, let him be King of all the world; if he
be man, let him be the ruler of Mankind: no, thou art deceived (O Jew) that
exspectest in thy Savior the glory of the world; fear not Herod the loss of
thy Diadem, for this child is born, not to be thy successor, but if thou will
believe, to be thy Savior; was he a King on earth? alas! look through the
Chronicles of his life, and you find him so far from a King, that he is the
meanest subject of all men: where was he born but at Bethlehem, a little City?
where did the shepherds find him, but in a sorry cottage? who were his
Disciples, but poor Fishermen? who his companions, but Publicans and sinners?
is he hungry? where stands his Table, but on plain ground? what are his
dainties, but bread and a few fishes? who are his guests, but a rout of hungry
starved creatures? and where is his lodging, but at the stern of a ship? here
is a poor King, without either presence or bedchamber, The foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay
his head, Matthew. 8.20. Matthew. 8.20.


Is not this the Carpenter, Mary's son? Mark. 6.3. Mark. 6.3.
A poor trade sure, but to show us that he was man, and how much he hated
idleness, some time he will bestow in the labors of man's life: but O wonder!
if he will reject majesty, let him use at least some of those liberal arts; or
if he will be mechanical, let him choose to some noble trade, Thy Merchants
were the great men of the earth, said the Angel to Babylon, Apoc. 18.23. Apoc.
18.23.
Ay, but our Savior is no Adventurer, neither is he so stockt to follow any
such profession; once indeed he traveled into Egypt with Joseph and Mary, but
to show us that it was no prize, you may see Mary his mother steal him away by
night, without further preparation: what, gone on a sudden? it seems there was
no treasure to hide, no hangings to take down, no lands to secure, his mother
needs do no more but lock the doors and away: what portion then is for the Lord
of heaven? O sweet Jesu, thou must be content for us to hew sticks and stocks,
besides which (after his coming out of Egypt, about the seventh year of his
age, until his baptism by John, which was the thirtieth) we find little else
recorded in any Writers, profane or Ecclesiastical.

And are we now at our just Quantum? alas, what quantity, what bounds has the
humility of our Savior? is he a Carpenter? that were to be master of a trade,
but he took on him (says the Apostle) the form of a servant, not a master,
Phil. 2.7. Phil. 2.7.
It is true, he could say to his Apostles, Ye call me master, and Lord, and ye
say well, for so I am, Ioh. 13.13. Ioh. 13.13.
and yet at that very instant mark but his gestures, and you may see their Lord
and Master, become a servant to his servants: his many offices express his
services, Ioh. 13.4, 5.
when he rose from supper, and laid a side his upper garments, and took a
towell and girded himself, and after that he had poured water in a basen, begun
to wash his disciples feet, and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was
girded. O ye blessed spirits, look down from heaven, and you may see even the
Almighty kneeling at the feet of men! O ye blessed Apostles, why tremble ye
not at this so wonderful sight of your lovely, lowly Creator? Peter, what
do thou? Is not he the beauty of the heavens, the Paradise of Angels, the
brightness of God, the Redeemer of men? and will thou (notwithstanding all
this) let him wash thy feet? no, leave, O Lord, leave this base office for thy
servants, lay down the towell, put on thy apparel, see Peter is resolute.
Lord, do thou wash my feet? no Lord, thou shall never do it. Yes Peter thus
it must be, to leave thee and us a memorial of his humility; I have given you
an example (says Christ) that ye should do as I have done unto you: Verse. 15.
and what has he done, but for our sakes is become a servant, yea his servants
servant, washing and wiping, not their hands, or heads, but the very meanest,
lowest parts, their feet.

How many hired servants (said the Prodigal) at my fathers house have bread
enough, Luke 15.17.
and I die for hunger? and as if our Saviors case were like the Prodigals, you
may see him little lower then a servant, yea little better then a beggar: Ye
know (says the Apostle) the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. 2 Cor. 8.9.
poor indeed, and so poor, that he was not worth a penny to pay tribute, till
he had borrowed it of a fish, Mat. 17.27. Matthew. 17.27.
See him in his birth, in his life, in his death, and what was he but a
pilgrim, that never had house to harbor in? a while he lodges in an
oxen-stall, thence he flies into Egypt, back he comes into Galilee, anon he
travels to Jerusalem, within a while (as if all his life were but a wandering)
you may see him on mount Calvary hanging on the cross, was ever any beggars
life more miserable? he has no house, no money, no friends, no lands, and
howsoever he was God the disposer of all; yet for us he became man, a poor man,
a mean man, yea the meanest of all men: and this another step downwards.

beast appointed to the slaughter: what was he but a sleep, said Esaias of him?
Esai. 53.7. Esaias 53.7.
a sheep indeed, and that more especially in these two qualities. First, as a
sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth: and to this
purpose was that silence of our Savior: when all those evidences came against
him, he would not so much as drop one syllable to defend his cause: if the high
Priests question him, What is the matter that these men witness against thee?
Matthew tells us that Jesus held his peace, Mat. 26.63. Matthew. 26.63.
If Pilate say unto him. Behold how many things they witness against thee, Mark
tells us, that Jesus answered him nothing, Mark. 15.5. Mark. 15.5.
If Herod question with him in many words, because he had heard many things of
him, Luke tells us, that he answered him nothing, Luke 23.9. Luke 23.9.
As a poor sheep in the hands of the shearer, he is dumb before his Judges and
accusers, whence briefly we may observe, Christ came not to defend, but to
suffer condemnation. Secondly (as a sheep he is dumb, and) as a sheep he is
slain; Esa. ibid.
He was led (says the Prophet) as a sheep to the slaughter. O Jesu! art thou
come to this? to be a man who art God, a sheep, who art man, and so for our
sakes far inferior to our selves: nay worse, a sheep: how? not free, as one
that is leaping on the mountains, or skipping on the hills; no, but a sheep
that is led:] led whether? not thither as David was, who could say of his
Shepherd, that he fed him in green pastures, and led him forth besides the
waters of comfort: no, but led to the slaughter. He is a sheep, a sheep led,
Psalm. 23.2.
a sheep led to the slaughter; and such a slaughter, that were he a dumb
creature, yet great ruth it were to see him so handled as he was by the Jews.

poorest of men, so the least of sheep; like a lamb, says the Apostle, Act.
8.32. Act. 8.32.
and, Behold the Lamb (said John the Baptist) even the Lamb of God which takes
away the sin of the world, Joh. 1.29. Joh. 1.29.
This was that Lamb which the Paschall Lamb prefigured, Your Lamb (says God to
the Israelites) shall be a Lamb without blemish, and the blood shall be a token
for you, that I will pass over you, Exodus 12.13. Exodus 12.5. and 13.
But was ever lamb like the Lamb of God? he is without blemish, says Pilate, I
find no fault in him, Luke 23.4. Luke 23.4.
and the sprinkling of his blood (says Peter) is the right token of election,
1 Pet. 1.2. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Such a lamb was this Lamb without blemish in his life, and whose blood was
sprinkled at his death, in life and death ever suffering for us, who (had he
not done so) should for ever and ever have suffered our selves. Tell me, O thou
whom my soul loves, where thou feedest! says the Church in Canticles. tell
me? yes: If thou know not (says our Savior) go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flock, Cant. 1.8. Cant. 1.8.
Our Savior is become a man, a sheep, a lamb, or if this be not humility
enough, he will yet take a leap lower.

What is he but a worm, and no man yea the very scorn of men, and the outcast
of the people, Psalm. 22.6. Psalm. 22.6.
Did you ever think we could have brought our Savior to thus low a degree?
what, beneath a lamb, and no better then a worm? Heaven and earth may well ring
of this, as being the greatest wonder that ever was: there is any bitter potion
due to man, which the Son of God will not partake of to the utmost dregs; and
therefore if Job say to the worm, Job 17.14. Job. 25.6.
thou art my sister, and mother; nay, if Bildad say, Man is a worm, and the son
of man is but a worm; which is more then kindred: behold our Savior stooping
thus low himself, what is he but a man? nay, as if that were too much, a worm,
and not a man, as sung the Psalmist of him.

no body, we can down no lower; and yet here is one leap more, that if we take
a view of it, we may suppose him to be nothing in esteem, a Nobody indeed.
Look we at every man in respect of God, and the Prophet tells us, All nations
before him are as nothing, Esai. 40.17. Esai. 40.17.
And if man be thus, why sure the son of man will be no less: see then (to the
wondrous astonishment of men and Angels) how greatness it self, Ex omni seipsum
ad nihil redegit: Beza in loc. Tert. ad Mar. l. 5.
to bring man from nothing, Exinanivit se, has made himself nothing, or of no
reputation, Phil. 2.7. Phil. 2.7.
How? nothing: yes, says Beza; He that was all in all, has reduced himself to
that which is nothing at all: and Tertullian little less, Exhausit se, He has
emptied himself, or as our translation gives it, He has made himself (not of
little, but) of no reputation.

Lo here those steps (the Scripture lighting us all the way) by which our
Savior descended; he that is God for us became an Angel, a man, a
Serving-man, a poor man, a sheep, a lamb, a worm, a nothing in esteem, a man of
no reputation. Cyprian, how he brings in the Devil triumphing over Christ in
this manner: As for my followers, I never dyed for them, as Christ did for his,
I never promised them so great a reward, as Christ has done to his; and yet I
have more followers then he, and they do more for me, then his do for him:
hear, O heaven! and hearken O earth? Was ever the like frenzy? The Devil,
like a roaring Lion, seeks ever and anon to devour our souls, and how many
thousands, and millions of souls yield themselves to his service, though he
never died for them, nor will ever do for them the poorest favor whatsoever,
but pay them everlastingly with pains and pangs, death and damnation? On the
other side, see our Savior (God Almighty) take on him the nature of a man, a
poor man, a sheep, a lamh, a worm, a nothing in esteem; and why all this? but
only to save our souls, and to give them heaven and salvation: yet such is the
condition of a stubborn heart, that (to choose) it will spurn at heavens crown,
and run upon hell, and be a slave to Satan, and scoff at Christ's suffering,
yea and let out his blood, and pull out his heart, and bring him a degree lower
then very beelzebub himself, rather then it will submit to his will, and march
under his banner to the kingdom of heaven. Hence it is, that the Devil so
triumphs over Christ, As for my followers (says he) I never died for them as
Christ did for his: no Devil, thou never diedst for them, but thou will put
them to a death without all ease or end. Think of this, ye unbelievers; me
thinks like a thunderbolt, it might shake all your hearts, and dash them into
pieces.

But a word more to you, of whom I hope better things; let me exhort the
Saints, that you for your parts, will ever love, and serve, and honor, and
obey, and praise the Lord of glory, for this so wonderful a mercy; I pray,
have you not cause? had your Savior only sent his creatures to serve you, or
some Prophets to advise you in the way of salvation, had he only sent his
Angels to attend you, and to minister unto you; or had he come down in his
glory, like a King that would not only send to the prison, but come himself to
the dungeon, and ask, saying, Is such a man here? or had he only come and wept
over you, saying, Oh that you had never sinned; all these had been great
mercies: But that Christ himself should come, and strive with you in mercy and
patience, that he should be so fond of a company of Rebels and Hel-hounds, (and
yet we are not at the lowest) that he would for us become a man, a mean man, a
lamb, a worm, a nothing in esteem. O all ye stubborn hearts, (too much stubborn
are we all) if judgment and the hammer cannot break your hearts, yet let this
mercy break you, and let every one say, O Jesus have thou done all this for me?
certainly I will love thee, and praise thee, and serve thee, and obey thee as
long as I live. Say so, and the Lord say Amen to the good desires of your
hearts. To whet this on the more, remember still, it is you that should have
suffered, but to prevent this, it is he that was humbled, it is he that was
crucified, it is he that was purged: what needs more? John 18.5.
I am he, said Christ to the Jews when they apprehended him; He? what he? I
know not what: but be he what he will, he it is our Savior, Redeemer,
Physician, Patient, Who had by himself purged our sins.

Thus far we have measured his steps downwards, and should we go up again the
same stairs, we might bring him as high as we have placed him lovv: but his
asscent belongs rather to the words following my Text; for after he had purged,
then he sat down on Gods right hand on high. Come we then to the next words,
and as you have seen the Person, so let us look for a companion; This may in
misery yield some comfort, if but any society bears a share in his misery; But
me thinks I hear you say to me, as the Athenians said (...) 32.
to Paul, We will hear thee again of this matter another time. By himself]
THe Time and Physician have prepared a Purge; but who is the Patient to
receive it? it is man is sick, and it is man must purge, or otherwise he dies
without all remedy or recoverie: but alas! what Purge (what Purgatory) must
that be which can evacuate sin? Should man take all the virtue of herbs and
mineralls, and distill them into one sublime and purest quintessence, yet
impossible were it to wash away sin: or the least dregs of its corruption:
Not Galen nor Hippocrates, nor all the Artists, or Naturalists that ever lived
on earth could find out, or invent any remedy for sin; this must be a work
of Grace, and not of Nature; yea, and such a grace as neither man nor Angel
could afford: Behold then who it is that both administers and takes the receipt
prepared; it is man that sinned, and God is become man, that so being both, he
might administer it as God, and receive it as man, the same Person, being
Physician and Patient, Compounder and Purger.

But, what a wonder is this? Are we a-dying, and must he purge for it? can
Physic given to the sound, heal the party that is sick? It was the saying of
our Savior, Matthew. 9.12.
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick, and Christ Jesus for
his part is whole indeed, No fault in this man, says Pilate; Luke 23.14.
Matthew. 27.19.
and he is a just man, said Pilates wife of him: to what end then should he
purge that is whole, and we escape it that are sick? O this is to manifest the
dearest love of our Soul-Physician, our endeared Savior; the whole indeed need
not the Physician, he needs no physic, no Purge, no Physician at all, but for
us he is become a Physician himself, for us he became Physician and Patient:
for us he was sick, for us he purged, that we through him might escape that
danger of eternal fire.

But how purged he? By himself? Was there none to associate him in this misery?
no, he purged by himself] only, and that without a Partner. Comforter.


First, without a partner, there was none that laid a finger in the burden of
his Cross to ease him: why, Blessed Savior, thou have Myriads of Angels
waiting on Thee, and can they not a little lighten thy heavy yoke? No, the
Angels are blessed, but they are finite and limited, and therefore unable to
this expiation of sin.

But what say we of the Saints? if you will believe the Rhemists, Rem. Coll. 1.
sec. 4.
they can tell you that the sufferings of Saints (sanctified in Christ's blood)
have not only a forcible satisfaction for the Church, and its members; but
withal they are the accomplishments of the wants of Christ's passion; an
horrible blasphemy: as if Christ's were not sufficient in it self, but his wants
must be supplied by the satisfaction of others; my Text tells me, Christ purged
by himself,] therefore not by any other, but sufficiently in his own person;
and as for that Text they urge against us, Coloss. 1.24. Col. 1.24.
Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake which is the Church;
whence they argue these two points, first the want of Christ's sufferings, and
secondly, the abounding of Saints sufferings for the satisfaction of others. To
the first we answer, that the afflictions of Christ, which the Apostle says, I
fulfill, are not meant of the afflictions which Christ suffered in his Person,
August. tract. in Joh. 108.
but in his members, thus Augustine; Non dixit pressurarum mearum, sed Christi,
quia membrum erat Christi, The Apostle says not, my afflictions, but Christ's,
because he was a member of Christ, who is usually said to suffer both with, and
in his members. To the second we answer, that Paul's sufferings, for his body
which is the Church, served not for satisfaction, but for confirmation of their
faith; Christi passio nobis sufficit ad salutem, Petri and Pauli contulit ad
exemplum. Ambr. sermon. 66.
thus Ambrose, Christ's passion suffices to salvation, Peter and Paul's passion
serve only for example; so then if you will have the true sense of the words,
they run thus; Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, whereby I fulfill the
measure of those tribulations which remain yet to be endured of Christ in his
mystical body, which I do for the bodies sake, not to satisfy for it, but to
confirm it, or strengthen it in the Gospel of Christ: and good reason have we
to admit of this comment; otherwise how is Christ a perfect Savior, if any act
of our redemption be left to the performance of any Saint or Angel? no it is
Christ, and only Christ Jesus, and only Jesus, nor is there salvation in any
other, for there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we
must be saved, Acts 4.12. Acts 4.12.


Angels, or Saints, what say we of good Works? Cannot they expiate sin? yea,
say our adversaries, they are meritorious, and applicatory; and expiatorie, so
here is a threefold use of them; what? has Christ purged by himself? and is
there any other means whatsoever to expiate sin? no says the Apostle, so
incompatible are these two, his grace, and our works, that if it be of grace,
it is no more of works, Romans 11.6.
or else grace were no more grace; and if it be of works, it is no more grace,
or else works were no more works. By grace then ye are saved -- not of works,
lest any man should boast himself, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.


Angels, Saints, nor good works, what say we to purgatory it self? we say it is
a fable, or were it an Article of Faith (as the Pontificians affirm) let us
have Scripture for it; yes says Roffensis, We went through fire and water,
Roffen. contra Luther. art. 37.
Psalm. 66.12. Psalm. 66.12.
and Sir Thomas Moor will have more Scripture yet, I have sent forth thy
prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water, Zach. 9.11. Zach. 9.11.
here are two places for Purgatory, and one says, there is water, the other
says, there is no water; but to say truth of both the Catholic faith, Aug.
hypog. l. 5. tom. 7.
resting upon divine authority believes heaven and hell, but third place
(says Augustine,) we know none, neither find we in holy Scripture, that there
is any such place: neither speaks he only of places eternal, that are to
continue for ever, for he purposely disputes against Limbus puerorum: and
rejects all places temporary; yea, elsewhere he acknowledges, there is no
middle place at all, Aug. de pec. merit. and remiss. l. 1. c. 28. Juel. def.
Apol. 2. part.
but he must needs be with the Devil, that is not with Christ: away then with
those paper walls, and painted fires, a bug (could Harding once say) meet only
to fray children; God will have no rival in sins purge, no Angel in Heaven,
no Saints, no works on earth, no purgatory under earth, it is he himself will
purge it by himself, my text affirms it, (and who dares gainsay it) that he by
himself (by no other) has purged our sins.

Thus far you have seen Christ purging without a partner, Esaias 63.3.
he trod the winepresse alone, and there was none to help him; but o the
bitterness of this purge that admits of no help, no ease; as he had no partner
to help him, so no Comforter to cheer him in his so lamentable sufferings. Some
ease it is to have one or other touched with the sense of our miseries, and if
they cannot help us, Solamen miseriis socios, etc.
yet to do what they can (be it only to condole us) it were a comfortable
refreshing; ay, but our Savior finds no refreshing at all, he purged by
himself, without a Partner, without a Comforter; not any one one earth or in
heaven, that afforded his poor heart any cure or cordial. First, look on
earth, for to them does he address that speech in Lamentations, Lament 1.12.
is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? the most grievous torments find some
mitigation in the supply of friends, and what friends has our Savior to
comfort him in his torments?

Gentiles; I must confess he found faith in some, and a seeming favor from
others: the Centurion is witness of the one, of whom our Savior himself
confessed, I have not found so great faith no not in Israel, Matthew. 8.10.
Matthew. 8.10.
and Pilate gives a token of the other, when he took water, and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just
man, Matthew. 27, 24 Matthew. 27.24.
but alas! did Pilate so favor him as to free him? no, he fears to condemn him
being innocent, and yet dares not absolve him, being so envyed as he was by the
Jews; what then can a little water? what can Iordans floods? what can rivers
of wine, and oil do, toward the washing of those hands, that had power to
release him and would not? he knew they had delivered him of envy, Matthew.
27.18. Matthew. 27.18.
he confesses, I find no fault in this man, Luke 23.14. Luke 23.14.
he tells him that he had power to crucify him, and he had power to loose him,
John 19.10. Joh. 19.10.
and yet fondly would he wash away the guilt of his unjust sentence, with a
little water on his hands; no Pilate, that ceremony cannot wash away thy sin,
that sin I mean, which thou and the Gentiles in thee committed, in delivering
of Jesus to the will of the Jews. Luke 23.25.


Jews, sure it is well enough; he is their Countryman, Kinsman, of the stock
of Abraham, of the Tribe of Juda, of the Family of Joseph; but this rather
aggravates then allaies his misery, that his own people should degenerate into
Traitors: not a Gentile, but a Jew to be his Executioner: what torment had not
been a lenitive, and a recreation in comparison of this? Daniels Den, the three
Childrens Furnace, Esays wooden Saw, Isreal's fiery Serpents, the Spanish
Inquisition, the Romish Purgatory, are all as far short in torture, as the last
of them in truth, to the malice of a Jew, witness our Saviors death, when they
all conspired not only to scourge him, mock him, buffet him, slay him; but to
slay him in such a manner, as to hang him on nails, and to make the Cross his
Gibbet,

Gentiles condemn him? will the Jews crucify him? and is there none to pity
him? Yes, what say we of his Disciples, that heard him, followed him, Luke 10.1.
and were sent of him by two and two into every City and place, whether he
himself should come? Would you think that these seventy, Luke 10.17.
(for they were so many in number) which for a time did his Embassage with joy,
would now have forsaken him? yes, if you mark it, many of them went back, Joh.
6.66.
and would walk no more with him. some stumble at his Doctrine, others at his
passion, but all were offended, as it is written, I will smite the Shepherd,
and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered, Matthew. 26.31. Matthew. 26.31.


Yet if the Gentiles reject him, they do but like Gentiles who were ignorant of
God; if the Jews hate and malign him, Matthew. 23.31.
it is but their old wont of killing the Prophets; if the Disciples that are
weaker, faint, and waver in faith, Matthew. 8.26.
it was no more then was said of them: O ye of little faith! but what say we to
the twelve Apostles, those Secretaries of his mysteries, stewards of his
mercies, almners of his bounties, will they also go away, and leave him
comfortless alone? no, can Peter say, Master, to whom shall we go, thou have
the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6.68. Joh. 6.68.
or if he will have deeper protestations; I am ready to go with thee (says
Peter) into prison and to death, Luke 22.33. Luke 22.33.
to death? yes, though I die with thee, I will not deny thee, and thus said all
his Disciples, Matthew. 26.35. Matthew: 26.35.
and yet like Jonas Gourd, when the Sun beats hottest, how soon are they all
gone, and vanished away? lo one betrays him, another forswears him, all run
from him, and leave him alone in the midst of all his enemies.

Apostles leave him, what say we to Mary his mother, and other his friends?
these indeed wait on him, seeing, sighing, wailing, weeping, but alas! what do
those tears but increase his sorrows? might he not justly say with Paul, What
mean ye to weep and to break my heart? Act. 21.13. Acts 21.13.
Pity, and of all other feminine pity, it is the poorest, helpless salve of
misery; but howsoever it was to others, this was so far from any salve to him,
as it is one of his greatest, tenderest sores about him: Luke 23.28.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and your
children. O see the wonder of compassion which he bears to others in his
passion; he has more care of the women that follow him weeping, then on his
own mangled self, that reels along fainting and bleeding even unto death, the
tears that drop from their eyes is more to him, then all the blood in his
veins, and therefore careless (as it were) of his own sacred person, he turns
about his blessed bleeding face to the weeping women, Luke 23.38.
affording them looks and words too of compassion, of consolation, weep not for
me, but weep for your selves and your children: But O blessed Savior, did
thou flow unto us in showrs of Blood, and may not we drop a tear for all those
purple streams of thine? yes Lord, thou do not here forbid us weeping, only
thou turnest the stream of our tears the right way; that is to say, homewards
into our own bosoms, pointing us to our sins, the truest cause of thy
sufferings.

the Gentiles, Jews, his Disciples, Apostles, Mary his own Mother, and all
other his friends, they are but as Jobs miserable comforters all; but let us go
up into heaven, John 16.2.
and there (if any where) be his comforters indeed: alas! what comforters? If
you imagine the Angels, it is true they could attend him in the Desert, and
comfort him in the Garden, but when he came to the main act of our Redemption,
not an Angel must be seen: how, not seen? no, they must not so much as look
through the windows of heaven to give him any ease at all; nor indeed were it
to any purpose if they should; for who can lift up, where the Lord will cast
down? O ye blessed Angels, how is it that your Hallelujahs cease? that your
songs which you warbled at his birth, are finished at his death; that your
glorious company, which are the delight of happy souls is denied to him, who is
the Lord and Maker both of you and them: why, thus it must be for our sakes: I
am full of heaviness (said our Savior in his type) and I looked for some to
take pity, but there was none, and for comforters, but I found none, Psalm. 69,
20. Psalm. 69.20.


Father in heaven that is nearer to him: Ioh. 10.30.
I and my father are one (says our Savior) and it is my Father that honors
me, Ioh. 8.34. John 8.34.
it is my Father that loves me, Ioh. 10.17. John 10.17.
it is my Father that dwells in me, Ioh. 14.10. John 14.10.
and howsoever others forsake me, and leave me alone; (as himself proclaims
it) yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me, Ioh. 16.32. John 16.32.
Is it so, (sweet Savior) whence then was that sorrowful complaint of thine;
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46.
Leo it is that first reconciled it, and all antiquity allow of it: the union
was not disolved, but the beams, the influence was restrained: Non solvit
unionem, sed subtraxit visionem. Scotus 4. sent. D. 46. Q. 4. resp. ad princip.
argum.
Affectione justitiae (says Scotus) he was ever united to his Father, because
he ever loved, trusted, and glorified him; but affectione commodi, that delight
ever emergent from that divine vision, was for a time suspended, and therefore
was it that his body drooped, his soul fainted, he being even as a scorched
Heath-ground, without any drop of dew of the divine comfort on it.

Father now forsakes him, will he forsake himself? O yes! he burns in the fiery
furnace of affliction, without all manner of refreshing; and this was it that
was figured in the Law, by those two Goats offered for the sins of the people;
whereof the one was the Scapegoat, and the other was the Offering: the
scapegoat departed away, and was sent into the wilderness, but her companion
was left alone in the torments, and made a Sin-Offering for the people: even so
was this Sacrifice of God-man, man-God, blessed for ever, the humanity was
offered, but the divinity escaped; the humanity suffered for the sins of the
world, but the divinity departed away in the midst of sufferings, and left her
sister and companion all alone in the torments: thus he purged himself, himself
only in his humanity, no other with him, all other left him; the Gentiles,
Jews, Disciples, Apostles, Mary his mother, and God his Father, nay he himself
is bereaved of himself, Levit. 16.10.
the humanity of his divinity, if not in respect of the union, yet as touching
the consolation, When he had by himself] (in his humane nature, without any
comforter) purged our sins.

Thus far you have seen Christ drink the cup of his bitter pains, pure and
without mixture of any manner of ease; what now remains, but that we make some
use of it? I will take the cup of salvation (says David) and call upon the
Name of the Lord, Psalm. 116.13. Psalm. 116.13
and what can we less? if our Savior has begun to us in pains, shall not
we afford him our thanks? the Cup of death could not pass from him, and must
the Cup of Salvation be removed from us? Psalm. 148.2.
O praise him, praise him all his Hosts: howsoever he was alone in his
sufferings, let us all bear the burdens in a song of thanksgiving, and in this
song let us singing vveep, and weeping sing; our sins may dravv the tears
which were the cause of his sufferings, and our salvation may make us sing,
which those his sufferings did effect: what needs more? he suffered by
himself] the cause our sins, the effect our salvation; let us mourn for the
one, and praise him for the other; praise him, and him alone, for he had no
partner in his sufferings, nor will he have any in our thanks, he had no
comforter in his miseries, nor must any share with him, in the duty we owe
him of praising his Name: Alas, have we not reason (think you) to give all the
glory unto him? it was he that suffered that which we deserved he purged by
himself] when we our selves lay sick of sin, in peril of death and
damnation; thus gracious is he to us, that when there was no other remedy for
our recovery, then he by himself in our stead, came, and purged our sins.

Thus far you have seen the Patient, and order now requires that we prepare
the Receipt, the Patient was himself] the Receipt is a Purge] but to confect
this Purge, we must crave a further time; and in the mean while, and ever
remember him in your thoughts, who has done all this for you, and the Lord
make you thankful. Had purged.]
YOu see who it is that has freed us from sin, to wit, Christ our Savior
without a Compurgator; he purged by himself] but what did he by himself? do
we say he purged? what need he to purge, who never committed any sin in
thought, word, or deed? it is without doubt he needs not, and yet do it he
will, not to clear himself, but us.

But this Purge does imply a medicine, and so we must apply it, a medicine it
was, and many medicines he used for the curing of man's soul; the first by diet,
when he fasted forty days and foruty nights. Matthew. 4.2. Matthew. 4.2.
the second by Electuary, when he gave his most precious body and blood in his
last Supper, Matthew. 26.26. Matthew. 26.26.
The third by sweat, when great drops of blood issued from him falling down to
the ground, Luke 22.44. Luke 22.44.
The fourth by plaster, when he was spit upon by the Jews, Mark 15.19. Mar.
15.19.
The fifth by potion, when he tasted vinegar mingled with gall, Matthew. 27.34.
Matthew. 27.34.
The sixth by letting of blood, when his hands and feet were pierced, yea, when
his heart vein was stricken, and his side goared with a Spear, Ioh. 19.34. Joh.
19.34.
the last (which contains all the rest) was by purge, when by all his
sufferings (and especially by his bloodshed) he washed us from our sins,
Revel. 1.5. Revel. 1.5.
Here was the cures of all cures which all the Galenists in the world may
admire with reverence, that our Lord and Savior should become our surety, that
our soul-Physician should become our Purger: how? not by giving us Physic, but
by receiving it for us; we (miserable wretches) lay sick of sin, and he (our
Physician) has by himself purged and delivered us of it.

But that we may the better see how this Purge wrought with him, we must know,
that purging in general, Observe.
is taken for any evacuation whatsoever: and to say truth in a word, the
evacuation of Christ's blood was the right purging of our sins. Hence is it,
that (as Scriptures affirm) the blood of Christ does redeem us, cleanse us,
wash us, justify us, sanctify us: Ye were redeemed by his blood, 1 Pet.
1.19. 1 Pet. 1.19.
and his blood cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
and he washed us from our sins in his blood, Revel. 1.5. Rev. 1.5.
and being now justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. Romans 5.9.
and therefore Jesus suffered, that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, Heb. 13.12. Heb. 13.12.
This blood was it that was believed by the Patriarchs, witnessed by the
Sacrifices, shadowed in the figures of the Law, exspected of all the faithful
from the beginning of the world; and therefore the Apostle concludes, almost
all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is
no remission, Heb. 9.22. Heb. 9.22.
It is true, Christ purged by his death and other his sufferings, and yet are
all these contained in the shedding of his blood: this blood is the foundation
of true Religion, for other foundation can no man lay. Wherefore neither was
the first Testament ordained without blood, 1 Cor. 3.11.
Heb. 9.18. Heb. 9.18.
Nor is the new Testament otherwise sealed, then with blood, Matthew. 26.28.
Matthew. 26.28.
What needs more? If the blood of Bulls and of Goats (in the old Testament)
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Christ (in the new Testament) purge your Consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God. Heb. 9.13, 14. Heb. 9.13, 14.
O sweet blood of our Savior that purges our Consciences, evacuates our dead
works, restores us to our God, will bring us unto heaven.

Esaias 63.2.
But O my Savior, wherefore art thou red in thy apparel, and thy garments like
him that treads in the wine-fat? is it thy precious blood that has given
this hew? yes, an hew often dipped in the Wine-fat, and that we may the better
see the color, let us distinguish the times when his Blood was shed for us.

Six times, says a Adams Crucifix.
Modern: seven times, says Bern. de passione Domini. cap. 36.
Bernard, did Christ shed his blood for us; and (to reduce them into order) the
first was at his Circumcision, when his name Jesus was given him, which was so
named of the Angel, before he was conceived in the womb; Luke 2.21. Bern. ibid.
and was this without Mystery? no (says Bernard) for by the effusion of his
blood he was to be our Jesus, our Savior. Blessed Jesu! how ready art thou for
the Sacrifice? What? but eight days old, and then to shed thy blood for the
salvation of our souls? Maturum hoc Martyrium, here is a mature Martyrdom
indeed. It is a superstition took up with the Egyptians and Arabians, Ambros.
l. 2. de patriarch. Abraham.
that Circumcision should fright away devils: and the Jews have a conceit not
much unlike: for when the child is Circumcised, one stands by which a vessel
full of dust into which they cast the Praepuce: the meaning of it is, that
whereas it was the curse of the Serpent, Dust shall thou eat all the days of
thy life: Genesis 3.14. Pet. Mart loc. com. class. 4. c. 7. Symbol. Ruffini Tomo
Jeronymi. 4.
they suppose therefore the Praepuce (or fore skin) being cast into the dust,
the Devil by that Covenant eats his own meat, and so departs from the child.
But howsoever they err, of this we are sure, that Christ delivered his flesh
as a bait to Satan, held him fast with the hook of his Divinity through the
shedding of his blood; this blood was it first shed at his Circumcision; and we
cannot imagine it a little pain, seeing the flesh was cut with a sharp stone
which made Zipporah to cry out against Moses, Surely a bloody husband art thou
to me: what a love is this, that Christ newly born should so early shed his
blood? Exodus 4.25.
but all was for our sakes, for the salvation of our souls.

he fell into an agony, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down
to the ground: here is a physick-purgative indeed, Luke 22.44.
when all his body evacuates sweat like drops of blood: but what? be the
pleurisy never so great, how strange is the phlebotomy? it seems not to
consult where the sign lies, you see all his body falls at once to sweating and
bleeding, not is the cure less strange then the physic; for we had surfetted,
and it is he that purges; we had the fever, and it is he that sweats and
bleeds for the recovery of our health; did you ever hear of such a remedy as
this? oft-times a bleeding in the head (say Physicians) is best stop by
striking a vein in the foot; but here the malady is in the foot, and the remedy
in the head; we (silly wretches) lay sick of sin, and Christ our Savior
purges it out by a sweat like drops of blood trickling down to the ground:
here is a wonder, no violence is offered, no labor is sustained, he is abroad
too in the raw air, and laid down grovelling on the cooler earth, or if all this
be not enough to keep him from sweating, the night is cold (so cold that
hardier soldiers were fain to have a fire within doors) and yet
notwithstanding all this, he sweats says the Text: how sweats? it is not sudor
diaphoreticus, a thin faint sweat, but grumosus, of great drops, and those so
many, so violent, as they pierce not only his skin, but clothes too, trickling
down to the ground in great abundance; and yet may all this fall within the
compass of a natural possibility. But a sweat of blood puts all reason to
silence, yea, says Hilary, it is again nature to sweat blood, Contra naturam
est sudare sanguinem. Hillar. l. 10. trinitate.
and yet (howsoever nature stands aghast) the God of nature goes thus far, that
in a cold night (which naturally draws blood inwards) he sweats without heat,
and bleeds without a wound. See all his body is besprinckled with a Crimson
dew, the very veins and pores, not waiting the tormentors fury, pour out a
shower of blood upon the sudden; foul sin that could not be cleansed save only
by such a bath! what? must our surfets be thus sweat out by our Savior? Yes
(says Bernard) we sin, and our Savior weeps for it, Bern. in ramis Palmarum,
sermon. 3.
not only with his eyes, but with all the parts of his body: and why so? but
to this end, That the whole body of his Church might be purged with the tears
of his whole body. Come then ye sons of Adam, and see your Redeemer in this
heavy case! if such as be kind and loving are wont (when they come to visit
their friends in death or danger) to observe their countenance, to consider
their color, and other accidents of their bodies; tell me, ye that in your
Contemplations behold the face of your Savior; What think you when you see in
him such wonderful, strange, and deadly signs? our sweat (howsoever caused)
is most usual in the face or forehead; but our Savior sweats in all his
body, and how then was that face of his disfigured when it stood all on dros,
and the drops not of a watrie sweat, but of scarlet blood? O my heart! how
can thou but rend into a thousand pieces? O my beloved! well may our eyes
shed tears at this, when his veins thus shed their blood for us.

Bernard tells us) was in vellicatione genarum in the nippings and tearings of
his sacred cheeks, Bern. de Pass. Dom. c. 38.
to this bears the Prophet witness, Esaias 50.6. Esaias 50.6.
I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to the nippers; or as our later
Translation, I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair: whether his cheeks were torn, or his beard plucked off, some vary
in opinion: Bernard thinks both might be true; Bern. ibid.
or howsoever we believe, most probable it is, that neither of them could be
effected without effusion of hloud. And now me thinks I see that face fairer
then the sons of men spit on by the Jews; nor is their scorn without some
cruelty; for in the next Scene they exercise their fists, which that they may
do with more sport to them, and spite to him, Luke 22.64.
they first blindfold him, and then smiting him on the face, they bid him read
who it is that strikes him; and yet (as if whiteness of their spittle, and
blewness of their strokes, had not caused enough colors) they once more die
his rosy countenance in a bloody red; to this end do they nip his cheeks with
their nails, and (as others) pluck off his hair with their fingers, whereby
streams and strokes of blood run down his cheeks, and drop down at his chin to
his lower garments: O sweet face of our Savior, what mean these sufferings,
but to tell us, if ever confusion cover our face for him, that we consider then
how blood and sweat thus covered his face for us.

tho^^s must fetch more from his head. If mine adv^^sary (says Job) should
write a book against me, s^^ely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it
as (...), ^^b 31.36. Job 31.36.
the (...) in stead of (writing a book, the (...) own, and see how our Savior
^i^^^ it to (...); not only on his shoulder as (...) to bear it, but on his
h^^d too, as a Crown, to (...) it ^^ but neither is it for triu^^^ only, but
for torture, it is a Crown woven of boughs, decked with thorns, and (...) of
blood in lieu of precious stones. O Jes^^ (...) thy ci^t^^e^^ (...) thy
scepter, th^se (...) ^^^^ple died with blood, thy royal Robes Is ^^^^nkfull
people (...) watered with his blood, that bring forth nothing but h^i^^s and
thorns, to crown him: but wherefore (...) save only to crush into his tender
hand? and to this (...) they do not only stick his head full (...), but after
they (...), to fasten the crown better, they strike him on the head their
reeds, or (...), Matthew. 27.30.
are (...) not like (...) (at the Country afforded) stronger and greater to
(...) his (...) with more ease; and see here (...) not (...) heavier and
solider ((...) and plenty of them) to (...) and hammer that crown of thorns
deeper and deeper into his head: O (...) imagine, Ne hic puto rivos sanguinis
defuisse. Bern. de pass. Dom. c. 39.
what streams of blood gushed (...) sharp prickled were shot in (...) less then
(...) on his neck, his face, his shoulders; and (...) ^is (...) u^ member of
that Head, his h^^^ (...) down upon all his members.

And his head ^ein (...), they (...) of blood issuing out of his (...) the
whips wherewith (...) his sacred sides (...) after (...)? Consider (I pray you)
(...) strip our Savior of his (...) and (...) his holy body to a pillar? he
(poor (...)) (...) ^he, without any friends to (...) ^im, whilst they strike
^n their (...) again and again full (...) leave a drop of blood in all his body
wh^^^ (...) in all this? the Law of Moses commanded that Malefactors should be
beaten with whips, and it shall be if the wicked be worthy to be beaten, that
the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face
according to his fault by a certain number: what number? forty stripes he may
give him, and not exceed, lest if he should exceed and beat him above these
with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee, Deuteronomy. 25.2, 3.
Deuteronomy. 25.2, 3.
Thus indeed were the Jews tied, but the G^^tiles neither bound by law, nor
moved with compassion, (...) exceed this number; I have read that he received
no less then 5400 stripes; S. Gert. l. 4. divin. insinuat. c. 35.
which if we consider these things, is not altogether improbable. First, the
law of beating; that every guilty should be stricken by every one of the
Soldiers, a freeman with staves, and a bondman with whips. Secondly, the
cause of this Law, that the body of him that was to be crucified, should be
disfigured, that the nakedness should not move the beholders to any dishonest
thoughts, when they should see nothing pleasing or beautiful, but all things
torn and full of commiseration. Thirdly, the purpose of Pilate who hoped to
spare his life, by this so great cruelty used against him. Fourthly, the great
care and haste which the Priests used in carrying of the cross, lest Christ
should have died before he was crucified: every one of these reasons argue an
unreasonable whipping, which our poor Savior endured. But (O joy of the
Angels, and glory of Saints) who has thus disfigured thee? who has thus
defiled thee with so many bloody blows? certainly they were not thy sins, but
mine, that have thus evil entreated thee: it was love and mercy that compast
thee about, for I should have suffered, but to prevent this, thy mercy moves
thee, and so thou take upon thee all my miseries.

Behold the man, said Pilate to them, Joh. 19.5.
when he thought to have pacified their wrath by that doleful sight, but this
nothing moved them, though (presently after) it moved rocks and stones to
shiver in pieces: Behold then a sixth effusion of blood, when his hands and
feet were pierced through with nails: he bears indeed upon his shoulders an
heavy and weighty cross of fifteen foot long, which must needs (say some) cause
a great and grievous wound, but (to omit that which is questionable) here be
those woeful sufferings; now come the barbarous inhumane hang-men, and begin to
lose his hands that were tied to the p^st, to tie them to (a worser pillory)
the cross, then strip they off his gore-glued clothes, which did so cleave to
his mangled battered back, that they pull off clothes and skin together: nay,
yet more (and how (...), I say it without tears for ^^n,) the cross is ready,
and nothing wanting but a measure for the holes; down therefore they lay him on
it, and though the print of his blood gives them a true length, yet spitefully
they take it longer, that so they may stretch and rack him on the cross, till
you may tell his bones. Psalm. 22.17.
And now all fitted, his hands and feet are bored, the greatness of whose
wounds David fore-shewed by those words, They dug my hands and my feet,
Psalm. 22.16. Psalm. 22.16. Socrat. l. 1. c. 17.
And well may we think so, for (as Ecclesiastical History reports) so big were
the very nails, that Constantine made of them an helmet, and a bridle. O then
what pain is this, when all the weight of his body must hang on four nails,
and they ^o be driven (not into the least sensible parts, but) through his hands
and his feet, the most sinew it, and therefore more sensible p^rts of all other
whatsoever; yet to hang thus for a time were (it may be) somewhat tolerable,
but thus he hangs till he dies, and so the longer he continues, the wider go
his wounds, and the fresher is his torture. And now (my brethren) behold and
see, Lam. 1.12.
if there were ever any sorrow like unto this sorrow: alas! what else appears
in him, but bleeding veins, bruised shoulders, scourged sides, furrowed back,
harrowed temples, dug hands and feet? dug, I say, not with small pins,
but with rough boystrous nails, and how then shot the blood from those hands
and feet thus dug, Cant. 2.1. Bern. de pass. Dom. c. 41.
and dug through? O, I am the rose of Sharon, it is truly said of Christ,
Look on one hand, and on the other, and you may find roses in both; look on one
foot, and on the other, and you may find roses in either; In a word, look all
over his body, and it is all over rosy, and ruddy in blood.

Longinus Bishop of Cappadocia Test Herle Contemplations on Christ's passion.
One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there
^^t blood and water, Ioh. 19.34. Joh. 19.34.
The Soldier that gave this wound (they say) was a blind man, but our Saviors
blood springing out on his eyes, restored him to his sight, and so he became a
Convert, a Bishop, and a Martyr: a strange cure, where the Physician must
bleed, but so full of virtue was this blood, that by it we are all saved. And
yet (O Savior) why did thou flow to us in so many streams of blood? one drop
had been enough for the world, but thy love is without measure. Physicians are
usually liberal of other men's blood, but sparing of their own; here it is not
so: for in stead of the Patients arm, it is the Physicians own side that
bleeds; in stead of a lancet here is a spear, and that in the hand of a blind
Surgeon: yet as blind as he was, how right does he hit the very vein of his
heart? that heart where never dwelt deceit, see how how it runs blood and water
for our sins, here is the fountain of his Sacraments, the beginning of our
happiness: O gate of heaven! O window of Paradise! O place of refuge! O tower
of strength! O sanctuary of the just! O flourishing bed of the Spouse of
Solomon! who is not ravished at the running of this stream? me thinks I still
see the blood gushing out of his sides, more freshly and fully then those sweet
golden streams which run out of Eden to water the whole world. But is it his
hearts blood? what? keeps he nothing whole without him, nor within him? his
Apostles are scattered in the garden, his garments at the cross, his blood how
many where is? his skin they have rent with their whips, his ears with their
blasphemies, his back with their furrows, his hands and feet with their nails,
and will they yet have his heart too cloven with a spear? what a wonderful
thing is this, that after all those sufferings he must have one wound more? why
(Lord) what means this open cleft and wound within thee? what means this stream
and river of thy hearts-bloud? O it is I that sinned, and to wash it away, his
heart runs blood and water in abundance.

Lo here those seven effusions of our Saviors blood, the first at his
circumcision, the second in the garden, the rest when his cheeks were nipped,
his head crowned, his back scourged, his hands and feet nailed, his side opened
with a spear, whence came out an issue of blood and water. purged? Lord in what
miserable case lay we, that Christ our Savior must endure all this for us!
were our sins infinite, for which none could satisfy but our infinite God?
were not our iniquities as the sands, for which no less then an Ocean of blood
could serve to cover them? sure here is a motive (if nothing else) to draw from
us the confession of our manifold sins. Lord, we have sinned, we have sinned
grievously, heavily, and with a mighty hand; and what now remains, but that we
never cease weeping, crying, praying, beseeching, till we get our pardon sealed
in the blood of Christ? O beloved! let me entreat you for Christ's sake, for his
bloods sake, for his deaths sake, that you will repent you of your sins which
have put him to these torments: and to this end I shall entreat you thus to
order your repentance: weep, and weep over him, whom you see, by your sins,
thus clothed in his blood. Why thus shall it be with the house of David, Zach.
12.10. Zach. 12.10, 11.
I will pour upon the house of David (says God) and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the spirit of grace, and of supplications, and they shall look upon
him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one that mourns
for his only son; and be sorry for him, as one that is sorry for his
firstborn: in that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. What is the house of David?
and what are the inhabitants of Jerusalem, but the elect people of God? and if
you be of that number, then do you look on him whom you have pierced, and mourn
for him, or mourn over him, as one that mourns for his only son, yea, be
sorry for him, or be in bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for
his firstborn. Is it not time, think you? do you not see how every part of our
Savior bleeds before you, his head bleeds, his face bleeds, his arms bleed, his
hands bleed, his heart bleeds, his back bleeds, his belly bleeds, his thighs
bleed, his legs bleed, his feet bleed: and what makes all this bloodshed but
our sins, our sins? O that this day, for this cause, we would make a great
mourning as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon! O weep, or
if you will not weep for him, yet weep for your selves, and your own sins:
alas, have you not cause? your sins were his murderers, and your hands by your
sins were imbrued in his blood.

effectually, send your thoughts a far off, and see your Savior in his
circumcision, in the garden, and when you have done so, then follow him a
little further; behold the tears in his eyes, and the clodded blood that came
from him when his cheeks were nipped, his head crowned, his back scourged, his
hands and feet nailed, his side opened: and then, O then see if you can love
those sins that have done all this villainy! love them, said I: no (if you have
any share in Christ) I hope you will rather be revenged on your sins, rather
you will every one say, O my pride, and my stubbornness, and my looseness, and
my uncleanness, and my drunkenness, these were the nails, and the whips, and
the spear that drew blood from my Savior, therefore let me be for ever
revenged of this proud, subborn, rebellious heart of mine own; let me for ever
loath my sin, because it brought all this sorrow on my Savior. Is not this
ordinary with men? should any one murder your Father or friend, whom you
highly regarded and honored, would you brook his sight, or endure his company?
nay, would not your hearts rise against him? would you not prosecute the Law to
the uttermost? and if you might be the Executioner, would you not wound him and
mangle him, and at every stroke cry out, Thou wast the death of my Father, thou
wast the death of my Father: and is the heart of a man thus enraged against
him, that has but murdered his friend or his father? O then how should your
hearts be transported with infinite indignation (not against the man but)
against sin that has shed the precious blood of your father, your Master,
your God, your King, your Savior? O follow, follow, after these sins with an
Hue and Cry, bring them to the Bar, set them be-the Tribunal of that great
Judge of heaven, and cry, Justice Lord, justice against these sins of mine;
these slew my Savior, Lord slay them; these crucified my Savior, Lord
crucify them: Why thus pursue and never leave them, until (if it possible may
may) you see these sins bleed their last; never think you have done enough, but
still give your corruptions one hack more, confess your sins once more and say,
Lord, this pride, and this stubbornness, and this looseness of heart, these are
they that killed my Savior, and I will be revenged of them.

them all on the Lord Jesus Christ; ease your own souls of them, and hurl your
care on him that cares for you all. Certainly, there is no way to wash you
clean from your sin, but only by Christ's blood, and how must you apply this
but by Faith? now then, in the last place have faith, rence your soul (as it
were) in the blood of this immaculate Lamb, and though you are polluted and
defied, yet (questionless) the blood of Jesus Christ will purge you from all
sin: Heb. 9.13, 14.
If the blood of Bulls and Goats (says the Apostle) and the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, how much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God: You may talk of a Purgatory, why here is the Purgatory, that true
Purgatory, the fountain that is laid open for the house of Judah to wash in;
and I pray you mark it, it is not only for justification, but being applied by
faith, as effectual for sanctification; not only for the expiation of sin,
that it be not laid to your charge, but withal to purge your Consciences from
dead works to serve the living God. O then (as you tender your souls) believe,
and cast your selves upon Christ for salvation, and for pardon of sins: Do you
not see him bleeding on the Cross? Do you not hear him graciously offering to
receive your sin-wearied souls into his bleeding wounds? what should you do
then but cast your selves, with all the spiritual strength that you can (at
least with infinite longings, and most hearty desires) into the bosom of your
Savior? say with your selves, the fountain is opened, and here will we bathe
for ever: Come life or come death, come heaven or come hell, come what come
can, here will we stick for ever: nay, if you must perish, tell God and man,
Angels and devils, they shall pluck you out of the hands, and rent you from
between the arms of your blessed bleeding Redeemer, your soul-purging Savior.
Thus if you believe, you need not to droop for your sins, but to go on with
comfort to everlasting happiness; the blood of Christ (no question) will make
way for you into heaven: Yea, (says the Apostle) by the blood of Jesus we may
boldly enter into the holy places, by the new and living way which he has
prepared for us, Heb. 10.19.20.
through the veil which is his flesh. Such is the blessed fruit of this blood,
and the Lord make it effectual unto us, to bring us into heaven, even for his
sake who by himself thus purged our sins.

You see the Purge given and taken, only a time it must have, and then follows
the Evacuation: He purged.] What? the ill humor is Sin,] the extent of it
Our] sin: of both these together at our next meeting. Now the Lord so prepare
us, that this Purge may work in us the everlasting welfare, and health of our
souls. Our sins.]
SIn is our sickness, and to cure us of it, the Law yields corrasives, the
Gospel lenitives, but especially Christ yields that Physic Purgative, which
evacuates sin. To consider Christ as a man of sorrows, and not a Savior of
sinners; were but a melancholic contemplation; to behold his wounds, and not
so to think on 'em as they were our selves, adds but more sorrows to our other
miseries; but when we call to mind that his blood was our ransom, that his
stripes were our cures, then with all our hearts we pray, his blood be upon us
and our children. And why not, this blood (says the Apostle) speaks better
things then the blood of Abel. Heb. 12.24.
For Ables blood cried revenge, but Christ's blood speaks mercy; and (to our
comfort be it spoken) if God heard the servant, he will much rather hear the
son: yea, if he heard his servant for spilling, how much more will he hear his
Son for saving, and regaining our souls? In the words are two parts,

1. The ill hu^our evacuated, Sin.]

2. The extent of this sin, it is mine, yours, Ours,] every ones.

What is it but Sin] which our Savior purged? this is that ill humor derived
from our Parents, inherent in our selves, imputed to our Savior, and therefore
(says the Prophet) he bare the sins of many, Esaias 53.12. Esaias 53.12.
to who^ agrees the Apostle, that he his own self bare our sins in his own
body, 1 Pet. 2.24. 1 Pet. 2.24.
What a load then lay on his shoulders; when all our sins, the sins of all the
world were fastened upon him? one man's sin is enough to sink him into hell; and
had not our Savior intervened, every one of us had known by a woeful
experience, how heavy sin would have been upon the soul of each man: but (O
happy we!) the snare is broken, and we are delivered. To prevent sins effect,
Christ Jesus has purged and washed it away.

And is this all the matter wherefore our Savior suffered? was sin all the
disease of which he labored, when he had by himself purged? yes, it was all,
and if we consider it rightly, we may think it enough to cause sufferings in
him, when merely for its sake God was so wroth against us. O loathsome sin,
more ugly in the sight of God, then is the foulest Creature in the sight of
man! he cannot away with it, nor (so righteous are his ways) could he save his
own Elect because of it, but by killing his own son: Imagine then what a
sickness is sin, when nothing but the blood of the son of God could cure
it: imagine what a poison is sin, when nothing but a spiritual Methridate,
compounded and confected of the best blood that ever the world had, could heal
it: we need not any further to consider its nature, but only to think of it,
how hateful it was to God, how hurtful to his Son, how damnable to men.

Sin he purged? this may teach us how hateful sin is, that put him thus to
his Purge: Every sin is a nail, a thorn, a spear, and every sinner a Jew, a
Judas, a Pilate: howsoever then we may seek to shift it on others, yet are we
found the principal in this act our selves; you know it is not the Executioner
that properly kills the man, sin only is the murderer, yea, our sins only
are the crucifyers of the Lord of glory: yea, (if you will please to hear me) I
will yet say more, our sins only did not crucify him, but do crucify him
afresh, Heb. 6.6. Heb. 6.6.
and herein how far do we exceed the cruelty of the Jews? then his body was
passible and mortal, but now it is glorified and immortal; they knew not what
they did, 1 Cor. 2.8.
for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory: but we
know well enough what we do and say too: they buried Christ in the earth, and
the third day he rose again from the dead; but we through sin so bury him in
oblivion, that not once in three days, three weeks he arises, or shines in
our hearts; O shame of Christians to forget so great a mercy! O sin past
shame to crucify afresh the Son of God! Think of it (beloved) sin is the
death of Christ, and would you not hate him that kills your brother, your
father, your Master, your King, your God? beware then of sin, that does it
all at a blow! and if you are tempted to it; suppose with your selves that you
saw Christ Jesus coming toward you, wrapped in linnens, bound with a kercher,
and crying after you in this ghastly manner: beware, take heed what you do, once
have your sins most vilely murdered me, but now seeing my wounds are whole
again, do not (I beseech you) rub and revive them with your multiplied sins;
pity, pity me your Jesus, save me your Savior, once have I dyed, and had not
that one death been sufficient, I would have dyed a thousand deaths more to
have saved your souls, why then do you sin again to renew my sufferings? O my
Savior, who will not leave to sin that but hears thy voice in the gardens?
Cant. 7.13.
lo the companions hearken unto thy voice, cause me to hear it: it is I that
have sinned, and if this be the fruit of it, let me rather be torn of beasts,
be devoured of Worms, be violently pulled or haled with racks, then wittingly,
or wilfully commit a sin.

Secondly, he purged sin, whose; but our sin: and this tells us of the
universality of this gracious benefit, together with its limitation.

First, of the universality: he tasted of death for every man, Heb. 2.9. Heb.
2.9.
and he gave himself a ransom for all men, 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 Timothy 2.6.
and he purged our sins, says my Text; what, ours only? no, says the
Apostle, he is the propitiation not for our sins only, but for the sins of
the whole world, 1 John 2.2. 1 John 2.2.
You will say, all do not actually receive the fruit of his death; you say
indeed truly, but I wonder through whose default: Our blessed Savior, what is
he but like a Royal Prince, who having many of his subjects in captivity of
thraldom under a Foreign enemy, pays a full ransom for every one of them,
and then sending forth his Ambassadors, he woes them to return to their home,
and to enjoy their liberty; some there are that reject the offer, they will
rather serve the enemy then return to the freedom of their Lord; and are these
all the thanks they give their Redeemer? O sweet Savior! he made, upon the
cross a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction
for the sins of the world, but not all receive the benefit, because many by
their own demerit have made themselves unworthy; and yet howsoever some despise
liberty, Number. 11.23.
is the arm of the Lord shortened? no see his arms spread on the Cross to
embrace all; and here is the universality of this gracious benefit.

sinner) will now come in with a truly penitent soul, thirsting heartily for
Christ Jesus, and resolve unfeignedly to take his yoke upon him, there is no
number or notoriousnesse of sin that can possibly hinder his gracious
enterment at Gods mercy seat. O then how heinously do they offend, who refuse
to take Christ Jesus offered thus universally? if you ask who are they? I
answer, they are offenders on both hands: First, those that too much despair,
secondly, those that too much presume: to begin with the latter.

sins, that they are loath to leave them, and they hope God is so merciful,
that they can have Christ and their sins too. Alas deceive not your selves,
though the dearnesse, and sweetness, and freeness, and generality of Christ's
offers be a doctrine most true, and we propound it unto you as a motive and
encouragement to bring you in; yet not so much as one drop of all that
bottomless depth of Christ's mercy and bounty does as yet belong unto any that
lie in the state of unregeneratenesse, or in any kind of hypocrisy whatsoever.
Away then with this presumption, and bethink you what a grievous and fearful
sin you commit time after time, and day after day in neglecting so great
salvation, by choosing (upon a free offer of his soul saving blood) to cleave
rather to a lust (O horrible indignity!) then to Christ Jesus blessed for ever:
what height and perfection of madness is this, that whereas a man, but
renouncing his base, rotten, transitory pleasures, might have Christ Jesus,
and with him a full and free discharge of hell pains, a sure and known right to
heavens joys; yet: should in cold blood most wickedly and willingly, after so
many entreaties, invitations, and offers, refuse this mighty change? Heaven and
Earth may be astonished, Angels and all creatures may justly be amazed at this
prodigious sottishness, and monstrous madness of such miserable men: they are
the words of a late Divine, The World (says he) is wont to call Gods people
precise fools, because they are willing to sell all they have, for that one
Pearl of great price, to part with profits, pleasures, preferments, their right
hand, their right eye, every thing, any thing, rather then to leave Jesus
Christ: but who do you think now are the true and great fools of the world? and
who are likeliest one day to groan for anguish of spirit, and say within
themselves, Wisd. 5.3, 4.
This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb of reproach; we
fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without honor, now is he
numbered amongst the Children of God, and his lot is among the Saints: Nay, if
it once come to this, with what infinite horror and restless anguish will
this conceit rent a man's heart in pieces, and gnaw upon his conscience, when he
considers in hell, that he has lost heaven for a lust: and whereas he might at
every Sermon had even the Son of God his husband for the very taking, and have
lived with him for ever in unspeakable bliss; yet neglecting so great
salvation, must now lie in unquenchable flames, without all ease or end. Sure
it is the highest honor that can be imagined, that the Son of God should
make suit unto sinful souls to be their husband, Rev. 3.20.
and yet so it is; he stands at the door and knocks, if you will give him
entrance, he will bring himself and heaven into your hearts: 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are Christ's Ambassadors (says the Apostle) as though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God. We are Christ's
spokes-men, that I may so speak, to woo you and win you unto him; now what
can you say for your selves, that you stand out? why come you not in? if the
Devil would give you leave to speak out, and in plain terms, one would say, I
had rather be damned then leave my drunkenness, another, I love the world
better then Jesus Christ; a third, I will not part with my easy and gainful
trade of Usury for the treasure hid in the field; and so on; so that upon the
matter, you must needs all confess that you hereby judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life, that you are wilful bloody murderers of your own souls:
nay, and if you go on without repentance, you may exspect that the hellish
gnawing of Conscience for this one sin of refusing Christ, may perhaps hold
scale with the united horrors of all the rest whatsoever. O then make haste
out of sin, and come, come to Christ, so freely offered unto you! Hark how
he calls, Come unto me all sinners, see my arms spread, my heart open. O how
gladly would I entertain you, if you would come unto me: here is a general
invitation indeed, all men, all sinners, of all estates, of all kinds, of all
conditions, whosoever you are, he keeps open house for you, Come and welcome.

despair; Some there are, that may perhaps go so far as to acknowledge their
sins, and to confess, that without Christ they are utterly undone, and
everlastingly damned, that may be ravished with the thoughts and apprehensions
of this invitation of Christ, and would ever think themselves happy if they
had their hungry souls filled with Christ Jesus; but yet so it is, that
(considering their manifold grievous sins, sins of a scarlet die, of an
horrid strain against knowledge, against conscience, and that which troubles
them most, for all these sins their sorrow being so little, and poor, and
scant, and in no proportion answerable to them, they cannot, dare not; will not
meddle with any mercy, or believe that Christ Jesus in any ways belongs unto
them. To these I speak or rather let them hear our Savior himself speak to
them: Revel. 21.
Whosoever will (says he) let him come, and drink of this water of Life
freely: yea, those that think themselves furthest off, he bids them come, Matt.
11.28.
Come all that are weary and heavy laden: if they find sin a burden, then
Christ invites them, they (whosoever they are) that stand at the staffs end, he
desires them to lay aside their weapons and come in; or if they will not do it,
he lays his charge on them, for this is his Commandment, 1 John 3.23.
that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ: nay, he counts
it a sin worse then the sin of Sodom, a crying sin, not to come in when
the Gospel is proclaimed; and therefore let them never pretend their sins are
great and many, but rather (because of his offer, invitation, and command, it
being without any restraint of person, or sin, (except that against the holy
Ghost) if they will not come in, and cast themselves upon Christ, let them say,
it is not the greatness of their sin, but a willingness to be still in
their sins, which hinders them; or otherwise let them know, that sins, when
men are truly sensible of them, should be the greatest encouragement, (rather
then discouragement) to bring them in to our Savior: Matt. 9.12.
Those that be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick: is it not
for the honor of a Physician to cure great diseases? a mighty God and Savior
loves to do mighty things, therefore in any case let them come in, and the
greater sinners they are, no question the greater glory shall Christ have by
their coming: And indeed to take away all scruple, it is a Maxim most true,
That he which is truly weary of his sins, has a sound, seasonable, and
comfortable calling to lay hold upon Christ. Do they feel the heavy load of
their sin? just then is Christ ready to take off the burden: Matthew. 11.28.
Rev. 21.6.
do they thirst after righteousness? just then is the fountain of the water of
life set wide open unto them: are they contrite and humble in spirit? Esaias
57.15.
just then are they become thrones for the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity to dwell in for ever. O then come and welcome! Christ excepts none
that will not except themselves, He died for all, and be would have all men to
be saved.

But yet let us be cautelous: secondly, he purged our sins, and ours] with a
limitation; the use of Physic (we say) consists in application; and howsoever
our Savior has purged our sins; yet this purge of his is nothing beneficial
to us, unless there be some means to apply it: As then it is in all other
Physic, so in this; we must first take it; secondly, keep it.

1. Take it, for as the best plaster if not laid to, can cure no wound; so
Christ himself, and all his precious merits are of no virtue to him that will
not apply them by faith: when you hear the Gospel preached, believe it on your
parts, believe Christ is yours, believe that he lived, and died, and sorrowed,
and suffered, and all this for you, to purge your souls of your sins.

2. But having taken it; you must secondly keep it; as men take Physic, not
only in belief that it will do them good, but in hope to keep it by the virtue
and strength of the retentive parts; so we take Christ by faith, but we retain
him by holiness: these two, faith and holiness, are those two bonds wherewith
Christ is united unto us, and we unto Christ: so that if we be of this number,
then truly may we say that he purged our sins: for the both died for us, and
by virtue of our faith and holiness through him, his death is applied to us;
to us I say, not in any general acception, but as we are of the number of his
Saints, for we had sinned, and they were our sinnes] only that he effectually
purged, and washed away.

free grace, and mercy, and goodness of Christ Jesus is revealed and offered
to all men universally; yet our Savior takes none but such as are willing to
take upon them his yoke; he gives himself to none but such as are ready to
sell all and follow him: he saves none, but such as deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present
world: in a word, he purges none, or cleanses none by his blood from all sin,
but such as walk in the light as God is in the light, who make conscience of
detesting and declining all sins, and sincerely set their hearts and hands with
love and careful endeavor to every duty enjoined them; why these are the men
only to whom his death is effectual; and therefore, as we mean to partake of
his merits, or to have good by his death, let us become new creatures. It is
true indeed, and we cannot but maintain it, that to justification nothing but
faith is required, but this caution must be added, it must be a faith that
purifies the heart, that works an universal change, that shows it self in the
fruits: if therefore any of us would come in, let us have ready our answer, as
a late Divine speaks the dialogue betwixt Christ and a true Christian on this
manner: First, (says he) when God has enlightened the eyes of a man, that he
can see where this treasure is, what then? Why (says the Christian) I am so
enflamed with the love of it, that I will have it whatsoever it cost me: yea
(says Christ) but there is a price upon it, it must cost thee dear, a great
deal of sorrow, and trouble, and crosses, and afflictions: Tush, tell me not of
price (says the Christian) whatsoever I have shall go for it, I will do any
thing for it that God will enable me: Why (says Christ) will thou curb thine
affections? will thou give up thy life? will thou be content to sell all thou
have? I will do it (says the Christian) with all my heart, I am content to
sell all that I have, nothing is so dear unto me but I will part with it, my
right hand, my right eye: nay, if hell it felf should stand between me and
Christ, yet would I pass through it unto him. This (beloved) this is that
violent affection which God puts into the hearts of his children, that they
will have Christ whatsoever it cost them: yet understand me, I pray you: It is
not to sell our houses, or lands, or children, but our sins that I mean: the
Lord Jesus and one lust cannot lodge together in one soul: no, if we are but
once truly incorporated into Christ, we must take him as our Husband and Lord;
we must love, honor, and serve him; we must endeavor after sanctification,
purity, new obedience, ability to do, or suffer any thing for Christ; we must
consecrate all the powers and possibilities of our bodies and souls to do him
the best service we can; we must grieve and walk more humbly, because we can do
no better: and thus if we do, though I cannot say but still we shall sin so
long as we live on this earth, yet here is our comfort, 1. Joh. 2.1, 2.
We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. I say for our sinnes] effectually, if we believe
in his Name, for it was for us he died, and they were our sins he purged, and
this is that great benefit we receive from our Savior, in that he by himself
has purged our sins.]

And now our sins being purged our souls recovered, I may well end this Text;
only I shall give it one visit more, and so Farewell. You see the malady,
Sin,] the remedy, a purge,] the Physician, he,] the patient, himself,] our
selves;] for our infirmities were laid on him, and his sores became our salves,
by whose virtue we are healed. Bless we then God for the recovery of our
souls; and be we careful for the future of any relapse whatsoever: these
relapses are they we had need to fear indeed, for in them the diseases are more
dangerous, sins are more pernicious, Matthew. 12.44.
and men become seven times more the children of Satan then ever they were
before. Now then we are healed, be we studious to preserve it all the days of
our life, and we shall find at our death, that he that purged our sins will
save our souls; we need not any other Purgatory after death; no, when our souls
shall take their flights from our bodies, then are the Angels ready to conduct
them to his Kingdom: and thither may we come for his sake, and his only, who
by himself (in his own person) has purged our sins. AMEN.

FINIS.
Heavens happiness.
LUKE 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.


HE that purged our sins is here disposing of Paradise, at the same time when
he hung on the Cross, even giving up the ghost, he is dealing Crowns and
Kingdoms to a poor penitent soul: thus like a glorious Sun that breaks through
the watrie clouds ere it appear unto us, our Savior (the Sun of Righteousness)
shoots forth his rays of Majesty through all his sufferings on a dejected
sinner. Two malefactors suffer with him, the one railes on him, saying, If
thou be Christ, save thy self and us: but the other prays to him, Lord,
remember me when thou come to thy Kingdom: in the midst of his thraldom he
proclaims his Kingdom, and whom he sees a Captive, he believes a Lord: Lord
remember me; is it not strange, that through so many, such thick clouds of
misery, this dying thief should behold his glory? but where grace abounds,
what marvel is it? 1. Cor. 2.15.
The Natural man knows not the things of God, but he that is spiritual
discerns all things. No sooner was this penitent thief converted a Christian,
but on a sudden, even on the very rack of torture he confesses himself a
sinner, and Christ his Savior; and therefore desires to be remembered of him
when he comes to heaven: Thus pouring out his soul in prayer, the Bridegroom
that became an Harp, says Bernard, (his Cross being the wood, himself
stretched on it the strings, and his words the sound) hark how he warbles the
most heavenly music that was ever chanted to a departing soul, To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.

The words are a Gospel, such as the Angels brought to the Shepherds, Luke
2.10. Luke 2.10.
Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy; here is tidings, good tidings;
joy, and great joy, the greatest happiness that could ever befall a mortal,
now waits on a malefactor, at that time when the execution was a doing, death
approaching, and the horrors of hell laying hold upon him; when a word of
comfort would have been most seasonable, like apples of gold in pictures of
silver; Prove. 25.11.
then comes our Savior (as a messenger with a pardon) and he bids him be of
good cheer, there was happiness toward him: when? to day] what? thou shall be
with me] where? in Paradise.] Not a word but speaks comfort to the afflicted
soul, be he howsoever afflicted for the present, yet there shall be a change,
and the more to sweeten it,

Here is the Celerity, to day] Certainty, thou shall be] Society, with me]
Vbi, or place where all joy is enjoyed, in Paradise.]


These are those four heads that issue out of Eden, may God give a blessing to
the watering, that you may bear good fruit till you are planted in that garden,
whereof it is spoken, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.] We begin with
the certainty of this promise, Thou shall be.] etc.

Thou shall be]
TO this purpose was that asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto thee.] Nor
is it enough that he affirms it, but he assures it, (...), thou shall be.] Will
and shall is for the King, and what is he less that bestows Kingdoms on his
servants? here was a poor man desires only to be remembered of him, and in
stead of remembering him, he tells him he shall be with him: how? but as a
coheir of his Kingdom. Blessed thief, that had such a gift, and that made unto
him with such assurance as this was! It is the promise of our Savior, who to
put him out of all doubt, he tells him it shall be so, Thou shall be] with me
in Paradise. Whence observe,

That Salvation may be made sure to a man. Observe.
If you would needs know the means (howsoever it was true in this thief) it is
not by any immediate suggestion, or revelation; Christ is now in heaven, and
the holy Ghost works not by enthusiasmes or dreams; Fidelium (...) non nititur
revelatione, sed promissionibus Evangelii.
The assurance of our salvation depends not upon revelation, but on the
promises of the Gospel: there then must we search and see, and if our hearts be
rightly qualified, thence may we draw that fullness of persuasion with Abraham
who staggered not at Gods promises, being fully persuaded, that what he had
promised he was able to perform, Romans 4.21. Romans 4.20, 21
This doctrine we have confirmed by David, Psalm, 35.3. Psalm. 35.3.
Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. By Peter, in the 2. Pet. 1.10. 2. Pet.
1.10.
Make your election sure. By Paul, in the 1. Cor. 9.26. 1. Cor. 9.26.
I therefore so run, not as uncertainly. From all which we may argue, David
would never pray for that which could not be; nor would Peter charge us with a
duty which stood not in possibility to be performed; nor would Paul serve God
at random, uncertain whether he should obtain any good, or prevent any
mischief; no, but as one that was sure, that by so doing he should attain
everlasting life, and without so doing he could not avoid eternal death. We
may then be sure, if conditions rightly concur; and seeing this is a point we
would be all glad to know, that we are sure to be saved, I shall beg others
help, Gods assistance, and your patience, till we have opened the windows, and
given you a light of the lodging, Cant. 1.7.
where securely our souls may rest at noon day.

Some lay the order thus, that to assure us of heaven, we must be assured of
Christ; and to assure us of Christ we must be assured of faith; and to assure
us of faith, we must be assured of repentance; and to assure us of repentance,
we must be assured of amendment of life.

Others tell us of more evidences, and we shall reduce them to these heads; The
testimony of our spirits, and the testimony of Gods Spirit: It is not our
spirit alone, nor Gods Spirit alone makes this Certificate, but both
concurring, and thus Paul tells us, Romans 8.16. Romans 8.16.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God.

1. Our first assurance then is the testimony of our spirit, and this
witnesses with Gods spirit two ways,

By Inward tokens, Outward fruits.


Inward tokens are certain special graces of God imprinted in the spirit of a
man, as godly sorrow desire of pardon, love of righteousness, John 5.10.
faith in Christ, for he that believes on the Son of God, has the witness
in himself, says the Apostle.

Outward fruits are all good deeds, holy duties, new obedience, and hereby we
are sure that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, 1. Joh, 2.3. 1. John
2.3.
To say then we are sure of heaven, and to live a life fitter for devils, what
a fond saying is this? no, if we have a true testimony we must be of good
lives; it is our holiness, and justice, and mercy, and truth, that will be our
best assurance, 2. Pet 1 10.
and so the Apostle assures us; If ye do these things ye shall never fall.

2. Our second and best assurance is the testimony of Gods Spirit, which
sometimes may suggest and testify to the sanctified conscience thus, or in the
like manner, Thou shall be saved, thou shall be] with me in Paradise.

But here I must satisfy two doubts: first, by what means the Spirit of God
gives this particular assurance? secondly, how a man may discern betwixt the
assurance of this Spirit, and the illusion of Satan, who is the spirit of lies?

To the first we say, the means is either by an immediate revelation, or by a
particular application of the promises in the Gospel, John 3.36.
in form of an experimental syllogism, as, Whosoever believes on the Son
shall be saved; but I believe on the Son, therefore I shall be saved. The
major is Scripture, the minor is confirmed by our faith, which if I have, I may
say I believe: True, flesh and blood cannot say this, it is the operation of
the holy Ghost; but if the work be wrought, and I feel this faith within my
soul, what need I doubt but this assumption is true, I believe on the Son? Yet
I hear some complain, they have neither sight nor sense of faith: and thus it
is often with Gods dearest children: the Sun that in a clear sky discovers
and manifests it self, may sometimes with clouds be overcast and darkened; and
faith, that in the calmnesse of a Christian course shines, and shows it self
clearly to the sanctified heart, may sometimes in the damp of spiritual
desertion, or darkness of temptation, lie hid and obscured: there is therefore
in the Saints, Certitudo evidentiae, and adhaerentiae.
the assurance of evidence, and the assurance of adherence: The assurance of
evidence, is that which is without scruple, and brings an admirable joy with
it, and this more especially appears either in our more fervent prayers, or in
our heavenly meditations, or in time of martyrdom, or in some quickening
exercises of extraordinary humiliation, or in beginning of our spiritual, or
end of our natural life, as most needful times, then does Gods spirit speak
comfortably to us, whispering to our souls the assurance of our happiness,
that we shall be inheritours of his Kingdom. The assurance of adherence is
that, which I doubt not the Saints have in their greatest extremity: for
instance, many a faithful soul, that makes conscience of sin, lies and
languishes upon the rack of fears and terrors, he shells nothing but a dead
heart, and a spiritual desertion, yet in the mean time his soul cleaves unto
Christ, as to the surest rock, he cries and longs after him, and for all his
fears and sorrows he will still rest upon him, Job-like, though he slay me, yet
will I trust in him, Job 13.15. Job 13.15.
Now this adherence unto Christ may assure him of salvation, for (if we speak
punctually and properly) faith justifying is not to be assured of pardon, but
to trust wholly upon Christ for pardon; and thus if he do, then may he with
freedom of spirit say, I believe on the Son, whence arises this conclusion,
which is the testimony of Gods Spirit, therefore I shall be saved.

To our second doubt, how we may discern betwixt the testimony of Gods Spirit,
and the illusion of Satan? I answer.

First, the testimony of Gods Spirit is ever agreeable to the Word, and thus to
try us, the Scripture tells us, that Whosoever is born of God, does not commit
sin, 1 John 3.9. which is not to be understood simply of the act of sinning,
for who can say, my heart is clean? but in this sense, he does not commit
sin, that is, he makes not a trade of sin, it does not reign in him; if
then thou allowest any lust in thine heart, or go on in the willing practice
of any one known sin and yet have a conceit that thou art sure of salvation,
alas, thou art deceived, thou have made a lie thy refuge, and hid thy self
under falsehood.

Secondly Gods Spirit breeds in the soul a Reverend love, and insatiable
longing after all good means appointed and sanctified for our spiritual good:
and therefore that heart which sweetly is affected and inflamed with the word
and prayer, and meditation and conference, and vows, and singing of Psalms, and
use of good books, we doubt not but it is breathed on by the Spirit of God;
whilst others that use all these Ordinances out of custom or formalitie, or
some other sinister end, alas, their conceit of being right, is built on the
sands, and therefore down it falls at deaths flood, and is overwhelmed in
destruction.

Thirdly, Gods Spirit is ever attended with the spirit of Prayer, and therefore
says the Apostle, We know not how to pray, but the spirit it self, makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. Romans
8.26.
O the blessed operation of this Spirit! it even warms the spirit of a man with
quickening life, to pour out it self in the presence of the Lord his God,
sometimes in more hearty prayers, and sometimes in more faint and cold, yet
always edged with infinite desires that they were far more fervent then they
are: But on the other side, every deluded Pharisee is a mere stranger to the
power of Prayer, if he prays often (as I make it a question) yet never prays
he from a broken heart, and this argues that all his confidence is no better
then a weed which grows of its own accord, and therefore like Jonahs gourd,
when affliction comes, it withers on a sudden.

Fourthly, the testimony of Gods Spirit is often exercised and accompanied
with fears, and jealousies, and doubts, and distrusts; and varieties of
temptations, which many times will drive the soul thus distressed to cry mightily
to God, to re-examine her grounds, to confirm her watch, to resort for counsel
where it may be had; whilst on the contrary the Pharisees groundless conceit
lies in his bosom without fears, or jealousies, or doubts, or distrusts, or
any such ado, why so? alas, Satan is too subtle to trouble him in that case;
he knows his foundation is falsehood, his hope of Heaven no better then a golden
dream, and therefore in policy he holds his peace, that he may hold him the
faster.

Fifthly, the testimony of Gods Spirit is ever most refreshing at those times,
when we retire our selves to converse with God in a more solemn manner; when we
feel that we have conquered, or well curbed some corruption of nature; when we
are well exercised in the Ordinances of God, or in our sufferings by man for a
good cause, and conscience sake; then (or at such times) shall we feel that
sweetness of the spirit cherishing our hearts with a lightsome comfort that
cannot be uttered; whilst on the contrary the deluded man is always alike
peremptory in his confidence, you shall not take him at any time without a
bold persuasion, that he hopes to be saved as well as the best, thus like a man
who lying fast asleep on the edge of a Rock, he dreams merrily of Crowns and
Kingdoms, and will not off it, but on a sudden starting for joy, he tumbles
into the bottom of the Sea, and there lies drowned in the deep; that assurance
which is ever secure is but a dream whereas the testimony of Gods Spirit is
sometimes mixed with doubts, and sometimes (to our unspeakable comfort) with a
secret, still, heart-ravishing voice thus speaks to our consciences, thou shall
be] thou shall be] with me in paradise.

You see the testimony of Gods Spirit, how it works in us, and how it is
discerned by us; it works in us by a particular application of the promises in
the Gospel, and is discerned by us by the word, by our love, our prayers, our
fears, our joys at some times while we are a doing our duties. assurance of
Heaven is the only real comfort that we have on earth; who then would not
study to make this certain? if we purchase an inheritance on earth we make it
as sure, and our tenure as strong, as the brawn of the Law, or the brain of
Lawyers can devise, we have conveyance, and bonds, and fines, no strength too
much; and shall we not be more curious in the settling our eternal inherit^nce
in Paradise? a man can never be too sure of going to Heaven; and therefore in
Gods fear let us examine the testimony of our spirits by the inward tokens,
and by the outward fruits: let us examine the testimony of Gods Spirit by the
means and the difference; and if we find both these testimonies to accord
within us, how blessed are we in this vale of tears! it is an heaven upon
earth, a Paradise in a wilderness, in a word, a comfort in all miseries, be
they never so embittered. See a Thief hanging on the Cross, an Engine of most
grievous torture; but who can tell the joy that entered into him before he
entered into Heaven? you may guess it by his desire to be remembered of Christ
when he came into his Kingdom; he begs not for life, nor pleasure, nor riches,
nor honor, no, there is one thing necessary; give him Heaven and he cares for
nothing; to this purpose does he address himself to our blessed Savior, Luke
23.37, 39.
and he asks -- what? if thou be Christ, save thy self, said the Jews in
derision, and if thou be Christ, save thy self and us, said the other Thief to
him; but this was only for the bodies safety: and here is a man quite of
another mind, let the Jews rack him tear him, break all his bones, and pull him
into atoms, if our Savior will but do so much as remember him in his
kingdom, he desires nothing more: O blessed Christ speak comfortably to his
soul that begs it thus vehemently at thy hands! but why do I prevent? the
bowels of our Savior yearn to hear him; remember him? yes, he will remember
him, and he shall be with him; comfortable news! how leaps his heart at these
so blessed words? his desire is granted, and Heaven is assured, and the Spirit
of God, yea, the God of Spirits thus testifies it to him, to day [shalt thou
be] with me in Paradise.]

Thus far of the certainty of his salvation, thou shall be:] but as the grant
is sweet that is certain, so is it yet more acceptable if done with expedition:
and here is both the certainty, and expedition, thou shall be, when? to day]
with me in paradise. To day.]
OUr Savior deferres not that he promises but as he quickly hears, and quickly
grants, so he quickly gives him Paradise, and a kingdom. This sudden
unexspected joy makes all more grateful; to tell us of Crowns and Kingdoms
that we must inherit, and then to put us off with delays, abates the
sweetness of the promise: men that go to suits for lands and livings, though
Lawyers feed them with hopes, yet one order after another, spinning out time to
a multitude of Terms, makes them weary of the business: it is the happiness
of this suitour that he comes to an hearing but the highest degree of his
happiness was the expedition of his suit: no sooner he motions, Lord, remember
me when thou come into thy Kingdom; but the Lord gives him that he asks upon
his first motion, to day, ere the Sun be down, the Kingdom shall be thine,
thou shall be with me in Paradise.

But you may object, Was there no Limbus Patrum, no Purgatory to run through?
but the very same day he died, he must then go to Paradise? no, unless Limbus
or Purgatory be Paradise it self, there is no such thing at all. Some there
are, that rather then say nothing, speak thus; Christ giving up the ghost, Mox
ut Deus exspiravit ipse secundum animam ad infernos descendit, Guliel. Paris.
cap. 21. secundum verbum.
his soul descended into hell, and the very same day was this Malefactor
partaker of Christ's beatificall vision, with the other Patriarchs in Limbus.
But of how great difference is Paradise and Limbus, we shall hear another time:
sure it is, Christ promised not a Dungeon in stead of a Kingdom, nor is
Paradise a place of pleasure, of any such imaginary melancholy nature: we
conclude then, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise,] it is all one, as to
say, To day, (thy day of death) thou shall be with me in Heaven, and there
enjoy me in my Kingdom.

But again you may object, That Christ rather that day, descended into hell,
then ascended into heaven: The Creed teaches, that after he was crucified,
dead, and buried, he descended into hell.

To answer the objection; some go about thus; by hell (say they) is meant
Paradise, where the soul of Christ was all the time that his body lay in the
grave: If this be not a misconstruction, I am sure it is no literal
Exposition, and me thinks a very strange kind of figure it is, to express
Christ's ascent into Paradise by his descent into hell. Others more probably
understand Christ's abode in the grave for the space of three days. Aug. Epist.
57.
Austin after some turns and wrenches concludes thus: Est autem sensus multo
expeditior, etc. It is a far easier sense and freer from all ambiguity, if we
take Christ to speak thesc words, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise]
not of his Manhood, but of his Godhead; for the man Christ was that day in the
grave according to the flesh, and in hell as touching his soul, but the same
Christ as God is always every where. Thus he: But this will not satisfy all,
Perkins on the Creed.
and therefore they argue thus against it; These words (say they) must be
understood of his Manhood, not his Godhead: and why so? For they are an answer
unto a demand, and unto it they must be suitable: Now the Thief (seeing that
Christ was first of all crucified, and therefore in all likelihood should first
of all die) makes his request to this effect; Lord, thou shall shortly enter
into thy Kingdom, remember me then: to which, Christ's answer (as the very
words import) is thus much; I shall enter into Paradise this day, and there
shall thou be with me: but the Godhead, which is at all times in all places,
cannot be said properly to enter into a place, and therefore not into Paradise.
Again, When Christ says, Thou shall be with me in Paradise] he does intimate a
resemblance between the first and second Adam: the first Adam sinned against
God, and was presently cast out of Paradise: the second having made a
satisfaction for sin, must presently enter into Paradise. Now there is no
entrance but in regard of the soul, or manhood, and therefore to apply it to
the Godhead, were to abolish this analogy betwixt the first and second Adam.

These reasons are weighty, but should we say with Austin, That Christ in his
soul went down into hell, one of our Worthies can tell us, R. Clerk D. in D.
Sermon.
that Christ's soul, united to his Godhead, might do all that, and yet be that
day in Paradise: God works not lazily like man: Satan could show Christ all the
Kingdoms of the world in the twinkling of an eye, and Gods expedition exceeds
his. To this agrees another, that we have no warrant in Gods Word, so to fasten
Christ's soul unto hell for all the time of his death, B. Bilson, l. of the
power of Hell destroyed, fol. 219. Romans 10.7.
but that it might be in Paradise before it descended into hell. That he was in
Paradise must be received, because himself does affirm it, and that he
descended into the deep must be received also, for the Apostle does avouch it;
but how he descended, or what time he descended, as also what manner of triumph
he brought thence, cannot be limited by any mortal man. To conclude, I will
not deny, but that according to the Creed, he descended into Hell, yet
howsoever we expound it, Metaphorically or literally, it hinders not this
truth, but that immediately after death his soul went into Paradise.

The objections thus solved, now come we to the Thief thus comforted by Christ,
to day] shall thou be with me in Paradise. What? to day? without all doubts or
delays? here is a blessed dispatch, if we either consider the misery endured,
or the joy to be received.

First, in regard of his miseries, he was a Thief condemned and crucified: we
read of four kinds of deaths in use amongst the Jews, strangling, stoning,
fire and the sword: the Cross was a death whether for the pain, the shame, the
curse, far above all other: we may see it in that gradation of the Apostle,
He became obedient to death, even to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. Phil.
2.8,
What engine of torture was that? it spins out pain, it slowes his death, yet a
little and a little till it be more then any man can think: see his hands
bored, his feet nailed, his legs broken, every part full of pain from top to
toe, and thus hangs this Thief, the poyz of his body every moment increasing
his pain, and his own weight becoming his own affliction; in this case were not
a quick riddance his best remedy? were not the news of death better then a
lingering life? Lo then to his eternal comfort, Christ our Savior (in the same
condemnation) grants him his desire: What would he have? a dispatch of pain? he
shall have it this day] as Samuels appearance said to Saul, To morrow (yea, to
day) thou shall be with me. 1 Samuel 28.19.


But secondly, here is a greater comfort, his miseries have an end, and his joys
are at hand; while he is even gasping in deaths pangs, he is carried on a
sudden from earth to heaven, from his Cross to Paradise, from a world of woe to
a kingdom of happiness and eternal bliss. O how blessed is the change, when
in the very moment of misery joy enters! Suppose you a poor man in the night
time out of his way, wandering alone upon the mountains, far from company,
destitute of money, beaten with rain, terrified with thunder, stiff with cold,
wearied with labor, famished with hunger, and near brought to despair with the
multitude of miseries; if this man upon a sudden, in the twinkling of an eye,
should be placed in a goodly, large, and rich palace furnished with all kind of
clear lights, warm fire, sweet smells, dainty meats, soft beds, pleasant music,
fine apparel, honorable company, and all these prepared for him, to serve
him, honor him, and to anoint and crown him a King for ever; what would this
poor man do? what could he say? surely nothing, but rather in silence weep for
joy: Such, nay, far happier was the case of this poor malefactor: he was like
the man wandering on the mountains, full of as much pain as the cross could
make him; but on a sudden he and our Savior crucified with him, both meet in
his Kingdom: and now, Lord, what a joy enters into him, when he entered into
heaven! on Calvary he had nothing about him, but the Jews at his feet, and the
nails in his hands, and the Cross at his back; in stead whereof, no sooner
comes he to Paradise, but the Angels, Archangels, Cherubims, Seraphims, all hug
him, and embrace him; imagine with your selves, how was he astonished, and as
it were besides himself at this sudden mutation, and excessive honor done unto
him! Imagine with your selves what joy was that, when he met our Savior in his
glory, whom that very day, he had seen buffeted, scourged, crowned, crucified;
blessed day that could ever bring forth such a change! Beloved, I know not how
to express it, but let your souls in some meditation fly up from Calvarie to
Heaven; in the morning you might have seen Christ and this Thief hanging on two
Crosses, their bodies stretched, their veins opened, their hands and feet
bleeding in abundance, the one desiring to be remembered of the other, and the
other complaining that he was forgotten of his Father: Matthew. 27.46.
in this doleful case both leaving the world, ere night they meet again, and
now what hugs, what kisses are betwixt them? When Joseph met with Jacob, Genesis
46.26.
he fell on his neck (says Moses) and wept on his neck a good while; but never
was any meeting on earth like this in Heaven: here we have a Joseph lift out of
the dungeon to the Throne, where no sooner set, but our Savior performs his
promise of meeting him in Paradise, at which meeting the Angels sing, the
Saints rejoice, all Harps warble, all Hands clap for joy, and the poor soul of
this penitent Thief, ravished with delight, what does it, or what can it do,
but even weep for joy (if any weeping were in heaven) to see on a sudden so
great a change as this?

Balaam, Let me die the death of the righteous and let my last end be like his?
Number. 23 10.
O let us (I beseech you) present unto our souls the blessed condition to come,
and this will be effectual to stir us up to every good duty, and to comfort us
in all conditions whatsoever: what will a man care for crosses, and losses, and
disgraces in the world, that thinks of an heavenly Kingdom? What will a man
care for ill usage in his Pilgrim^ge, when he knows he is a King at home? we
are all (in this time of our ab^ence from God) but even strangers upon ^^rth;
here then must we suffer in dignities, yet here is the comfort, we have a
better estate to come, and all this in the mean time is nothing but a fitting
of us to that heavenly Kingdom. ^s David's time between his anointing and
investing was a very preparing of him that he might know himself, and that he
might learn fitness for to govern aright, so we are anointed Kings, as soon as
we believe, we have the same blessed anointing that is poured on our head, and
runs down about us, but we must be humbled and fitted, before we are
invested: (...) time (and but a (...)) we have yet here to spend; and let this
be our comfort (howsoever we (...) here) it is not long ere we inherit. Alas,
the (...) of this life are not worthy of the glory that shall be showed us Romans
8.18. Romans 8.18.
and therefore Ig^^^^^ i^ a burn^^g (...) say (...) gallows, Hieron. in
catalogo.
beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering of ^y (...) ^^^^s^^ng of my body all
the torments of devils, let them come upon me, so I may enjoy the treasure of
Heaven; and well ^^g^^ he say it, that knew what a ch^nge would be one day
(...) never was cold shadow so pleasant (...) hot Summer, never was (...) so
delightful after ^^^our, as shall be this ^e^t of heaven to an afflicted ^our
coming thither out of this valley of tears, O then what service should we do?
what pain should we suffer to attain this ^est? were it to run through fire
and water, were it (as Augustine said) to suffer every day torments you, Aug.
sermon. 31. de sanct.
the very torments of Hell yet should we be con^en^ to a^^^e it; and how much
more when we may buy it without money, or money-worth; we need not to part with
any thing for it but sin: This Thief (now a blessed Saint in glory) I speak of
suffering and repenting as means, not as the cause.
for a days suffering, an half days repenting, was thus welcomed to Heaven;
imitate we him in his repentance, not in his delay, he indeed had mercy at the
last cast, but this privilege of one inferres not a common law for all: one
find mercy at the last, that none should despair, and but one that none
should presume. Be then your sins as red as Scarlet, you need not despair if
you will but repent; and lest your repentance be too late, let this be the day
of your conversion, now abhor sins past, sue out a pardon, call upon Christ
with this Thief on the Cross, Lord, remember me, remember me now thou art in
thy Kingdom; thus would we do, how blessedly should we die, our consciences
comforting us in deaths pangs, and Christ Jesus saying to us at our last day
here, our day of death, our day of dissolution, To day shall thou be with me in
paradise.

We have dispatched with expedition this dispatch, this expedition, to day] the
next day you shall hear the happiness of this grant, which is the society of
our Savior, thou shall be: with whom? with me] in paradise.

With me]
ANd is he of the Society of Jesus? yes, though no Jesuit neither, for they
were not then hatched) but what noble order is this, where the Saints sing,
Angels minister, Archangels rule, Principalities triumph, Powers rejoice,
Dominations govern, Virtues shine, Thrones glitter, Cherubims give light,
Seraphins burn in love, and all that heavenly company ascribe and ever give all
laud and praises unto God their Maker? here is a Society indeed, (I mean not
of Babylon, but Jerusalem) whither Jesus our Savior admits all his servants,
and whereto this Thief on the Cross was invited, and welcomed, thou shall be
with me] in paradise.

For if with me] then with all that is with me, and thus comes in that blessed
company of Heaven; we will only take a view of them, and in some scantling or
other you may guess at Heavens happiness.

With me] and therefore with my Saints; blessed man that from a crew of thieves
(by one hours repentance) became a companion of Saints: and now he is a Saint
amongst them, what joy is that he enjoys with them? O my soul, could thou so
steal Heaven by remorse for sin, then might thou see -- what? all those
millions of Saints that ever lived on earth, and are in Heaven; Heb. 12.22.
there are those holy Patriarchs, Adam, Noah, Abraham, and the rest, not now in
their pilgrimage tossed to and fro on earth, but abiding for ever on Mount
Sion, the City of the living God: there are those goodly Prophets, Esaias,
Jeremy, Ezekiel, and the rest, not now subject to the torments of their cruel
adversaries, but wearing Palms, and Crowns and all other glorious Ensigne^ of
their victorious triumphs: there live those glorious Apostles, Peter, Andrew,
James, John, and the rest, not now in danger of persecution or death, but
arrayed in long robes washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb: Revel.
7.14.
there live those women-Saints, Mary, Martha, and that Virgin Mother, not now
weeping at our Saviors death, but singing unto him those heavenly songs of
praise and glory world without end: there are those tender infants ( an hundred
forty four thousand, Revel. 14.1. Revel. 14.1, 3, 4.
) not now under Herod's knife bleeding unto death, but harping on their harps,
and following the Lamb whithersoever he goes: there lives that noble army of
Martyrs, ( they that were slain upon the earth, Revel. 18.24. Revel. 18.24.
) not now under the merciless hands of cruel tyrants, but singing and saying
their Hallelujahs, salvation, and glory, and honor, Revel. 19.1.
and power be unto the Lord our God: t^ere dwell all the Saints and servants of
God ( both small and great, Revel. 19.5. Revel. 19.5.
) not now sighing in this vale of tears but singing sweet songs that echo
through the Heavens, as the voice of many waters, as the voice of mighty
thunderings, so is their voice saying, Hellelujah, Revel. 19.6.
for the Lord God omnipotent reigns. And is not here a goodly troop, a sweet
company, a blessed society and fellowship of Saints? O my soul; how happy
were thou to be with them! yea, how happy will that day be to thee, when thou
shall meet all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Disciples, Innocents,
Martyrs, the Saints, and servants of the King of Heaven? why thus happy and
blessed, is this penitent Thief: no sooner entered he into the gates of Heaven,
but there meets him with music and dancing, Luke 15.25.
all the quire of Heaven, and (Lord) what a joy entered into his soul, when his
soul entered into his masters joy? Tell me (could I speak with thee that
dwell in the Heavens) what a day was that, when stepping from the Cross,
and conducted to Paradise, thou wast there received with all honorable
companies and troops above? there did the Patriarchs meet thee, and the
Prophets hug thee, and the Martyrs struck up their Harps to bid thee welcome to
the Tabernacle of Heaven. Such honor have all his Saints that attain the
fellowship of the Saints in glory.

But more then so, thou shall be with me] and therefore with my Angels: Lo here
a blessed company indeed, these are the heavenly Choristers eternally singing
Jehovahs praise: The Seraphims cry aloud, Esaias 6.3.
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, an Army answer to the antheme, Glory to
God on high. The whole Quire of heaven add the burden, Revel. 4.11.
Thou art wortby, O Lord to receive honor, and glory, and power for thou have
created all things, and for thy sake they are and were cre^^^d O heavenly
harmony consisting of ten thousand times ten thousand various sorts of Music!
Revel. 5.11.
I heard (says John the Divine) that (...) of many Angels round about the
throne, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, thousand of
thousands these are the shining and singing Stars of which God told his
servant Job, Job 38.7.
The morning stars sing together, and the ser^^^^^ of God shout for joy.
These are the winged Ch^risters of (...), whom John the Divine heard singing
their song of Hallelujah and Hosanna, Revel. 19.6.
I heard (says he) the voice of a great multitude, as the voice of many waters
the voice of ^any Angels, singing, and saying Hallelujah and again Hallelujah
these are the nimble Posts of heaven, Genesis 28.12.
whom Jacob say^ thing (...) and down the Ladder: these are the Protectours of
the godly whose aid God promised the Israelites; Exodus 23.20.
Behold, I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee
to the place which I have prepared. These are the Guardians of sucking Infants,
of whom our Savior told his Disciples that in, Matthew. 18.10.
Heaven their Angels always behold the face of his Father; these are the
armies of God, who meeting Jacob in his journey, Genesis 32.2.
he said this is Gods Hosts these are the Spirits and Ministers of God whom
David describing by the purity of their substance, and readiness of their
obedience, he calls the Angels spirits and his Ministers a flame of fire. Psalm.
104.4.
They are shining and singing stars winged choristers, nimble Posts of heaven,
Protectours of the godly guardians of children, the armies of the Almighty, the
Spirits and Ministers of the great Jehovah.

What blessed company is this we shall enjoy in heaven* there is nothing in
them but is amiable, nothing in them but is admirable: O that this clay of ours
should come to dwell with th^se incorporeall spirits! and yet see here a man a
thief (...) the (...) of men;) by his confession, and contrition, and faith in
Christ is now become a companion with Angels.

Nor is that all, thou shall be with me] not only with my Saints and Angels,
but with me] (with my soul) in Paradise. His soul indeed was there, though his
body at that time was in the grave; and if the soul be it that makes us men,
what a passing great joy is that, when men standing amongst the Angels shall
see their Lord, the Lord of heaven, not to be an Angel, but a man? Here is the
solace of Saints, when they shall see and say, who is yond that rules on the
Throne of heaven? who is yond that sits on the right hand of God the Father?
and they shall answer themselves again, it is he that for us became man; for the
salvation, it is he that of our souls has took upon him a body and soul. And
think now with thy self whosoever thou art that readst (if thou will but spend
thy few evil days in his fear, and so die in his favor) what a comfort will
it be unto thee to see that Lamb sitting on his seat of state? If the wise men
of the East came so far, and so rejoiced to see him in the Manger, what will it
be to thee to see him sitting and glittering in his glory? If John Baptist did
leap at his presence in his mothers belly, what shall his presence do in his
royal and eternal Kingdom? It passes all other glories (says Austin) to be
admitted to the inestimable sight of Christ his face, August.
and to receive the beams of glory from the brightness of his Majesty: nay,
should we suffer torments every day, or for a time the very pains of hell it
self, thereby to gain the sight of Christ, and of his Saints, it were nothing
in comparison. No wonder then, Phil. 1.23.
if Paul desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Alas, who would not be
so? O most sweet Savior (says one devoutly) when shall this joyful day come?
when shall I appear before thy face? when shall I be filled with thy excellent
beauty? when shall I see that countenance of thine, which the very Angels
themselves are so desirous to behold? an happy time sure will it be to each
faithful soul: And thus happy was this man, he parted sorrowfully with our
Savior on the Cross, but he met him joyfully in his Kingdom: those sweet
souls that both left the world at one time, no sooner had heaven gates opened
unto them, but with mutual kisses they embraced each other in unspeakable
manner.

Nor was this all, thou shall be with me,] not only with my soul, but with my
Godhead: this indeed was the height of bliss, the very soul of heavens joy it
self; set aside this, and crown a man with the Empire of all the earth, the
splendor of heaven, the royal endowments of a glorified soul, the sweetest
company of Saints and Angels, yet still would his soul be full of emptiness,
and utterly to seek for the surest Sanctuary whereon to rest: only once admit
him to the face of God, and then presently, and never before, his infinite
desire exspires in the bosom of his Maker: I deny not but the other joys in
heaven are transcendent and ravishing, but they are all no better then
accessories to this principal, drops to this Ocean, glimpses to this Sun. If
you ask how can our souls enjoy this Godhead? I answer, two ways; first, by
the understanding; secondly, by the will. The understanding is filled by a
clear glorious sight of God, 1 Cor. 12.12.
called Beatificall vision; we shall see him face to face, says Paul, 1 Cor.
13.12. We shall see him as he is, says John, 1 John 3.2. 1 John 3.2.
For as the Sun by his beams and brightness illightens the eye, and the air,
that we may see not only all other things, but also his own glorious face: so
God, blessed for ever (in whose presence ten thousand of our suns would vanish
away as a darksome mote) does by the light of his Majesty, so irradiate the
minds of all the blessed, that they behold in him, not only the beauty of all
his Creatures, but of himself; and thus shall we see and know that glorious
mystery of the Trinity, the goodness of the Father, the wisdom of the Son,
the love and comfortable fellowship of the holy Spirit; nothing that can be
known, but in him we shall know it, in most ample manner.

Secondly, the will is for ever satisfied with a perfect inward, and eternal
communion with God himself; Christ that is God and man, by his Manhood assumed
uniteth us unto God, and by his Godhead assuming uniteth God unto us, so that
by this secret and sacred communion, we are made partakers (and as it were
possessours) of God himself: O bottomless depth, and dearest confluence of
joys and pleasures everlasting! here is the perfection of all good things, the
Crown of glory, the very life of Life everlasting. And well may it be so, for
what can the soul desire, God will not be unto her? It is he that is eminently
in himself beauty to our eyes, music to our ears, honey to our mouths,
perfume to our nostrils, light to our understanding, delight to our will,
continuation of eternity to our memory; in him shall we enjoy all the
varieties of times, all the beauty of creatures, all the pleasures of
Paradise. Blessed Thief, what a glory was this to be admitted to the society
of Christ in his Deity! thou shall be with me?] how then should he be but
happy? Where could he be ill with him? Vbi male poterat esse cum illo? ubi
been poterat esse sine illo? Aug. Psalm. 16.11.
where could he be well without him? In thy presence there is fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there are pleasures evermore; joy, and fullness of joy:
pleasures, and everlasting pleasures: Blessed are all they that live in thy
house, O Lord, for they shall praise thee eternally world without end, Psalm.
84.4. Psalm. 84.4.


You see now Heavens society, they are Saints and Angels, and Christ, and God
blessed for ever and ever. forsake Father and Mother, the dearest fellowship of
this world to be with Christ in his Kingdom? You that love one another in the
deepest bonds, who cannot part out of this life but with the survivours grief,
and hearts break: tell me what a merry day will that be, when (you shall not
only meet again, never more to part asunder, but when) Christ our Savior
shall gladly welcome you (every one of you) into his society, thou shall be
with me,] and let me speak to the joy of us all, I mean all brokenhearted
Christians, (as for you that are profane ones, you have your portion here,
therefore stand you by, and let the Children come to their share) a day will
come, I trust in the Lord, when I shall meet you, and you me in the Kingdom of
heaven: a day will come, I trust in the Lord, when you and I shall be all
admitted into the society of God, and of Christ, and of his Saints, and of the
Aagels: a day will come, I trust in the Lord, when with these eyes we shall
behold our Redeemer, together with that Thief that was crucified with him: a
day will come, I trust in the Lord, when we shall meet again with all the
Saints that are gone before us: and is not this a comfort? what shall we say
when we see our Savior in his Throne, waited on with Mary his Mother, and
Magdalen and Martha, and Lazarus, and Paul, and Peter, and all the Apostles and
Disciples of our Lord and Savior? yea, when this Thief shall be presented to
our view, the wounds in his hands and his feet shining like Stars, and
Pearls, and Rubies, all his body glittering in glory, and his soul magnifying
the Lord for his conversion and salvation world without end.

must fit our selves to that estate to which God has preserved us: to this
purpose says the Apostle, Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look
for the Savior, Phil. 3.20. Phil. 3.20.
He was assured of heaven, and therefore he conversed as a Citizen of heaven
before he came there, every way he ^^rried himself (as much as earth would
suffer him) like them that live in heaven: and thus must we (if ever we go to
heaven) become like to those that are in that place. Deceive not your selves,
neither Whoremongers, no Adulterers, nor Extortioners, nor the like shall enter
into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. 1 Cor. 6.9.
Do men who live in these sins without all remorse or repentance ever think
to go to heaven? is it possible that ever any flesh should go out of the puddle
into Paradise? Matt. 25.41.
no, no, Away ye workers of iniquity, I know you not, says our Savior: let
no man cherish presumptions of an heavenly Kingdom, except he abstain from all
sins against Conscience. What then? but so live we here as becomes his
servants, and thus when we part, it is but for better company: we lose a few
friends, but we shall find him that welcomes all his with this heavenly
harmony, thou shall be -- with whom? with me,] in Paradise.

Hitherto of the Society. The last thing considerable is the place or Vbi where
his soul arrived; but of that hereafter, as the Lord shall enable me. God give
us all grace ^o to live here that howsoever we go hence one after another, yet
at last we may all meet together with our Lord and Savior in his heavenly
Paradise. In Paradise.]
ANd where was that? our Adversaries say in Limbus, and yet (to give them their
due) Bellarmine so means not as that Limbus was Paradise, Illa enim vere
Paradisus deliciarum est, non corporalis, aut localis, sed spiritualis and
coelestis. Bellar. de 7. verbis Domini l. 1. cap. 4.
but that in Limbus this thief had his Paradise, to wit, the vision of God: The
vision of God (says Bellarmine) is a true Paradise indeed, not local, but
spiritual. But with Bellarmines leave we have no such sense of Paradise, in
any part of holy Writ. In the old Testament we read of an earthly Paradise,
wherein Adam lived; in the new Testament we read of an Heavenly Paradise,
whither Paul was caught, yet both these were local, for the one (says Moses)
was a garden Eastward in Eden, Gen 2.8. Genesis 2.8.
and the other (says Paul) was in heaven, which he calls the third heaven, 2.
Cor. 12.2. 1. Cor. 12.2, 4
and that Paradise in my Text must be understood of Heaven, this resemblance
confirms; the first Adam sinned against God, and was presently cast out of that
Paradise on earth; the second Adam made satisfaction for sin, and so must
presently enter into this Paradise of heaven: because of the sin of the first
Adam, both he and all his posterity were thrust out of Eden; because of the
sufferings of the second Adam, both he, and we, this Thief, and all believers,
are to go into heaven. So then this Paradise whither Christ is gone, and this
Thief went with him, what is it? but as Paul calls it, the third heaven? or as
the Thief himself styled it in his prayer to our Savior, Remember me; where?
in thy Kingdom.

And if this be it we call Paradise, what can we say of it? It is not for us
(says Bernard) in these earthly bodies to mount into the Clouds, Bern. super
Cant. sermon. 38.
to pierce this fullness of light to break into this bottomless depth of
glory; this is reserved to the last day, when Christ Jesus shall present us
glorious and pure to his Father, without spot or wrinkle. And yet because God
in his Word does here give us a taste of heaven, by comparing it with the most
precious things that are on earth, let us follow him so far as he has revealed
it, and no further.

In the midst of Paradise is a Tree of Life, Rev. 2.7. Revel. 2.7.
and this Tree bears twelve manner of fruits, yielding her fruit every Month,
Rev. 22.2. Rev. 22.2.
What more pleasant then life? and what life better then where is variety of
pleasure? here is a tree of life, and the life of the tree; a Tree of life that
renews life to the eaters, and the life of the tree bearing fruit every month,
and as many months so many fruits; such are the varieties of heavens joys,
where youth flourishes that never waxes old, change of delights and choice
too enters that never knows end. But look we a little further: John that
calls this place Paradise, Revel. 2. calls this Paradise a City, Rev. 21. Rev.
21. from the 10 verse to 24.
and hereof he gives us the quantity and quality, the bigness and beauty:
first for the greatness of it; An Angel with a golden Reed mea^ures it, and
and he finds the length and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.
Secondly, for the beauty of it, The Walls (says he) are of Jasper, and the
foundation of the Walls garnished with all manner of precious stones, the
twelve gates are of pearls, and the streets paved with pure gold: there is no
need of Sun or Moon: for the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb (Christ
Jesus) is the light thereof. See here the excellency of this City: on which
words to give you a short Comment,

We Will begin first with the Greatness of it: The Angel sets it down twelve
hundred Furlongs, verse. 16. Yet that we may know this certain number; it is but
figuratively taken; you may guess at the measurable magnitude of this City,
by those many Mansions, spoken of by Christ, John 14.2. John 14.2.
In my Fathers house are many Mansions: How many? so many (says one) as would
suffice infinitis mundis, Rolloc. in Joh cap. 14.
a thousand worlds of men, and though all the men in this one world attain not
to it, it is not for want of room, but of will, They believe not in him who
has prepared these seats for them. And guess it you may by that incredible
distance betwixt Heaven and Earth. Some Astronomers compute, that betwixt us
only and the starrie Frmament, there is no less then seventy four Millions,
Casman. (...).
seven hundred three thousand, one hundred, eighty miles; and if the Empyreall
Heaven (as many say) be two or three Orbs above the Starrie firmament, how many
more miles is it then beyond? and the further it is distant (we all know well
enough) the heavens being Orb-wise, and one comprehending another, that which
is furthest or highest must needs be the greatest; hence is it that Scriptures
compare the height of Heaven (and consequently the magnitude) to the perfection
of God past finding out; Can thou by searching find out God? -- it is as high
as heaven, what can thou do? Job 11.8. Job 11.8.


Secondly, If such be the immensity, what think you is the beauty? It is a most
glorious City, whose walls are of Jasper, whose building is of gold, whose
gates are of pearls, whose foundation of precious stones: and if such be the
gates and streets, what then are the inner rooms? what are the dining Chambers?
what are the lodging rooms? O how unspeakable is the glory of this City! Kings
shall throw down their Crowns before it, and count all their pomp and glory but
as dust in comparison; and well they may: for what is an earthly Kingdom to
this heavenly Paradise? where is mirth without sadness, health without sorrow,
life without labor, light without darkness, where every Saint is a King,
adorned with light as with a garment, and clad in the richest robes that God
bestows upon a creature.

But that which more especially commends the beauty of this City, is the
luster of it, There is (says John) no need of Sun or Moon, it is verus (...),
wholly light it self, Zanch. de Coelo beatorum, cap. 4.
not like the starrie firmament, bespangled here and there with glittering
spots. It is all as it were one great, one glorious Sun, from every point it
pours out abundantly whole rivers of purest light, and then what a light is
this?

Nor is this all; for the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof; besides the native luster, there is the glory of God, the glory of
all glories; this is it for which Moses prayed, O Lord, I beseech thee show me
thy glory; to whom God answered, thou can not see my face and live, -- but I
will put thee in a cleft of the rock, Exodus 33.18, 20, 21, 22, 23.
and will cover thee with my hand while my glory passes by; then will I take
away my hand, and thou shall see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen.
And if Moses face shone so bright with seeing Gods back-parts, that the
Israelites were afraid to come nigh him, and that he was fain to cover his face
with a veil while he spoke unto them, Exodus 34.30, 33.
how bright then is Paradise, not only lightened with the back-parts of God,
but with his own divine glory? From the majesty of God (says a modern) there
goes out a created light, Zanch. de Coelo beat. l. 1. c. 4.
that makes the whole City glitter, and this being communicated to the Saints,
God thereby causes that they see him fully face to face.

Again, The glory of God, and the Lamb of God both give their lights; that
Lamb that was slain from the beginning of the world, that body of his once
crucified, now brighter then ten thousand Suns, O how infinitely glorious does
it make this Paradise, this City of God? His countenance is as the Sun that
shines in his strength, says John, Revel. 1.16. Revel. 1.16.
But what stars are those in his hands and his feet? Where the nayls pierced,
now it sparkleth; where the spear entered now it glittereth gloriously: if we
look all over him, Ibid. v. 14, 15.
his head and his hairs are as white as snow, his eyes are as a flame of fire,
his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace: no wonder then
if such beams come from this Sun (the Sun of righteousness) that all heaven
shines with it from the one end to the other.

And yet again the Lamb, and the Saints all give their lights; for we know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, 1. Joh. 3.2. 1. John 3.2.
how like? why, he shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. Phil. 3.21.
In what like? even in this very quality; for they that be wise shall shine,
Dan. 12.3. Dan. 12.3.
How shine? as the brightness of the Firmament: nay more, as the stars,
says Daniel: nay more, as the Sun, says our Savior; nay, yet more says
Chrysostom: howsoever the righteous in heaven Heaven are compared to the Sun,
Matthew. 13.43. Matthew. 13.43.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 6
It is not, because they shall not surpass the brightness of it; but the Sun
being the most glittering thing in this world, he takes a resemblance thence
only toward the expressing of their glory. Now then what a mass of light
will arise in Paradise, where so many millions of Sunns appear all at once? If
one Sun make the morning sky so glorious, what a bright shining and glorious
day is there, where is not a body but it is a Sunn? Sure it is, Revel. 21.23.
There shall be no night there no need of candle* no need of Sun, or Moon, or
Star. O that this clay of ours should be partakers of such glory! what am I O
Lord, that being a worm on earth, thou will make me a Saint in heaven? this
body of earth and dust shall shine in heaven like those glorious spangles in
the firmament; this body that shall rot in dust and fall more vile then a
Carrion, shall arise in glory, and shine like the glorious body of our Savior
in the mount of Tabor. To come near my Text: See here a Saint-Thief shining
gloriously he that was crucified with our Savior at whose death the Sun hid
her face with a veil, now he reigns in glory without need of Sunn: for he is a
Sunn himself, shining more clearly then the Sun at noon; he that one day was
fastened to a Cross, now walks at liberty through the streets of Paradise, and
all the joys, all the riches, all the glory that can be is poured upon him.
What else? He is in Paradise, and what is Paradise but a place of pleasure?
where sorrow is never felt, complaint is never heard, matter of sadness is
never seen, evil success is never feared, but in stead thereof there is all
good without any evil, life that never ends, beauty that never fades, love
that never cools, health that never impaireth, joy that never cease; what
more could this penitent wish, then to hear him speak that promised Paradise,
and per^^^^^ed his promise, To day thou shall (...) with me in Paradise.]

And thus in a Map have I (...) Paradise] for quantity great, for quality
glor^^^^, (...) better, when you shall walk through the (...) observe the
towers, fully contemplate the glory (...) that you may, not w^^^ of application
before I (...). for the name of Christ; there is nothing so imbittered, that a
thought of heaven will not sweeten: Yet I say not that w^ are only to think of
it, withal let us strive and strain to get into this golden City, where
stre^^^ (...) ^^te^ and all is gold and pearl; nay, where pearl (...) nothing
worth in comparison of those things which shall be revealed unto (...)
faithful soul.

Paradise, for (...)rye pelf? What sots and senseless wretches are they, who
wittingly and wilfully bar themselves out of this Palace, for the short
fruition of wordly trash and (...). As for you of whom I hope better things,
let me advise you for the love of God, for the love of Christ, for the love
that you b^^^ to your own soul, that you will settle your affections or things
above, and not on things beneath; and then you shall find o^^ l^y the comfort
of it when leaving this world, the Spirit of G^^st shall whisper to your souls
this happy tidings, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.]

Here is an end: Shall I now cast up the accounts of what I have delivered you?
The Total is this: Every sinner that repents and believes, shall be saved: you
need no other instance then this Thief on the Cross, at one hearty tear, one
penitent prayer, Lord, remember me in thy Kingdom, the Lord gives him his
desire; see here the fiat, thou shall be] the expedition, to day] his
admission, with me] the place whither he is inducted, it is into Paradise.] and
there now he officiates, doing service to God without ceasing, world without
end. O Lord, give me grace so to repent and believe, that whenever I go
hence, that day I may be with thee in Paradise. AMEN*

SO^^ DEO ^L^
Printed for Nath. Webb, and William Grantham, at the Greyhound in Paul's
Churchyard. MDCL.


