THE PLEASURES OF Love and Marriage, A POEM In Praise of the FAIR SEX. In
Requital for The Folly of Love, and some other late Satyrs on WOMEN.

LONDON: Printed, for H. N. and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms
in Warwick Lane. 1691.

Epistle to STELLA.
It Is well, Dearest Stella, that the lewd World and your Astrophel are not much
accquainted: For should they once know how long he has Loved, and how long he
has been Happy, and yet that he still continues to Love as well, and be Happy
as ever, they would certainly Point at him in the Streets, and cry, there goes that
Monster of a Constant Lover. Fools and Wretches! How can you and I at the same
time Despise and Pity 'em? They have not Souls great enough for a constant
Passion, and are no more capable of relishing so noble a Joy, than a rude
Peasant can the sweetest Delicacies of Wit and Music. The Wondrous weighty
Excuse they commonly make use of to cloak their Perfidy and Folly, is, that
forsooth, they can find nothing in the Fair Sex that is Worthy their continued
Adorations. I Will not deny that many, perhaps, all of the Beau's acquaintance,
may be just such Persons as he Describes all Women; for we may safely affirm no
others would Ambition the Honor of knowing him. However, Sympathy should, one
would think, keep him a little closer to what is so extremely like his dear
Self: But the mischief is, like other Persons of his understanding, he must
have every day a new Toy or Baby to divert him, or else no quiet is to be
expected: And it is with him too like them; no sooner is a new play-thing
brought within his reach, but the old must be immediately thrown away or knocked
of the Head.

But I have forgot I am speaking to my Stella, not to them, tho I have not much
more to say to either; only, that I have endeavored to do her Lovely Sex
Justice in the following pages, against the weak Malice and Impudence of some
late Scriblers; that I have in the Draught I have here attempted of their
Perfections, taken quite contrary Measures to those of the Painter, who from
all the Beauties of his Country, made one Venus; since from one of the Graces I
have described all the rest; and that Stella need do no more than consult her
Glass to learn who that Person is, besides whom, none shall ever have any room
in the Heart of

Her Happy and Constant Adorer, ASTROPHEL.

Stella asked Astrophel what Love was, and for what Reason he Loved her? Who
made this following Answer.
LOVE is not Wounds, nor Darts, nor Fire,
Nor an unbridled wild Desire:
That never holds which runs too fast;
What Is Violent can never last.
Love's not a thing that 's bought or Sold,
It thinks no Dross so base as Gold;
Intrest and Fear alike does hate,
Superior unto all but Fate.
It is not Lust, for Brutes would be,
If so, as much in Love as we,
Who neither Shape nor Beauty mind,
But dully must Preserve their Kind.
Where shall this Stranger then be found,
In what fantastic Fairy-ground?
Is it a true or Fancied bliss?
Speak he that knows it what it is!
It Is when two Kindred-Souls agree,
It Is Virtues sweetest Harmony;
Virtue the Spring of true Content
The Basis, Wit the strong Cement.
It Is made of tender moving Sighs,
Soft grasping Hands, kind melting Eyes,
Magic which all our Cares beguiles,
Enchanting Glances charming Smiles.
Short Tremblings, which no fear discover,
The Guiltless Blush of the happy Lover,
These are the Attendants which declare
The little Winged God is there.
If this Description will not suffice,
I Will read the rest in Stella's Eyes.
That the exactest Map will prove,
And therefore Stella I must ever Love.
THE PLEASURES OF LOVE, etc.
DIvinest Sex, composed of purer Mold!
(We only are the Ore, but you the Gold.)
How shall I justly Treat so vast a Theme,
Where meanly to Commend were to Blaspheme?
How shall I give your Virtues half their due,
In Living Verse, and Numbers worthy you?
Fair Stella, thy soft Sexes Pride and Joy,
The noblest Trophy of the winged Boy:
Bright Charmer of my Soul, whose very Name
Inspires Delight eternal as our Flame.
No longer I Will the noble Task refuse,
If with one gentle Smile you will Tune my Muse.
The kindly Spring does Natures Face restore,
And dress a new, but Stella can do more;
Where nothing Gay e're flourisht, spite of Fate,
Her powerful Smile can what she please Create.
As, Thebes! thy wondrous Walls did once aspire
At the command of great Amphion's Lyre.
And now the Inspiration does begin,
I feel, I rising feel the God within,
A kindly Warmth, which does with that agree
When first my charming Conqu'ress wounded me,
(So near a kin are Love and Poetry)
Some Angel has with Nectar touched my Tongue,
As Spencer's, when his Rosaline he sung.
Snarl on this Age! the next just praise will give,
And this, as long as the Fair Sex shall live.
When Man did first from Native Turf arise,
He all around him cast his wondering Eyes.
Absolute Monarch then himself might call,
And under his great Maker, Lord of all:
The Royal Lion willing Homage paid,
The mighty Elephant Obeisance made;
Ambition could not find a thing to ask,
And Pleasure had as difficult a Task;
His most Luxurious wish could seek no more,
When all Fair Eden was his own before.
Yet did he sad and Melancholy rove,
By each clear stream, through every lonely Grove,
And thought he wanted something still to Love.
When to the Crystal Brooks he did repair,
To view in vain his watery Image there,
He saw the Amorous Palms outstretching wide
Their Leavy Hands to reach the distant side.
No Fruit they bore, unless their Like they found,
But dropped their Baren Blossoms on the Ground.
If to the Woods, if to the Plains he went,
What e're he meets augments his Discontent.
Here Faithful Turtles Court, and there he sees,
Through all the Grove, in all the Shrubs and Trees,
The Feathered People lodge their Families.
The bolder Male abroad for Food does roam,
And leaves the Industrious Female close at home*
But every evening returns to wonted Rest,
And Perches near her in her Downy Nest;
Like seeks its Like, of every Kind' s a Pair,
He saw no Single, fablous Phaenix there.
Nor that for which much more he would blessed his Fate,
Which all besides enjoyed, a gentle Mate.
Weary with seeking what could not be found.
He throws himself upon the Verdant Ground;
There sadly leaned on his kind Mothers Breast,
He with a Sigh composed his Eyes to rest;
Where in a wondrous Vision's mystic Shade
He saw that glorious Creature Woman Made.
How fine a Turn appeared in every part?
The Beauteous Masterpiece of Heavenly Art:
All the exact Proportions sweeter seemed,
And Man himself above himself esteemed.
Far more of Angel in her Face and Eyes,
The fittest Tenant she for Paradise:
He waked and claspt the Air; she from him flies,
Flies, yet looks back (so soon that Art she knew,)
And with a Smile invites him to pursue.
On rusht the Eager Youth to Bliss unknown,
And quickly thought the Beauteous Prey his own;
Till with a Frown his boldness she reproves,
At his Fair Captives Feet he kneels and Loves:
He Loves, she Grants, and Nature smiles to see,
In her best works so sweet a Harmony.
The Groves all Whisper, and the Birds all Sing,
Murmur each Crystal Brook and Silver Spring;
No Wind but amorous Zephyrs Spicy Breez,
Which into gentle Motion Fans the Waves and Trees.
What if this Calm was, ah! too quickly past,
This more than Mortal Bliss too great to last,
If the false Serpent, Woman did deceive,
And flily ruined all the World in Eve?
'Twas her ungrateful Lover let her stray
Through an unknown and a Forbidden way;
Careless what Company she chose or Place,
A true Forefather of his Perjured Race.
When Surfeited with too much happiness,
His Woman soon discovered the Disease,
Would be a Goddess, not to know, but Please,
Thus when at last by Hellish Policy,
She Plucked and Tasted that unlucky Tree;
Without her Adam she refused the Throne,
And scorned to be a Deity alone;
The choicest Fruit she in her Bosom stored,
And bore with greedy steps to her Loved Lord.
More Guilty far than his mistaken Bride,
He knew the fatal Price, yet Eat and Died.
He Died, though favored with a long Reprieve,
Her Love another Paradise could give,
And made him, even when Fallen, content to Live.
Hence sprung a Race so very Fair and Good,
No wonder Heaven was left, and Angels Woe'd.
Those Sons of God in all their Pomp of Light,
Confessed they found a Mortals Eyes as bright.
What foolish Man despised, with Joy Embraced,
Mended his humble Stock and Heroes raised.
In Politics and Architecture Skilled,
Men Boast they Empires raise and Cities Build:
Monsters and Thieves are to Destruction hurled
By them; it is they pretend to Rule the World;
When Women kept it in its constant state,
While they their first fair Copy imitate,
Encourage Man in all his sweat and toils,
And richly pay his Pains with Love and Smiles.
It Is Woman makes the ravished Poet Write,
It Is Lovely Woman makes the Soldier Fight;
The Merchant Sails to China or Peru,
Farther than Janson or Mercator knew;
And Caravans through Sandy Deserts rome,
But to the same account their Labors coam,
To bring a Mistress Silks or Spices home.
If them with welcome Smiles she is pleased to meet,
Down go their Gold and Jewels at her Feet.
Should that soft Sex refuse the World to Bless,
It Would soon be Chaos all, or Wilderness;
A Herd, without Civility or Rules,
A Drove of Drinking, Cheating, Fighting Fools;
All Mad to kick each other off the Stage,
Their very Race destroyed in one short Age.
'Twas Beauty first made Laws, did Monsters bind,
Reformed the World and civilized Mankind;
Taught us at first to turn the Fruitful Soil,
And with glad Harvest recompense the Toil,
Fair Ceres gave us Corn, Minerva Oil.
For Brutal Force which often true worth supplies,
The other Sex may that Monopolize;
But which is the best Title, Bold or Wise?
Presence of Mind, Invention quick and free,
Unforced, and Natural Ingenuity;
Foresight and Caution, Ills unseen to ward,
Ready for the worst, and still upon their Guard.
Here Man must own, tho scarce without a Blush,
They rather do excel than rival us.
As useful and more nimble all their Powers,
Their Judgment sharp, and earlier Ripe than ours.
Of Fancy they have an unexhausted Mine,
A Quarry where the richest Jewels shine,
Their Wit is all their own, and all Divine.
Who has not heard of great Orinda's Fame,
Pride of her own, and our vain Sexes shame,
To every Sister Muse a darling Name?
Her self a Muse. --
Whom late Posterity just Praise shall give,
Scarce Cowleys Sacred Works will longer live.
Nor had soft Afra less Immortal proved,
Had that fond Sappho kept her Heart unmoved,
And had she not too many Phaons Loved,
Whether with fair Oenonoe she deplored
The broken Faith of her ungrateful Lord;
Or in the Tragic Buskin swept the Stage,
Or in sharp Satyr lasht the obnoxious Age,
Or aims at something more Sublime and High,
When Caesar's Conquer or when Caesar's Dye.
Till we her Match can find, her Fate we'll mourn,
Light fall the Dust on gentle Afra's Vrn!
" What! Woman Wit? some VVitty Spark will say,
" Egad, not till sh' has Read my last New Play.
" The Dullest things on Earth, below a Pen,
" Heavy as Priests, or old fat Aldermen.
Yes Witty Sir! the Bays so much their due,
They Will wear in spite of Impudence and you.
If Wit be Nature's writing Copy fair,
Where shall we find it neater Drawn than there?
Show me a Fop who seven long years in France,
Has learnt to play the Fool, and Cringe and Dance,
Can teach 'em the sweet Arts of Complaisance.
Their Sex the speediest best Instructions lends,
The best of Tutors and the best of Friends.
Man's like a Lute unstrung, until he be
By Conversation turned to Harmony;
And that is it self, if Woman from it stays,
As dull as when an ill Musician Plays.
Woman's the Salt of Life, without a Grain
Of which, attempts for Mirth were all in vain;
Where e're she treads like Sunshine guilds the ground
And throws an air of Life and Pleasure round.
A Sympathetic Fire, whose very sight
Clears all the Rust of Man, and makes him Bright.
" But they a hundred thousand knicknacks wear,
" Exalted Top-knot Christians now they are,
" And grow almost as Proud as Lucifer.
We none would wrong, but give the Devil his due,
Suppose for once your Accusation true;
Where did they learn their Pride, unless from you?
If they are infected, it is with your Disease;
Unless fantastic, they can never please.
Is Pride then seated in the Mind or Dress;
Have you not often seen, if you would confess,
A humble Pomp, and a proud Nastiness?
With what should they adorn themselves, and how?
Must Mother Eves thin Fig Leaves only do,
Or may they wear a Leathern-Apron too?
Or dressed in honest Homespun Country Gray?
If you your selves know what will please you, say,
That all the Sex may instantly obey.
Nothing, alas, which feeble Art can lend,
Can unsophisticated Beauty mend.
Is Phoebus by the Clouds he wears more bright?
Unarmed that Sex most dangerously fight.
How well becomes a Horse his noble Pride,
Since every Beggar else would up and ride?
That sometimes will instead of Virtue serve,
It Is a just Sense of what their Sex deserve;
But yours more unexcusable will prove,
They only love themselves, you think that you they love.
Nor are you more uncivil or unjust,
In fixing here the ugly Brand of Lust.
Those whom deserved slights and losses vex,
Invent new Sins and throw 'em on the Sex;
More monstrous Crimes than e're Hot Asia knew,
Tho if 'twere possible they should be true,
Italy equals, and exceeds 'em too.
Whose thrifty Wickedness the Sex forsakes,
And of those Beauteous Fields a Sodom makes.
When, tame Vesuvius! shall thy Thunder rise,
And purge those foul infected Earth and Skies,
Thy Streams beyond the affrighted Tiber shine,
And justly punish hotter Flames than thine?
if any left, reserve 'em still for those
Who are the Lovely Sexes causeless Foes.
How many a faithful Wife and generous Maid
When to a Ravishers hot Lust betrayed,
Have gladly fled to Deaths cold Arms for aid?
How bravely could the Fair Lucretia Dye,
Rather than she would survive her Chastity?
But ah! she did the fatal Stab misplace,
Her part sh' had acted with a better Grace,
To Have Killed the Tyrant in his loathed Embrace;
There left him in his own Hot Gore to role,
And at the wound let out his Lustful Soul.
In vain the Spark may-grin, in vain he will Swear,
" Such Miracles are Ceased, or never were.
" And that no Woman he could ever find,
" But if the opportunity were kind,
" Would be so too. -- Perhaps he once is right;
He never Assaults but where the Walls are slight;
True Bullies will with none but Cowards Fight.
A Virtuous Woman values Fame too high,
To let the bold Assailant come so nigh,
The Fort's half gone that Treats with the Enemy.
That Town is won which e're the Attack is made,
Has lost its Counterscarp and Palizade.
When the White-Flag you see at first hung out,
You're wondrous Daring then, and wondrous Stout;
When once you but discover those within,
By their faint Fire have a low Magazine,
A slender stock of Chastity in store,
Your Oaths and Curses then like Canon roar,
You storm like Devils, and cry a Whore a Whore.
If you a Virtuous Woman tempt in vain,
Who still repells you with deserved disdain,
Who all your weak designs secure can mock,
Firm seated on an Alablaster Rock.
Her Snowy Bosom not more pure and fair,
Than the white Guest that still inhabits there,
Repulst at last with just Despair and Shame,
Your Poisnous Tongues at least will blast her Fame;
If her you cannot, you will ruin her Good Name.
And to the ill-natured World with Oaths protest,
All her Resistance was design or Jest,
You found her Woman, just like all the rest.
But say what Woman, search all ages over
Debaucht a Man, search Hell's unnumber'd store,
Who learnt it not from that false Sex before.
Who, can they any easy Fool Debauch,
Most generously undo, and then reproach,
And like the Inhabitants of endless Flame,
Over the wretch insult they helped to Damn.
To whom the Perjured Villains Kneeled and Swore,
But a few days perhaps or hours before,
Like a true Spaniel; lickt her Hand or Glove,
And Vowed eternal Constancy and Love.
Marriage is a dull Ceremony, made
By hungry Priests of old, to mend their Trade.
It Is Love's the thing, what matter for the Name?
Could they suspect their Faith as not the same,
Or when they would all the Stakes they would not play out
Can you be so ungenerous and unkind?
Then with ten thousand Oaths his Faith he will bind;
Perjured and Damned so often and so deep,
The Devil himself the Accounts can hardly keep.
Thus silly Flies by Cobweb-vows betrayed,
Their Virtue lose, and lose the name of Maid.
But then how soon another Face is shown?
E're the third night she is stale and nauseous grown,
The Cur has now some other Games to play;
No more her Whistle or her Called obey,
H' intends, but shakes his Tail and runs away.
To Brother Brutes will of her Favors boast,
And Write her Name on every Pissing-Post.
Who wonders if a Shop-Lift hates the Jayl,
Or strolling Gypsies at the Justice Rail?
If an old Usurer 'twou'd not well content
To hear a Bill was past for Four per Cent,
And if he all berogu'd the Parliament.
And who, that knows the World, will wonder more
That those at Matrimony rail, who Whore?
Call the poor Husband Munkey, Ass, or Dog,
And jear his Neck worn with the Wedlock-Clog,
While freely they over tops of Houses strolling,
Venture their Bones each Night a Caterwouling.
Besides a Ridg, or into Chimnies peep,
Through Cellar, or through Garret-Windows creep;
Expose themselves to Falls, or Guns, or Traps,
And twenty other unforeseen Mishaps,
All in the hot pursuit of Whores and Claps.
Ruin their Health, their Honor and Estate,
To Buy Repentance at so dear a rate;
For when Old Age with Palsy'd steps draws on,
Some ten perhaps, or twenty Years too soon,
And long e're this the last dear Acre gone.
Show me a Thing whom more the World despise,
Or more a Wretch than the old Lecher is!
'Twou'd even a common Woman's passion move,
To see the Old Doting Epicure make Love.
Restrain her struggling Laughter she that can,
A Lousy, Gowty, spawling, poor Old Man;
All over Lame, his Hips, his Hands, his Feet,
Fit for no other but a Winding- Sheet.
" True cries the Spark, but I have time to spare,
" Am Young and Free, and unconfined as Air;
" I Will Drink full Bowls of Pleasure while I may,
" And treat Life kindly, since so short its stay,
" And sip the sweets, and bask in the warm Beams of day,
" Whilst i am awake i will to my self be kind,
" And Reason too for all that I can find,
" Since all is a long, a dark, eternal sleep behind.
Sir, are you sure of that? Nay, never Swear,
You think none e're come thence that once were there;
How should you know it then? Deny it not,
By night and sleep you mean you know not what.
" Well, if their should, as the dull Clergy prate,
" Be any Future World or After State,
" Sure that good Being who did all Create,
" Rewards and Pains distributes justly there,
" And Man for necessary Ills will spare,
" Nor will his Punishment be too Severe.
" For what is more hard to vanquish than reprove,
" The natural Fault, if such it be, of Love?
" Are we into our Ruin thus decoyed?
" Was Nature made only to be destroyed?
" For what is Good, if not to be Enjoyed?
" And what is Good, or where, unless it is Common?
" And show me any Good on Earth like Woman!
So now the Quarrel's plainer than before,
It Is with the Virtuous Woman, not the Whore.
Well Argued for a Beast, we needs must own,
To whom no Principle but Sense is known;
They neither Number nor Distinguish can,
(Those are the Sole Prerogatives of Man)
But rush with undiscerning Rage, like you,
On the first Object that presents to view.
Themselves with Shape or Beauty never perplex,
But just like you,'r in Love with all the Sex.
Thus they, but those with reasoning minds endu'd,
Suspend a while when a Good Object's viewed,
And ask, if a Proportionable Good?
Sense is enough where Senses only Woe,
But Reasoning Lovers must have Reason too,
No wonder if the Body quickly cloy,
But Minds are infinite, and like themselves Enjoy.
There you may Travel still from Pole to Pole,
Where Winds can carry, or where Waves can roll,
For all the World is Pictured in a Soul;
An unexhausted sweet Variety,
That never degenerates to Satiety,
But out-lasts Time, and measures with Eternity.
Can any thing in this dull World pretend,
Than Wit and Reason greater Bliss to lend?
And Wit and Reasons pleasures never end.
If there is a farther Pleasure, it is a ^riend.
Whom mutual Griefs and mutual Joys may move,
With whom we all the Sweets of Life may prove,
Society and Sympathy and Love.
If each of these so Charming is alone,
Who would not gladly listen to be shown,
Where, without fail, to find 'em all in one.
At once the vast united Joys to prove,
Of Sense and Reason, Nature, Friendship, Love?
For such a Bliss, who'd not the World despise,
If such a Bliss he might Monopolize?
Yet need not his poor Neighbor at him Grutch,
Tho he has all, the other may have as much:
Fire, Air, Earth, Water, thus we common call,
Yet it is not all to some, but some to all,
" Would not this Phaenix set the World at strife
" To enjoy't? No, there is no danger, it is a Wife.
" A Wife, the Spark replies, the Name's as dull
" As Country Squire, or sage Right Worshipful.
" Rather than that, even let the World stand still,
" Or Porters drudg to keep it on the wheel.
" Give me your French Ragoo! your racy Miss,
" I hate a Wife, that English fulsom Dish,
" Nor know n^^ care whether it is Flesh or Fish.
" On such Gross Food our Grandsires used to Dine,
" The Coxcombs knew not what was to Eat Fine:
" The World Sir now is mightily improved,
" It Is not the age in which their Wives they Loved.
Degenerate Race! Your own and Natures Foe:
Ah! that your Fathers never had done so!
And yet in truth 'twou'd bear a long debate,
If this whole Age be'nt illegitimate?
By their loose Sites with Rage and Brandy hot,
In Leagures on the Sutlers Wives begot.
Since nothing they but Drabs and Drinking mind,
So true the Proverb, Cat will after kind.
Tho some there are, so very good and few,
That if enough might Plant the World anew.
Not made like those Sown on Earths fertile Face,
Old Pyrrhu's and Deucalion's Stony Race,
But warmed with gentle Fire and gentle Love,
As Pure and Constant as the Lamps above.
By Law and Inclination doubly joined,
Both acted by one Sympathetick Mind.
Whom Wedlock's Silken Chains as softly tie,
As that which when asunder snapt, we dye,
Which makes the Soul and Body's wondrous harmony.
Thrice Happy they in those soft Fetters tied,
The Fatal Sisters only can divide;
Who for no other Mastry ever strove,
But whether of the two should better Love,
As kind as when the Youth did first pretend,
( Passions on Virtue founded never end)
For tho in Age their Tops less verdant show,
Their flour'shing twisted Roots still stronger grow.
No churlish Feuds disturb their blessed Abodes,
All calm, as are the Dwellings of the Gods.
No little peevish Quarrels enter there,
No noise but Sighs which Fan the Amorous Air,
And all like Tempe still, and all like Tempe Fair.
Jealousy's Banished thence, and Rage and Pride,
And all the Torments of the World beside,
Sweet Peace their close Attendant, Love their Guide.
All the white Passions that delight to rest,
With Innocence in every constant Breast;
Pleasures which Guilt, nor Time, nor Age destroy,
Grateful Vicissitudes of Hope and Joy.
Glad Lambent Flames, but no wild wandering Fire,
A still Possessed, and still renewed Desire;
The Parent that, Delight the Child of Love,
Complacency, the Heaven of those above.
Wisely has Fate to to half the World denied,
(Almost perhaps to the other half beside)
That more than mortal Bliss, a Virtuous, Lovely Bride
Since knew they once the Joys of Loving well,
And were they all but blessed like Astrophel;
Even for Elysium sure they would hardly care,
But spite of Lethe live unhappy there.
Whoever of the two first seized should be,
Whether 'twere Orpheus or Euridice;
The Other would follow, either to retrieve
Far more than half their Soul, or with 'em live.
One then could never Dye without a Pair,
The Indian Wives Examples, now so rare
Would then be owned, and practiced every where.
Let others Rally, Envy, Smile or Chide,
Me from my Stella may no day divide.
Not even the last, 'twould be Impiety,
To think I Would wish to outlive her, or she
To live one single moment more than me.
Would some of you, ye gentle Powers above,
Who favor Innocence and Virtuous Love;
Would you blessed Astrophel's Petition grant,
For which thus low he kneels your Supplicant.
His Modest wishes should not aim too high,
Thus only he would ask to Live, and thus to Dye.
After a Life in Virtuous Acts employed,
And Bliss, that leaves no Sting or Shame, enjoyed,
(Double your Gifts, ye Gods! If ought you would give)
To cheerful Age may He and Stella live,
Till of their Lives no Friend is weary grown,
Nor they, or of each others, or their own.
May they (but sure that wish scarce needs) Love on
With mutual Flames till their last Sand is gone;
Then gently leaning on each others Breast,
Slumber away in Smiles to softer Rest.
Mistaken World to envy Kings, when we
May at far less expense far happier be.
All those gay trifles which so weigh'em down,
Their Robes and heavy, wondrous heavy Crown;
Their Globe, their Scepter and their Diadem,
With ease a happy Lover can contemn,
Poor cumber'd things, by Heaven I pity them.
So great their Toil, their thankless Task so hard,
Ungrateful Towns to Save, and Kingdoms Guard,
So great their Task, so rare their just Reward.
What can a worthy Reparation prove?
What but a Beauty worth a Princes Love?
If in ten Ages one by Fate is blessed,
One Favorite Prince, who all his Life redrest,
The worlds wide wrongs, and succored the distressed
" True Successor of the great Herculean race,
" Formed by the Gods, fell Monsters to debase;
If one with such an Empress favored be,
As suits his Inclination and Degree,
Worthy to fill a share of Majesty.
Who with him jointly feels each Joy and Smart,
True partner of his Empire, Cares and Heart;
If Business he of one short Hour beguile,
And lets the expecting World stand still the while;
If Great Augustus from the Field retires,
And Gracious Gloriana's Eyes admires;
The Fates of Empires will not let him stay,
He in a few short moments must away;
Some other Kingdoms his Defense do crave,
Imploring that he would them vouchsafe to Save;
Their Patron and their Guardian Friend esteem,
And lift their Dying Eyes to Heaven and Him;
Or sighing Europe of her wrongs complains,
Shows her Imprisoned Hands, and begs he would break her Chains,
Deliver all her Injured Sons and Her,
And take just Vengeance on the Ravisher.
Whilst now he plunges through the frighted Boyn,
Now the Mosell, and Meause, and headlong Rhine;
A thousand Fates around him does despise,
And sends far more among his Enemies;
He keeps far off our Danger at a Bay,
While we securely here sit still and Pray.
Taste the sweet Spring, and new recov'ring Groves,
And through our Peaceful Plains Record our happy Loves.
While Gloriana fills so well his Trone,
As either were designed to Reign alone;
Dazles Spite's Eyes, stops Envy's stinking Breath,
A second Loved, Adored Elizabeth;
Had She been Born where Rome's Religion sways,
And all the World their Mitred Prince obeys;
They one St. more would from their Mass Book
New Ave-Mary's they would repeat to Her, tear,
And place Her second in the Calendar;
No other Saints auspicious aid they would crave,
Her single Worth and Merits they would believe
Sufficient all Her Rank and Sex to Save.
While She the Kingdom's Intrest still Improves,
While She Her Royal Lord so dearly Loves,
While She Will so Fair, so Just a Pattern give,
Her Subjects must be blessed, if they would but like Her Live.
It Is flat Disloyalty that Sex to blame,
Who now can so Divine a Princess Claim:
None sure will do it, but those who burst for Spite,
None but despairing Teague or Jacobite.
For those who in their rage persist and will
The vengeance of a Loyal Lover feel;
Who still at the Fair Sex will rail and curse,
Be this their Doom, till we can find a worse:
Be this their Doom, to Love and to Despair,
The Ridicule of some Fantastic Fair;
With Folly, Jealousy, and Pride possessed,
And all the Faults are Charged on all the rest;
So fondly fickle that she does not know
What she has promised half an Hour ago.
(I need not wish a Mortal more perplexed)
Nor better what she means to do the next;
Still discontented, sower, morose, and vain,
Triumphing in her tame Adorers pain;
Jilting him to his Face, but not too long deceive,
Lest he too happy should himself believe.
May all the Infamy they ever cast
Upon the Charming Sex rebound at last
On their own cursed Heads; their Folly, Pride,
Rage, Lust, and every poisonous Ill beside*
May Envy gnaw their Intrails, never free
From Eating Spite, and Cankered Jealousy;
Through every Vein may the sharp Venom roll,
Diseases rack their Body, Rage their Soul,
Till with their Sins and Sores alike oppressed,
They Rotting to the Dunghill crawl for rest;
Drop in the Streets, like Poisoned Rats from Shelves,
Or in some Whores old Garters Hang themselves.
FINIS.

