Mr. ALSOP's SPEECH TO King JAMES the II.

At the presenting the Presbyterians Address, in April, 1687.

See London Gazette, No. 2238.

Humbly Inscribed

To B. B. B. --

As a Specimen of SINCERITY.

A COPY of a SPEECH To King James the II. by Mr. Alsop, upon the presenting of
an Address, as in the London Gazette, No. 2238.
Great Sir,
WE could wish your Majesty had a Window in our Breasts, through which you
might discern how our Souls Embrace your Royal Clemency with the highest
Admiration, and yet with the profoundest Veneration.

For we look upon our selves truly transplanted from a hotter Climate, and
happily seated under the temperate Zone of your Majesty's most mild and gentle
Government, where instead of the scorching Beams of Severity, which had almost
calcined us to Ashes, we now feel the cool Breezes of your Majesty's Favor to
revive and refresh us.

Really Sir, though we pretend not to any refined Intellectuals, nor presume to
Philosophise upon the Mysteries of Government, neither to pry into the
Mysteries of State; which things as they are far above, so they belong not to
us at all, yet we make some small Pretense to the Sense of Feeling; whatever
our Dullness may be, yet we can easily distinguish between a Wound and a
Plaster; and know the difference between the smart Lashes of some of our
Fellow Subjects, and the healing Clemency of our Sovereign.

We now, (Dear Sir) silently wait for some happy juncture to give your Majesty
such essential Proofs of our Loyalty, and the Sincerity of this our humble
Address; as may demonstrate that the greatest things, we have been able to
express or promise in this poor Paper is the least thing we shall cheerfully
perform for your Majesty's service and satisfaction.

Go on (Great Sir) in this your Royal Line, (that is) your own proper Way and
Method of Grace and Clemency, that the World may be more fully and further
convinced, that you are the best as well as the greatest, and therefore the
greatest, because the best of Princes, that so if there should remain any Seeds
of Disloyalty in any of your Subjects, this transcendent Goodness of yours may
mortify and kill them, or if any Sparks of Duty should be almost smothered in
well-meaning, though mistaken Minds, such sovereign Grace may awaken and revive
them, which above all Regalia's, will most gloriously adorn your Majesty's
Imperial Throne and Diadem.

FINIS.

