

To Musicks sacred Temple, Mercury.
And Orpheiis dedicate their Harmony
From thence proceeding. Whose fair Handmaids an
Myster'ous Numbers: which, if you compare.
The Rat'on of proport'ons you will find.
These please the Ear, and satisfy the mind.
For nothing, more, the Soul and sense contents.
Then Sounds expressed by voice, and Instruments.
Io. Dir. John Chantry ^

sold by Peter Dring at ye Sun in the Poultry:

TEMPLVM MVSICVM: OR THE MUSICAL SYNOPSIS, OF The Learned and Famous Johannes -
Henricus - Alstedius, BEING A Compendium of the Rudiments both of the
Mathematical and Practical Part of MUSIC: Of which Subject not any Book is
extant in our English Tongue.

Faithfully translated out of Latin By John Birchensha. Philomath.

^mprimatur, Feb. 5. 1663. Roger L'Estrange.

London, Printed by Will, Godbid for Peter Dring at (...) Sun in the Poultrey
next Door to the Rose-Tavern. 1664.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord MONTAGU Earl of Sandwich, etc. Knight of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
SIR,
WHen I considered the Excellency of the Subject of this Book, and deserved
Fame of the learned Author, I thought it not necessary to crave a Protection
for this Treatise by a Dedication of it unto any: being in it self far above
the reach of detracting Calumniators. Yet I have made bold, humbly, to present
it to your Honor as a pleasant and delightful Divertisement from your many and
great Employments. In all Ages Music has been acceptable to the wisest,
greatest, and most Learned men, of whom many have been famous for their great
Ability and Knowledge in this Science and Art. It was no dispraise to David
that he played skilfully on the Harp, and Sang well: the Compositions of diverse
German Princes are extant: neither is it the least of those Virtues which are
eminent in your Lordship, that you are both a Lover of Music, and a good
Musician. The renowned Alstedius in this Compendium (not much differing in his
Judgment from the Opinion of the Generality of modern musical Classic's) does
present the world with a great Light and Discovery of this Art, with the
Subject, Principle and Affections thereof, with the curious Symmetry of
Proportions: the proportional Dimensions of Sounds: the Variety of Diastems:
the admirable Series of musical Voices: the usefulness of Tetrachords: the
several Genus's of Music: and harmonical Moods, which being expressed by Voice
or Instrument or both, do operate ineredibly upon the Affections. Wherefore I
hope that this Book will be accepted both by your Honor, and all ingenuous
Lovers and Professors of this Art, and the Errors thereof favorably pardoned
by your Lordship and them. The Reason which moved me to undertake this
Translation, was, because I desired a Discovery might be made of some
Principles of the Mathematical part of Music, unto those ingenuous Lovers of
this Science, who understand only our own Language, to the End that by this
means the transcendent Virtue and Excellency that is comprehended in the due
proportions of musical Sounds may be known unto them; which will give
Satisfaction unto their Reason as well as to their Sense. I do not think this
unworthy my labor, because that many skilful Musicians have not thought it any
Disparagement to publish their Translations of the Works of famous Men, who did
write of the Art which they themselves professed. As Meibomius Translated some
Fragments of Baccheus, Alyppius, Nichomachus, and others: the never to be
forgotten Franchinus, the Commentaries of Briennius, Aristides, Ptolomy, and
others: and our English Douland, the Introduction of Ornithoparcus. In the
Author's last Edition of his universal Encyclopaedia, I met with an Appendix to
his Musical Synopsis, taken out of the writings of Erycius Puteanus; but not
finding any thing new in it, only an ABCdary Repetition of the first Elements
of Music, formerly but more judiciously and largely handled in this
Compendium: and also some few Questions started by Cardanus, which are, for the
most part more fully and Satisfactorily resolved by the Author; I did forbear
the Translation thereof; not being willing to weary the Reader with the
unnecessary recital of those things, nor your Lordship with too tedious an
Epistle, which I here conclude, humbly craving pardon for my boldness, and
your Honors favorable Acceptance of this Mite from your Lordships

Most humble and devoted Servant, JOHN BIRCHENSHA.

To all ingenious LOVERS of MUSIC.
GENTLEMEN,
IT was for your Profit and Benefit that I undertook this Translation: and that
you might thereby understand the Rudiments and Principles both of the
Mathematical and Practical Parts of this Science. We know that there is some
light into the Mathematical Part of all other Arts; but little discovery of
that Part of the Theory of Music has been made in our Language; therefore I
did suppose that this work would be gratefully accepted by you, the Author
having more fully discovered the Precepts, Rules, and Axioms of this Science,
then any other whose Works I have seen.

Since the Rumor of this Translation has been spread abroad, I have by diverse
been demanded, What Benefit and Advantage the Knowledge of the Mathematical
Part of Music does contribute to the completing of a Musician? To which I
answer, That it is as necessary for a perfect and complete Musician to
understand the Proportion of Sounds, as for a curious Painter, exactly to know
the Symmetry of every part o^ a Body: that so he may rightly understand the
ground and foundation of the Art he does profess, which is, the nature of
Sounds, and their due Proportion, in respect of their Ration, Habitude,
Quality, Difference, Excess, Dimension, and Magnitude. For this I dare boldly
affirm, and if ^ccasion be offered: undertake to prove it: That such Rules may
be yet further, and are already, in part, contrived (drawn from the
Mathematical Principles of Music, by which, musical Consonants and Dissonants
(artificially applied and disposed, according to the nature of their
Proportions, and by the forementioned Canons) may afford, in 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
or more parts, as go^d Music, that is, as agreeable, artificial, and formal,
as can be composed by the help of any Instrument. Yet until such Rules be
known, it is commendable in any to use such helps as may Advantage their
Compositions. But for any Musician to under value or speak slightly of the
Mathematical part of Music, is to repro^ch the Common Parent from whom the Art
h^ professes rec^ived a Being. I k^ow that all Ingenuous persons who are
Artists, will acknowledge that it is a more noble way to work by Rules and
Pr^c^pts in any Art, then mechanically; And so to work in this Art. i. e. to
compose regularly, will be found m^re advantageous then any other way in these
Respects. For by such a way of Operation the Composer shall work more
certain^y, firmly, readily, and with more facility then by any other way.

If Music be an Art, then it may be contracted and collected into certain
Rules which may discover all those Mysteries that are contained in that
Science, by which a man may become an excellent Musician, and expert, both in
the Theorical and Practical Parts thereof. To the Completeing of such forcible
Rules I have contributed my Mite, whose Certainty and Reality has been
Experienced by diverse, and may likewise be further known unto others, if they
please or desire to understand them.

I know that all Virtuoso's will encourage those things which conduce to the
Improvement of any ingenious Art: but what shall be spoken against such things
by persons rude, envious, or that do pass their Judgment rashly upon things
which they know not, having neither seen, heard, nor understood them, is not to
be valued. And I do assure my self that there is not any person in this Nation,
that is a true Lover of this Science; or a Professor thereof, who does truly
honor and understand this Art, but could cordially wish such an Improvement
thereof, that those things which in Music are concealed and mysterious, might
be fully discovered: those which are imperfect, completed: those which are
doubtful and disputable, cleared by evident Demonstration: those which are not
to be done without great trouble, facilitated: those many Observations which
burden the Memory, made few and plain: and those whose Operation and
Experience does require the study and Expense of many years, might be performed
without any difficulty in a few Weeks, or Months at the farthest. And that this
way is found out and effected in a great measure, I say, many persons of Worth
and Quality are able experimentally to testify.

Music has already flowed to a great ^eighth in this Nation, for I am
persuaded that there is as much Exc^llency in the Music which has been, and
is now c^mposed in England, as in any part of the World for Air, variety and
Substance. ^ut I heartily wish, that after this great Spring and blood, there
be not in our succ^eding Generations) as low an Ebb. For if the serious and
substantial part of Harmony be neglected, and the mercurial only used: It will
prove volatile, evaporate, and come to nothing. But, Gentlemen, I would not
willingly weary your patience, and sinc^ ^he Temple is so small, I will not
make the ^ate too bigg; But subscribe my self as it is known I am) a true Lover
of Music, and

Your Servant J. B.

I Have endeavored fa^thfully to translate the Origin^l, in which I find some
mistakes, which I dare not impute to the Author, of which I would have thee
take no^ice. And also one Erratum in this Impression.

1. Fol. 20. the greater Sem^tone exceeds the lesser by the lesser Diesis:
whereas it exceeds it but by a Comma, as appears fol. 18. where the Author
says thus, The Comma is the difference between the Semitone m^jor and minus.

2. Fol. 31. almost ten parallel Lines; the Word almost should be left out, for
the greater System is ten parallel Lines.

3. Fol. 44 for d moll. read b moll.

TEMPLUM MUSICUM.
CHAP. I. Of the Subject of MUSIC.
PRECEPTS.
MUSIC is the Science of Singing well, otherwise called Harmonical: and
Musathena.

The parts thereof are two: the general and the special.

The general part does treat of the Subject of Music; and both of the
Principles and Affections of the Subject.

The Subject of Music is an harmonical Song. And this is the Subject of
Tractation. The Subject of Information, is the Faculty of Singing: and the
Subject of Operation, is the matter to which harmonical Music may be applied.

RULES.
1. Music is a Mathematical Science, subalternate to Arithmetic.
For as Arithmetic does treat of Number, so Music of the number of Sounds: Or
as others of numerous Sound. For as the Optic Science is called a certain
special Geometry, so Music may be called a certain special Arithmetic: But
whereas some contend that Music is both a Science, Prudence, and Art, because
it does instruct both skilfully, or scientifically, and prudently, and
artificially to compose an harmonical Song, it is not so accurate. For it is
not here Queried, whether Science, Prudence, and Art may concur in Practice:
but whether Music being considered as a Discipline either habitual or
systematical, be a Science, Prudence, or Art. But that it is a Science it does
thus app^ar, because it has Subject, Principles, and Affections; which three
thin^s are required unto the complete Ration of a Science.

2. An Harmonical Song, is a concinnous multitude of Sounds, rightly composed
according to the Text.
The Subject of Explication in Music is a Song, whose chief Force lies in
this, (...) accommodated to the Text and Affections (...)

But if the same Sound may be accommodated to diverse and contrary things and
Affections, then the Music is inept and irrational; because it is contrary to
the Scope and Principle of that most laudable Discipline, which will, That
Melody be applied both to Things and Affections.

If therefore v. g. in any Psalm of David, three Parts do occur, viz.
Lamentation, Consolation, and giving of Thanks: there, three Tones ought to be.

3. The Subject of Operation in Music are Things sacred and liberal. By which
it appears that the usefulness of it is very great.
Things sacred, as the Psalms and Songs in the Bible, and of other things
wholly Divine.

Things liberal, as pathetical matters in things Philosophical, and which does
altogether concern the common Life of Man. For Music does penetrate the
In^eriors of the mind, it moves Affections, promoveth Contemplation, expels
^orrow, di^solveth bad Humors, exhilerateth the animal Spirits: and so is
beneficial to the Life of Men in general, to the Pious for Devotion, to the
Contemplative Life for Science, to the Solitary for Recreation, to the
domestic and public Life for Moderation of mind, to the Healt^ (...) the
temperament of their Body, and to the (...) for Delight; As excellently says
that famous Musician Lippius in his Musical Synopsis. Hence it is that the
Devil hates Music liberal, and on the contrary is delighted with filthy
Music and illiberal, which he uses as his Vehicle, by which he slideth
himself into the minds of men, who take Pleasure in such Diabolical Music. On
the contrary, the holy Angels are delighted with Music liberal, not because
corporal Harmony does affect them, but because all Harmony, especially that
which is conjoined with the Affection of a pious Will, is grateful to those
chaste Spirits. Hence it is, that the Heroes, holy Men, and Lovers of Virtue of
all times, have magnified Music: as appears by these Scriptures; Exodus 15.
Judge. 5.1. 1 Samuel 16.23. 2 Samuel 6 5. 2 Kings 3.15. 1 Chronicles. 23.5. Judith 16.1,
2, etc. Syrach 23.5, 6, and 39.20. and 44.5. Matthew. 26.30. Luke 1.46. and 2.13.
Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Col. 3.16. Apoc. 5.9. and 14.2, ^.

CHAP. II. Of the Principles of Cognition in Music.
PRECEPTS.
THE Principles of an Harmonical Song are those things upon which it does
depend: And those are either the Principles of the Cognition or Constitution
thereof.

Those are complex: these incomplex.

The Principles of Cognition are those by which an harmonical Song is known.
And they are either internal or external. Those are taken from the Science it
self, these from Philosophy, partly theoretical, and partly practical.

RULES.
1. The internal or domestical Principles of Cognition are here and there
spread through the whole Body of Music.
Wherefore it were not worth while to treat of them in this place.

2. The theoretical Principles which Music does use, or is built upon, are
either remote or proximate.
The remote are such as are taken from the Metaphysics and Physics. And
indeed from the Metaphysics, there are taken Principles of Unity, Goodness,
Pulchritude, Perfection, Order, Opposition, Quantity, Quality, and the like.
And from the Physics, those that treat of the Quantity, Quality, Motion,
Place, and Time of a natural Body: Al^o of Air, an^ Sound, and of its
propagation, multiplication, differences, and perception: And lastly of
Affections, as Love, Joy, Sorrow, and the like. The proximate principles are
Axioms, Assumptions, Questions, Theorems, Problems, and Consectaries
mathematical; and those pa^tly arithmetical, partly geometrical: but chiefly
a^ithmatical; especially those which concern the Proprieties of Simple Numbers,
and also their proportion; viz. dupla, tripla, sesquialtera, and the like, of
which in my Arithmeticks: But here let these Axioms be observed. 1. That
Proportion of Equality is radically between one and one: And this is the Radix
of all Proportion. 2. Dupla Proportion is radically between two and one, tripla
between three and one, quadrupla between four and one, and so forward. Obse^ve,
that radical proportio^s are in Nine Simple Numbers, from 1. to 9. because
these are the Radixes of all Numbers. 3. Sesquialtera Proportion is between
three and two, Sesquitertia between four and three, Superbipartiens tertias, is
radically between five and three, and Supertripartiens quintas is between eight
and five. And these are simple proportions, in which such an order of
perfection is observed, that after a proportion of Equality, a proportion of
inequality follows: First Dupla, afterward Sesquialtera, then Sesquitertia,
afterward Sesquiquarta, and Sesquiquinta, then Superbipartiens tertias, an^
Supertripartiens quintas. To these succeed com^ound^d P^opo^tions, as
Dupla-Sesquialtera b^tween 5, and 2. (...) Sesquitertia between 10, and 3.
Dupla-Superbipartiens tertias, as between 8, and 3. and so forward. 4.
Proportions are numbered by Division logistical, as the proportion which is
between 3, 2. appears by Division. For if 3. be divided by 2. it will produce
1.. 5. Proportions are added by vulgar multiplication, as 3/2: 2/1: make 6/2:
2/1: 6. Proportions are subtracted by Multiplication crucial; as ^ 7.
Proportions are multiplied or coupled when they are written without
Intermission, and the antecedent number of the latter proportion is multiplied
into the Consequent of the former, or contrarily. Also when the Consequent of
the former is multiplied into the Consequent of the latter. Or lastly, when the
Antecedent of the former is multiplied into the antecedent of the posterior. As
2.1, 3, 2. Here, once three, give three: and once two, give two, and twice
three, give six. 8. Proportions are radicated in greater numbers, and in
numberss compounded one with another by Mediation logistical* as 16-8. First
they are reduced to 8-4. then to 4-2. lastly to 2-1. And thus radical
Proportions by course are easily reduced to their greater Terms by logistical
Duplation; as 1-2. to 2-4. thence to 4-8. then to 8-16. and so forward. 9.
Every Dupla Proportion does consist of a Sesquialtera and Sesquitertia. 10. If
a Sesquialtera be taken away from a Dupla, a Sesquitertia will only remain, and
so consequently.

3. Practical Principles which Music uses, are chiefly taken from the
Ethics, Oeconomicks, Politics, and Poeticks.
From the Ethick^ are taken Principles of Virtue, and moral Beatitude; from the
Oeconomicks of Act^ons domestic; from Politics Principles of virtue, and
civil Beatitude; and from Poetry Principles concerning Rhyme and Verse: which
have ^uch Affinity with Music, that by some Mus^ck is divided into Harmonical,
Rhythmical, and Metrical.

CHAP. III. Of the Efficient and End of an Harmonical Song.
PRECEPTS.
THE Principles of Constitution are those by which an harmonical Song is
constituted.

And they are either external or internal.

The external are the Efficient and End. The Efficient Cause of a Song is
either the first or second.

The first Cause is GOD the Author of all Symphony.

The second is partly Nature, the Mother of all Sounds: partly Art perfecting
the Rudiment of Nature.

The ultimate End is GOD that Archetype of Harmony.

The subordinate End is Motion, and the impulse of Man to the hatred of Uice,
and study of Uirtue.

RULES.
1. God is the Author and Maintainer of all Harmony,
Seeing Harmony is Order, and tends to Unity; for God is the Author and
Maintainer of all Order, and the greatest Unity. Furthe^more, God is the chief
and unspeakable Joy, therefore they who rightly rejoice come nigher unto God.
Hence the Rabbis say, the Holy Ghost does sing by reason of Joy. And
Philosophers say, That the Soul of a Wise man does always rejoice; For joy as
it is pure Harmony cannot but be excited and maintained by Musical Harmony.

2. The Exemplary Cause of Harmonical Music; is that Music which is called
mundane.
This is discerned in the Order, Disposition, and admirable proportion which
does occur in the Celestial, and ^ubcelestial Region; partly among the St^rs,
partly among the Elements, partly among all things compounded of the Elements;
and lastly, among all those things which are compa^ed one with another: of
which Music and Harmony we have spoken in our Physics. This Harmony being
such and so great, when ancient men did diligently consider it, they supposed
that there was the like Proportion not only in Numbers and Lines, but also in
the Voice; especially when they did discern that Proportion in the various
Sound of various Bodies.

3. Music receives his greatest Perfection from the End.
That Perfection does not only depend upon matter and Form, but also upon the
and we have formerly shown in our Metaphysics and Logicks. In Music certainly
this is most manifest: for unless it be referred to the Glory of God, and the
pious Recreation of Man it cannot but equivocally be called Music. Hence it is
apparent that those simple men who abuse Vocal and Instrumental Music to
nourish the pleasures of this World, whilst they si^g Songs highly obscene, are
nothing less then Musicians. For although the Form of a Song occur there, yet
the End which perfecteth the Instrument, is not there discerned: Therefore in
such Music there is the first perfection but not the ultimate; which
necess^rily is ^equired in an Instrument, because the Virtue ther^of is placed
in the use.

CHAP. IV. Of the quantity of a Musical Song.
PRECEPTS.
THE internal Principles of an harmonical Song are Matter and Form.

Matter comprehends the integral parts of which an Harmonical Song is made.

Of the parts thereof, the one is Simple, and the other is compounded.

The simple part is called Sound: also a Musical Monad. in Greek Tonos.

A Musical Sound is considered in respect of his Quantity and Signs.

The Doctrine of that is called theoretical Music, and of this Signatory.

Quantity is threefold, Longitude, Latitude, and Crassitude.

The Longitude of a Musical Sound, is that which is discerned in the motion and
duration thereof: and measured by a Musical Touch or Tact.

The Latitude of a Musical Sound is that which is discerned in the tenuous and
asperous spirit.

The Crassitude of a Musical Sound is that which is discerned in the Profundity
and Altitude thereof.

By reason of this Crassitude a Musical Sound is equal or unequal.

The equal Sound is the Simple Unison.

The unequal Sound does bring forth a Distance or an Interval of a sonorous
Crassitude: which is called a Musical Interval.

A Musical Interval is seen in Proportion and Intention.

By reason of Proportion, an Interval is simple or compounded: that is called
radical, this radicated.

A Simple Interval is either Just, or not Just.

A Just Interval is that which is neither defective nor redundant: as an Octave
Fifth, etc.

An Interval not Just is that which is defective or redundant: as a Semioctave,
etc.

A compounded Interval is that which does consist of simple Intervals: as a
double Octave, a triple Octave, a quadruple Octave, and so ad infinitum.

By reason of Intention it is a Scale, called Musical; and it is the various
disposition of acute and grave Sounds.

RULES.
1. Every Sound is Quantus.
For in every Body that has Quantity, there is an audible Quality. That
Quantity is numbered by Division, and not barely considered, as it is a
magnitude. So that the most accurate Lippius might rightly say, every Sound is
continual or discrete, or explainable by number. But a Sound is Quantus, by
complete Quantity. i. e. So that it have a trine Dimension, and therefore
Longitude, Latitude, and Crassitude.

2. Every Sound is long numerably.
For seeing every Sound does continue so long, or not so long, this temporal
duration thereof may be numbered. And it is numbered by a Musical Touch, which,
according to the motion of the Heart, in this Science ought to be observed.
This Touch does consist of Depression and Elevation, according to a certain
Proportion, but especially a Dupla: And it is either more simple, more natural,
and more ^ommon, which is finished in two equal parts, and may be called
Spondaic, as (...): or less simple, and more unusual, which does consist of
unequal parts, the one greater, and the other lesser, and may be called
Tr^chaic. as (...)

3. Every Sound is numerably broad.
For every Sound besides the length thereof, is also tenuous or gentle, flat,
submi^s, small; or sharp, ha^sh, clear, full, as consisting of a tenuous and
a^perous Spirit.

4. Every Sound is numerably thick.
Besides the length and breadth, every Sound is al^o thick; and so it is either
deep or high. That, is called grave, and this, acute. And we measure this
magnitude of a Sound by Proportions of numbers, especially ra^ical, as they are
applied to the Monochord.

5. The Simple Unison is the Principal and Radix of all Musical Intervals.
As in numbers there is one proportion of Equality, and another of Inequality:
So also in Sounds, one is equal, and another is unequal. And again as in
numbers, the Proportion of ^quality is the Radix of all the rest: So in Sounds,
the Simple Unison is the principal and Radix o^ all Musical Intervals. For the
Simple Uni^on does consist of a proportion of Equality, which is radical^y
between 1. and 1. as may be seen in a Mon^ch^rd. Therefore a Simple Unison is
not a musical I^terval, but the original thereof.

6. Unequal Sounds do make a Musical Intervall.
Unequal Sounds do make a Diastem or Distance, which is called a Musical
Intervall, in which the grave Sound is profound and greater: and the acute,
high and lesser. Of this Intervall these Theorems are noted. 1. He that knows
a simple Intervall, may easily know a compounded Intervall. That, as they say,
is radical: this, radicated. 2. There are seventeen simple Intervals or
Diastems in this order. The first, an Octave, to wit, a voice, in Greek a
Diapason, which is of a Dupla Proportion, between 2. and 1. where one Sound as
the greater and graver, does contain another, as the lesser and acuter, twice
in it self; Therefore is the Unison composed from Letter to Letter, v. g. from
G. to g. etc. The second, a Fifth, or Diapente, which is of a Sesquialtera
Proportion; between 3. and 2. The third, a Fourth, or Diatessaron, which is of
a Sesquitertian Proportion between 4. and 3. The fourth, a greater Third or
Ditone, which is of Sesquiquarta Proportion, between 5. and 4. The fifth, a
Third minor, or Hemiditone, which is of Sesquiquinta Proportion, betwe^n 6 and
5. The sixth, a Sexta ma^or ^or greater Sixth] or fourth with the greater
thi^d, which is of a Superbipartiens tertias Proportion, as between 5. and 3 7.
A Sexta minor or fourth with the lesser Third, which is of a Supertripartiens
quintas Proportion, between 8. and 5. The eigth, is the major Second, or whole
Tone, which is of a Sesquioctave Proportion, between 9. and 8. The ninth, is
the minor Second, or minor Tone, of a Sesquinona Proportion, between 10. and 9.
The tenth, is the major Semitone, of the Proportion of 16. and 15. The
eleventh, is the minor Semitone, of a Sesquivicefima quarta Proportion, between
25. and 24. The twelfth, the Diesis minor, of a supertripartiens centesimas
vigesimas quintas Proportion between 128. and 125. The thirteenth, a Comma
which is the difference between the Semitone majus, and minus, of a
Sesqui^ctogesima Proportion, between 81. and 80. The fourteenth, a Schisma
which is the half of a Comma, or half of the Difference between the Semitone
majus and minus. The fifteenth, is the fifth with a tertia major, or greater
Seventh, which is of a Superseptipartiens octavas Proportion, as between 15.
and 8. The sixteenth, is the lesser Seventh, or quinta cum tertia minore, which
is a Superquadripartiens quintas Proportion, between 9. and 5. The seventeenth,
are Intervalls not just, which are either deficient or redundant, chiefly by
the lesser Semitone, or Comma, or both together: as the Semioctave deficient
and abounding Fifth: the minute and superfluous fourth which is named a
Tritone, and such like. 3. Intervalls compounded of simple Diastems may be
infinite. But it is proper to Music to bound that Infinity of gross Sounds.
(which is such only potentially.) Notwithstanding let us take notice of certain
compounded Intervalls. First, such as are once compounded, as a Disdiapason,
double Octave, or Fifteenth, which is of a quadrupla Proportion, between 4. and
1. Also a Diapason with a Diapente, an Octave, with a Fifth, or Twelfth, of a
triple Proportion, between 3. and 1. Also a Diapason with a Diatessaron, an
Octave with a Fourth, or Eleventh, of a dupla superbipartiens tertias
Proportion, between 8. and 3. Al^o others are twice compounded, as a
Trisdiapason, Triple Octave, or two and twentieth of an Octupla Proportion,
between 8. and 1. etc. Thirdly, others are thrice compounded, as a
Tetradiapason, quadrupla Octave, or nine and twentieth of a sedecupla
Proportion, between 16. and 1. Others are four times compounded, and so ad
infinitum. 4. An Octave is the most simple, perfect, and prime musical
Intervall. 5. An Octave divided be gets all other simple Diastems. Therefore
from the Division of the 0ctave, the Harmonies of every Genus do flow. For
every Octave being divided two ways, begets two Moods of it self. 6. An
Octave is first divided into a fifth and fourth, of which it does consist: and
that either by harmonical or arithmetical Division. That is called the
harmonical Medium of an Octave, when the fifth is beneath the fourth: and that
the arithmetical, when the fourth is beneath the fifth. Let this be the Example
of Harmonical Division.

But I suppose the Author means thus:^

Division Arithmetical is thus:^

Therefore in the harmonical Division of an Octave the fifth remaining
immovable, the fourth is placed above the fifth: in the arithmetical Division,
the fifth remaining immovable, the fourth is put beneath the fifth. 7. If a
Fifth be taken from an Eighth, there remains a Fourth, and so on the
contrary. 8. A Fifth is divided into a Ditone, and Semiditone. 9. A Ditone is
compounded of the greater and lesser Tone 10. The Tonus major is disp^sed into
the Semitone majus and minus. 11. The D^tone is more then the Semiditone by the
Semitone minus. 12. A Fourth exceeds a Ditone by the major Semitone. 13. A
Fifth is more then a fourth by the greater Tone. 14. The lesser Tone is
excceded by the greater by a Comma. 15. The greater Semitone exceeds the
lesser by (...). 16. A Sixth is made of a Fourth and a Th^rd, the greater of
the greater, and lesser of the lesser, or the greater of a fifth and lesser
Tone, and the lesser of the Semitone major. 17. The seventh major, is made of a
Fifth and greater Third, the minor, of the minor. 18. The greater Tone does
contain almost ten Comma's, the lesser almost nine; the greater Semitone almost
five, and the lesser a most four. 19. A fifth does contain two greater T^nes,
one lesser, and the Semitone majus: A fourth one greater and lesser Tone, and
the Semitone majus. Therefore an Octave has in it self six Tones three major,
and three minor, with the lesser D^esis: to wit, five Tones, three greater, and
two lesser, with two major Semitones, and so it does comprehend more then fifty
Comma's. 20. Compounded Intervalls do imitate the nature of their simple. A
Disdiapason arises from two Octaves, an Octave with a Fifth comprehends
eight Tones, five major, three minor, and three greater Semitones. A
Trisdiapason is divided into three Octaves, and so of the rest. These
Propositions are demonstrated by propositions arithmetical of proportions
added, subtracted, coupled, etc. v. gr. An Octave is of a dupla proportion, a
Fifth of a Sesquialtera, a Fourth of a Sesquitertia. Therefore an Octave does
consist of a Fifth and a Fourth. This whole matter is demonstrated in a
Monochord: How these things may be vulgarly propounded, you may see hereafter
in the last Chapter and last Rule.

7. The Scale of Music is explained in these Theorems.
1. The Series of Intension and Remission: or of Ascension from a grave Sound
into an Acute, and of the Descension from an acute into a grave, is called the
Scale of Music. 2. The Scale of Music does vary both according to ancient and
modern Musicians. For the Scale of the most ancient Musicians, was only of one
Diapason for radical Simplicity. The Scale of the Pythagorians was of a
Disdiapason, for the keeping of Mediocrity. And now it is of a Tris, and
Tetra-Diapason, for the grateful variety of vocal and Instrumental Music. The
Scale also is either Simple: and that either old as the enharmonic, chromatic,
and diatonic; or new as the Syntonic: or mixed, which is compounded of simple [
Intervalls] Of these the enharmonic and chromatic, in respect of their
Difficulty and imperfection are not used in Solitary Music. 3. The Syntonian
Scale is of all others the most harmonical, to which the Diaton Scale may aptly
be mixed: as it may be seen in a Clavichord, and wind Instrument, i. e. an
Organ; where the white Keys do proceed in the Syntonian Scale; which is
somewhat moderated by the Diaton. The Syntonian Scale proceeds by the great
Tone, the lesser Tone, and the greater Semitone which arises from the minor
Tone: the diatonic or diaton proceeds by two Tones and a Semitone. To these
the enharmonic Scale is added, proceeding by two Dieses, the greater and
lesser, and an immediate Ditone in his Tetrachords. Also the chromatic
proceeds by two Semitones, the greater and the lesser, and an immediate
Semiditone. So the black Keys proceed with the white in the chromatic: from
whence they are called fict in the Syntonian. Hence also arises the Scale
irregular or flat, which differs not from the regular or dural, but by
accidental Transposition, or by the fourth above, or by the fifth beneath. And
this is the Disposition of the old diatonic Scale.

1. The greater Tone. 9.8. 2. The greater Tone. 9.8. 3. The lesser Semitone
from the greater Tone 256.243 4. The greater Tone. 9.8. 5. The greater Tone.
9.8. 6. The greater Tone. 9.8. 7. The lesser Semitone. 256.243. 8. The greater
Tone. 9.8. and so on through the Octaves below and above.
But the Disposition of the new and perfect Syntonian Scale is as follows; 1.
The greater Tone. 9.8. 2. The lesser Tone. 10.9. 3. The greater Semitone.
16.15. 4. The greater Tone. 9.8. 5. The lesser Tone. 10.9. 6. The greater Tone.
9.8. 7. The greater Semitone. 16.15. 8. The greater Tone. 9.8. And so on
through the Octaves above and below. Compare these things with the antecedent
Rule, and following Chapters.


CHAP. V. Of the Signs of a Musical Sound.
PRECEPTS.
THE Signs of a Musical Sound do follow.

And those are of a Sound either broad, long, or thick.

The signs of a long Sound do note the duration thereof: and they are either
principal or less principal.

The principal Signs are a Note and a Pause.

A Note is a sign of a present and positive sound: and contains Touch, and
that either whole or not whole.

It contains the whole Touch either eight times as a Large, or four times as
a Long, or twice as a Breve, or once as a Semibreve.

The rest do contain not the whole, but part of a Touch, and that either the
half part as a Minim, or the fourth part as a Crotchet, or the eigth part as a
Quaver, or the sixteenth part as a Semiquaver.

A Pause is the Index of a privitive or absent Sound, that is of silence: and
it answers either to a Large, or Long, or Breve, etc.

Signs less principal are a semicircle with a Center, Custos, or the like.

Signs of a broad sound, are a prick of Augmentation, breathing, and Syncope:
of which, Syncope, is a certain loosing of the Touch; Notes, or Pauses;
breathing answers a Semi Minim.

The Signs of a Crasse Sound are parallel Lines, whereof the place and name do
occur.

The place is a Musical System, and that greater or lesser.

The greater System for the most part does consist of ten Lines: and serves
for the Composing of a Song, called otherwise a conjoined System.

The lesser System does consist of five Lines, and serves chiefly to a Song
pricked out. This is otherwise called a simple System.

The Name is as well a Letter as a Uoice, or as others will, a Musical Syllable.

A Letter is as a Key by which the Song is opened, therefore called Clavis.
Such letters are seven. A. B. C. D. E. F. G.

The musical Uoices or Syllables are six, ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la.

These are found in a Musical Scale either continued or discontinued.

There, there is no need of Mutation: but here otherwise.

RULES.
1. The most certain and ready Signs of Sounds are Ciphers of Numbers.
Because a Sound can neither by any Man be written in Paper, nor kept in his
Mind, neither only nor always; therefore it stands in need of certain Signs,
by which the Quantity and Quality thereof may be represented. For because in
the Numbers and Proportions of these, all the Dimensions of Sound have their
assigned Essence; the most sure and ready Signs are Ciphers of Numbers placed
according to their Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity. For according to
Longitude. 1.2.3.4.8. 1/3 may note the stay of one Touch, two, three, or four,
etc. According to Latitude in like manner; and according to Crassitude the
g^eater Numbers may signify the grave Sound; and the lesser Numbers, the acute
Sound. But it behooves here to retain vulgar Signs, because they are most used.

2. The Doctrine of Notes is contained in these Rules.
1. Notes are either simple or compounded. And those are either whole or
broken. These are called bound. Simple Notes are placed without any joining of
either: Compounded, contrarily. Whole Notes are measured by whole Times; broken
Notes, by parts of Time. Whole Sounds consist either of one Time, as a
Semibreve: or of more, and those either of two, as a Breve: four, as a Long: or
eight, as a Large. The broken Notes do contain either the second part of a
Time, as a Minim: or the fourth, as a Crotchet: or the eighth, as a Quaver: or
the Sixteenth, as a Semiquaver. According to the following Scheme.

Names. Figure. Value. Large. * Excessus. 8. Long. * Excessus. 4. Breve. *
Excessus. 2. Semibreve. * Medium. 1. Minim. * * Defectus. Crotchet. * *
Defectus. Quaver. * * Defectus. Semiquaver. * * Defectus. 1/16

Although more Notes of Longitude may be given, as well greater or lesser,
potentially infinite: yet the^e notwithstanding do suffice, which were invented
by Musicians of former Ages. 2. Notes are varied according to the Augmentation
or Diminution of their value, or according to both together. Either all or some
are augmented by the half part; and truly, all are augmented either by the
Opposition of a Semicircle. *. *. and a Prick, of which this is the Rule: A
Prick put after Notes does add the half part of the time above their proper
value, as 12. 6. 3. 3/2 *. *. *. *. *. Thus a Prick after a *. is a Monotone,
or *. after a Semibreve is a Minim, or *. Some Notes are only augmented by
prefixing a Circle {timeperf-prolatimperf}. as a Large, Long, Breve. Notes are
diminished by a Trochaic Touch in a certain proportion, either Tripla or
Sesquialtera. Where the Signs are either Number or Color: as 3/1 is tripla,
3/2 is sesquialtera. Notes are partly augmented and partly diminished, chiefly
by the ligation and obliquation of a Breve, which is done for the extending of
one Syllable. And a Long also with a Breve is counted for a Semibreve; and also
in like manner a Breve with a Breve. But this kind of ligation and obliquation
is now wholly omitted, as not necessary in the least.

3. Pauses measuring Silence do answer to those musical Notes whereof they are
Privations.
For a Pause (which is noted by a little Line) does answer either to a Large,
or Long, or Breve, or other Note: as in the Type. ^8. 4. 2. 1.

A double Breathing does answer to a Quaver: a Triple to a Semiquaver. Hitherto
do pertain the Neuma, Custos, and the like. As ^Neuma. Custos.

4. Signs of a broad Sound are by Artists expressed less carefully.
The Sign of a broad Sound ought to show the Latitude of it according to the
asperous, harsh, clear, full, soft, flat, and small Spirit thereof, as the
nature of the Text requires. But Musicians do less weigh the Latitude of a
Sound, and do leave it to the Text, and to the things themselves that are to be
sung, and are content with few Signs, chiefly using breathing and Syncopation.
Breathing does answer to the Crotchet: Syncope or Syncopation is a certain
Luxation, that is, a fraction, and Contraction of Touch, Notes, and Pauses. e.
gr. ^

5. The Sign of a Crass Sound is a crossed Line, as they call it.
The Sign signifying Crassitude of gravity and acuteness measurable by
proportionable Numbers, is a perpendicular Line, which a right line does cut;
thus, +. The^e Lines are called Seats of crass Sounds or Musical Intervalls.
Also a Musical System which is twofold, the greater and the lesser. In both
there are perpendicular and parallel Lines; indeed in the greater there are
(...) ten parallel Lines, in the lesser always five. The greater serves for
the composing of a Song; where the perpendicular Lines are cut by the distance
of one or two Touches: But the lesser does serve for Melody, which is to be
extracted and noted.

Let this be the Type of the greater System.^

Let this be the Type of the lesser System.^

Both these Systems are put in a Chart, or Melopoetick Abacus, or Compositary
as they call it. The first is convenient to a young Beginner: the latter, for a
longer Practitioner: but others would rather draw more simple Systems in an
Abacus; Thus, ^

6. Of Letters and Voices Musical, as they call them, these are the Theorems.
1. The radical Letters are seven, in this order, a. b. c. d. e. f. g. which do
moderate Sounds in the Diato^ic Scale of a Diapason. These are usually called
Keys, because that by them a ^ong is, as it were, opened. They were invented
by Guido Aretine; at this time they are insufficient. 2. Letters or Keys are
either capital, minute, or geminate. Capital are they which are written with
Capital, that is with great Letters. Thus G. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. of which G.
A. B. C. are called grave, because they emit a grave Sound in respect of the
rest: the rest, as D. E. F. G. are called finals, because every Song regularly
does end in these Keys. We have only G from the School of the Greeks. The
minute Keys are in number seven, so called because they are written with little
Letters. Of these a. b. c. d. are called asfinal, because in these Keys the
transposed Song does end: oth^rwise called acute, because they do emit a more
acute Sound. The other are called Superacute because they are put above the
acute, as e.f.g. The geminate Keys are commonly five in n^mber. aa bb. cc. dd.
ee. So called because they are written with double Letters. Otherwise called
excelling; because in their Sound they transcend all others. But because the
number of Keys is not sufficient; therefore latter Musicians under the great
Latin Letters have put seven German Letters: and the double Letters they do
fully recite, and more-over they add unto them triplicated Letters. Thus 1. A B
C D E F G. 2. A B C D E F G. 3. a b c d e f g. 4. aa bb cc dd ee ff gg. 5. aaa
bbb ccc ddd eee fff ggg.
3. Keys are signed, or understood, or not signed. The signed Keys are three
which are distant one from another by a Fifth, and they are g. c. f. thus ^

These in the conjoined System are thus put, and are distant from one another
by a Diapente. ^

In a simple System they are variously placed by reason of the Profundity and
Altitude of a Song; As, ^

But Keys not signed are known by the signed.

4. Out of these seven Keys there is a double b. viz. flat and sharp. These
two Letters in the signing are distant by the lesser half Note. So that the
regular or dural Scale begins in C. and the irregular or flat Scale in F. b
dural is thus marked and is called b. quadrate.

5. Besides b. molle, as they call it, there is need of Cancells. and cis, dis,
fis, gis: which are called fict Letters by instrumental Musicians. But David
Mostar^ so accommodateth the Musical Keys to ^even n^w Vo^ces. Four Keys in
the whole are here to be held. The first is C. in which he will always have bo
sung. The second is G. five Tones below and four above G, he always sings
bo. The third is F. and four above, and five Tones below F. bo. is always
sung. Also five Notes above B. molle, and four under B. molle, bo. is always
to be sung. 6. Musical Voices are one way rehearsed by the Ancients, and
another way by later Musicians. The ancient Musicians did constitute these six
ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la. To these six Voices some do add the seventh Si, lest
there should be need of some Mutation. Concerning this thing Erycius Puteanus
in his Musathena does so for the most part play the Philosopher. Guido Aretine
(lived under Henry the third Emperor) for his Skill in Music among the prime
of his Age, and delighted with the perfection of the Senary Number, introduced
these six Syllabic Notes, ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la. which he borrowed and
translated out of the Hymn. Ut queant laxis Resonare fibris,
MIra gestorum FAmuli tuorum,
SOLve pollutum LAbij reatum.
Sancte Johannes.

These six Notes so invented, do show their use every where among Musicians,
but very slow and difficult. For what impediment is there of Mutations,
confusion of Keys, substitution of Voices? You may see most (whether with
Indignation or no) to have spent a good part of their Age upon this Art, and
yet to have profited very little, though perfect many years before in the
Lection thereof. But the D^fficulty does hinder, and make it a remora to most.
Which some do thus take away by joining si. to the^e six received Not^s. For
which Note you may put By. out of the said Hymn. Solve polluti la BY. i.
reatum.

This therefore shall be the order of Notes, ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la* by, for
th^s Heptade these following Rea^ons are brought. 1. Whereas Notes are the
Index's of Vo^ces, and as certain Signs, it is of necessity that there should
be as many Notes as Voices. But there are seven distinct voices stablished in
that half verse septem discrimina vocum. Therefore there are seven Notes. For
by voices are understood those sev^n Sounds, which are distinguished by certain
Intervalls. Those Intervalls or Diastems are called Tones. Therefore a Sound,
and Tone or Intervall do differ. A Sound is the Voice it self, which being
formed by the Mouth, is brought by the Air to the Ears. A Tone is a Space
circumscribed by two Sounds: or, the distance of a grave and acute Sound: So
that Tones are those Intervals, which are placed between the first and secon^
^ound, the second and third, the third and fourth, the fourth and fifth, the
fifth and sixth, the sixth and seventh. But this Hep^ade of Voices, Ptolomy in
his eleventh Book concern^ng Music does confirm; saying, that by nature Voices
can be made neither more nor fewer then seven. 2. The Egyptians and Grecians
have approved the seven Voices by the number of seven Vowells. For the
Egyptians as Demetrius Phalereus does testify, did commend their Gods by the
modulated enunciation of seven vowels. And Plutarch does accommodate the Greeks
seven Vowels to so many Voices of Music. 3. The Lyre, Cithren, and certain
other musical Instruments which are strung with strings, were anciently of
seven strings, without doubt, by reason of the seven Voices. The Chords of the
Lyre were of old in this order, and by these Names, Hypate, Parhypate,
Hypermese, Mese, Paramese, Paranete, Ne^e. The first is called Hypate, not only
for the acuteness of the Voice, but for a certain excellency and virtue. For
Hypatos as it were Hypertatos, does signify a degree of Eminency and Dignity.
Nete, as Neat, that is, the last or ultimate. Neither have the Chords been
only by these Names, but also the Sounds themselves, nigh this manner. Hypate
has to himself By. and sounds acutely: Parhypate, la, and does lullaby:
Hypermese, sol, and does sound sweetly: Mese, fa, and does sound temperately:
Paramese, mi, and does delight pleasantly: Paranete, re, and does grate
tremulously: Nete, ut, and does, as it were low hoarfly. Furthermore the
Ancients did attribute the seven Planets to so many Chords of the Lyre, in this
Order. To Saturn, Hypate: to Jupiter, Parhypate: to Mars, Hypermese: to Sol,
Mese: to Venus, Paramese: to Mercury, Paranete: and to Luna, Nete. In which
Comparation the acuteness and gravity of the Chords and Planets do respond
exactly. Although others invert the order, and attribute to Saturn Nete, and to
Luna Hypate. Which Comparation although it may consist: Yet notwithstanding the
first is more allowed: because Saturn does proceed in a mundane motion most
quickly, Luna most slowly. Look Cicero in his Dream. From the Chords to the
Notes we transfer this Comparation, and ascribe to Luna, vt; to Mercury, re; to
Venus, mi; to sol, fa; to Jupiter, la; to Saturn, by. For surely as the
Planet's do run round the Week, or the Septenary Circle of days in their Term
or gliding Course, and each of them by a certain diurnal vicissitude of
Government does obtain the primacy: So these seven Notes do complete the
universal harmonical Lection, divided by Musicians into seven Types. These
Types are certain and appointed Progressions of Notes, distinguished by
judicial Letters. 4. These seven Voices do render all Music very facile,
as well in the Theory as in the Practice, thus. All Music is accomplished by
Voices. The Voices being known, Notes are adhibited: To the Notes Characters of
Letters; as appears by this Diagram.

In a Flat Song.
Between A and B also mi and fa Hemiton^ B C fa sol Tone C D sol la Tone D E la
by Tone E F by vt Hemitone F G vt re Tone

In a sharp Song.
Between A and B also la and by Tone B C by vt Hemitone C D vt re Tone D E re
mi Tone E F mi fa Hemitone F G fa sol Tone Therefore in a Flat Song, A has mi
conjoined with it, B fa, C sol, D la, E by, F vt, G re. In a sharp Song, A has
la ascribed to it, B by, C vt, D re, E mi, F fa, G sol. Which difference the
variated Disposition of the Hemitones has begotten. Moreover of these Letters
only four are expressed, B, C, F, G. Nor yet those together or conjoynedly, but
one or two in the beginning of Lines. The other Letters not noted, you may know
by these four. If you ascend from the Index Letter, number the first seven
according to the Order of the Alphabet, but if you go further, then iterate the
same: but if you descend, proceed by a retrograde Order, from the Line to the
Intervall, and from the Intervall to the Line. Then you may rightly find out
the Letters; by the Letters, the Notes; by the Notes, the Voices; which is the
Sum of Music. Therefore see that you be most exactly skilled in the
ascending and descending Order of the Notes: and that the Tones and Semitones
being observed, you may rise and fall with your Voice. After that, a Song being
proposed, you may pass from the Sign and Letter noted, to the Note answering
it: from hence, omitting the ^etters, to the other Notes. And this tr^el^ is
easy in a flat Song, when B. is marked in the beginning of the Lines, there it
shows that ^a is ^o be sung. But in a sharp Song the difference is of these
three Letters, C. F. G. of which by that you may know Sol, by that fa, lastly
b^ this Sol Therefore every where con^ult the Signed Letter, find out the Note,
and call it by its proper Vo^ce, and so proceed from thence by ascending and
d^scen^ing: but if in Singing a Note do occur, which has a peculiar Letter
prefixed, the Tone is to be changed, and the Note of the Letter sung. Therefore
if you have rightly accommodated the seven Notes, you may mix any Concent, or
read any Melody that you would, whether it be the simple Aeolian, or the
various Asian, or the querulous Lydian, or the religious Phrygian, or Warlike
Dorian. But you will say that Songs are not concluded in those Seven Voices,
but rise higher. The Answer is ready; As in numbers when we rise from the
Monade to the Denary, the first is the chief of numbers, and by iterating and
compounding them we proceed in infinitum. So in these Voices after every
seventh Sound, it returns to the first, but more subtle; and after every
seventh Note the first: and so also afterward the second of Notes does agree
with the ninth; the third, with the tenth; the fourth, with the eleventh; the
fifth, with the twelfth; the sixth, with the thirteenth; the seventh* with the
fourteenth, etc. Of Sounds there is the same Judgment. From a Musical
Instrument, which by way of Eminency is so called, you may take the Experience
of your Ears. But in these Notes observe a double order of Intension and
Rem^ssion. Intension (by the Greeks Epitasis) is the commotion of the Voice,
from the graver place to an acute: Remission (by the Greeks Anesis) from an
acuter to a grave. But it is worth the pains, that here some Director or Ruler
of the Voice (as Tertullian speaks) go before and lead. Hitherto Puteanus, with
whom works David Mostart in his Introduction of Music, as indeed he proves
the Septenary of Voices. But he does substitute other Voices in this manner,
bo, ce, di, ga, lo, ma, ni. But so that in C of a sharp Song bo is sung. Also
in F. of a flat, bo. e. gr. ^ ^

But let Mostart himself be heard. Who says thus, It is worth our labor
seriously to invent such Musical Voices as exhibit unto us a perfect Octave,
so that it be the Consequence of eight Tones or Notes: by which Connection and
Series the perfection of any Melody may be performed, without any Mutation:
which indeed is the torture of tender wits. And the Series is this, bo, ce, di,
ga, lo, ma, ni. bo Which Abridgement if it should be admitted, those old vulgar
Keys should be abolished, the Letters of those seven Syllables being only
retained in every Song, viz. b. c. d. g. l. m. n.

For Example sake.^

Therefore Mostart rejects the six Voices of the Ancients; because they
complete not an Octave, and for that Cause require Mutation, which is the
torture of the Ingenious: and also the seven Voices of latter Musicians,
because they do not respond to the seven Letters or Keys. But because those
Voices of the Ancients be much used in Schools, therefore let us see their use.
For 1. Some of those Voices are superior, by which a Song descends, viz. la,
sol, fa, and others are inferior, by which it ascends, as ut, re, mi. 2. All
those Voices are equally distant one from another by a Tone, besides mi and fa
which are distant by a Semitone. 3. Of these Voices, vt and fa sound flatly; mi
and la sharply; the rest, meanly. But concerning this thing others speaks thus,
vt and sol denote Sweetness, re and la gravity, mi Lamentation, fa
threatenings. Lastly, others consider these Voices thus. Vt and fa are flat
Voices by b moll, because they emit a flat and effeminate Sound: re and la
natural, because they afford a natural and middle Sound: mi and la b durales,
because they make a sharp and manlike Sound. According to these Verses; Vt cum
fa mollis vox est; quia Cantica mollit:
Mi cum la dura est, Nam duras efficit odas.
Sol naturalis (quoniam neutras facit) and re.


4. Certain Voices do answer all Keys. Thus A la mi re B fa mi C sol fa vt D
la sol re E la mi F fa vt G sol re vt

5. These Voices are circumscribed in certain parallel Lines, so that in a Song
we may ascend and descend; and that in a progression either continued, or
discontinued. Continued Progression is that which observes the natural Order
of Voices, and is called a natural Song; As, ^

Discontinued Progression is the Mutation of a Voice, which is considered
either in the minor or greater System. Mutation in the lesser System, is made
for the Paucity of Voices: and it is either Vocal or mental. That is called
explicit, this implicit. And both is diverse in a flat Song, and in a sharp.
In a flat Song Mutation is made in d. a. g. whose memorial Note is dag. In a
sha^p Song Mutation is made in d. a. e. Whose Voice of remembrance is dea. In
the greater System Mutation is made according to the triple Scale. The first is
b dural Scale; which is the Progression of Musical Voices, rising from a. into
b. sharply, that is, by the Voice mi. The second is b moll; which is the
progression of Musical Voices, rising from a. into b moll, that is the Voice
fa. The third is the fict Scale, which in every Key admits a strange Voice.
And hence it is called fict Music: because modulated by feigned Voices. i. e.
by such as are sung in any Key, in which essentially they are not contained. As
vt in e. re. in f. and so on.

This is the Type of the Triple Scale. 5. Tetrachord ee b la dd la sol cc sol
fa bb fa mi 4. Tetrachord of excellents. aa b la mi re g sol re vt f fa vt e b
la mi 3. Tetrachord of Superiors. d la sol re c sol fa vt b b fa mi a la mi re
2. Tetrachord of Finals. G sol re vt F fa vt E b la mi D sol re 1. Tetrachord
of grave Sounds. C fa vt B b mi A b re G vt

And this is the old Diaton Scale. Thus we have contracted the new Syntonian
Scale of Lippius.

In this Table musical Sounds are so contained, that first there is the Simple
Unison. 2. The Tonus minor. 3. The Tonus major. 4. The greater Semitone. 5. The
Semiditone. 6. The Ditone. 7. The Fourth. 8. The Fifth. 9. The lesser Sixth.
10. The greater Sixth. 11. The lesser Seventh. 12. The greater Seventh. 13. The
Octave. And this is the Cyclus or Compass of the Diapason. Concerning the
Proportions of all these Sounds, look into the former Chap. thus v. gr. To the
Octave ascribe 1.2. to the Septima 8.15. and so of others: So that the lesser
number be applied to the upper Note in the Scale. The significates of the
Letters. B. L. b.l.bb. are a little before called bo.ce.di.ga.lo.ma.ni.

CHAP. VI. Of the Musical DYAS.
PRECEPTS.
HItherto of the simple part of an harmonical Song: the compounded part thereof
follows; whose tractation is called practical or Melopoetical Music, if the
form of the Song be added.

The compounded part of an harmonical Song, is that which arises from musical
sounds or Monads conjoined according to three Dimensions.

And it is either primary or secondary.

The primary is called harmony and consonancy, which does arise from grave and
acute sounds united by such a proportion, that it may delight the hearing.

The secondary is dissonancy or Anarmosty, which arises from such a proportion
of grave and acute Sounds, that it offends the hearing.

And this double part is either a musical Dyas, or Tryas, of which the one is
perfect, and the other imperfect.

A musical Dyas, is that which arises from two sounds: consonant and
harmonical from Consonants, and dissonant from Dissonants.

And it is more simple, or more compounded. That is called radical, this
radicated.

The simple Consonant Dyads, are seven, viz. An Octave, Fifth, Fourth, Ditone,
Semiditone, greater Sixth, and lesser Sixth: the dissonant Dyads are the other
simple Intervalls, as the Tone major and minor, the Semitone greater and
lesser, the Seventh greater and lesser; and lastly, all sim^le Intervalls not
Just, as the Semioctave, Semififth, etc.

The Dyas more compounded is that which arises from the simple Dyas: and that
again is either consonant or dissonant: and both compounded either once, twice,
thrice, or so forward. In Dyads once compounded the double Octave, also the
Octave with a Fifth, the Octave with a Fourth, and Octave with a Ditone do
consonate: but the Octave with both tones, with a Semitone, and with an
Intervall not just does dissonate. In Dyads twice compounded the triple Octave,
and double Octave, with a Fifth do consonate: but the double Octave with both
tones, with the Semitone, and so forwards; does dissonate.

RULES.
1. There are two Arbiters of congruous and incongruous Proportions.
The first is superior, which does judge of Proportions a priori, to wit,
Logos: the other is inferior, which does exactly judge of Sounds a posteriori,
to wit, the Hearing. And there is a necessity that both these Judges should
concur, as Ptolomy does rightly teach: but falsely Pythagoras, who does think
that nothing here is to be attributed to the hearing; and falsely Aristoxenus,
that supposes nothing here is to be attributed to Ration. But the nature of
Proportions is demonstrated by the Monochord: for that in it all Musical
Diastems are contained.

2. The Simple Unison is the Radix of all Consonancy and Dissonancy.
Vulgarly they imagine that the Unison does both consonate and dissonate. But
they err; for the Unison does equisonate only, because it has the proportion
of Equality, and is the principal of every Interval. e. gr. ^

Rightly therefore the simple Unison is made the Radix of Consonancy and
Dissonancy.

3. The Simple Consonant Dyads are in number Seven, and may be called Simple
Concordancies.
Vulgarly they thus rehear^e the Simple Concordancies. There are twelve
Concordancies, the 1.3.5.6.8.10.12.13.15.17.19.20. And these are divided two
waves. First, there are Simple, replicated or triplicated. The Simple
Concordances are the 1.3.5.6. which are also called primary. The Replicated are
such as are equisonant to the former, conceived by a double Dimension, as the
8.10.12.13. Otherwise called Secondary. For in Sound the Octave does associate
with the Unison, the tenth with the third, the twelfth with the fifth, and the
thirteenth with the sixth. The triplicated Consonants are the 15.17.19.20.
otherwi^e called tertiaries. Of these the 15. is coequated in Sound with the
Octave and the first: the seventeenth with the tenth and third, and the
nineteenth with the twelfth and fifth, and the twentieth does equisonate with
the thirteenth and sixth, According to this Type.

1. 3. 5. 6. 8. 10. 12. 13. 15. 17. 19. 20.

Lastly, There are Concordances perfect, or imperfect. The Perfect are those
which can stand by themselves, that is, begin and terminate a Song: as the
1.5.8. The imperfect are those which may concur in Counterpoint, as the 3.6.10.
The Discordances are nine, viz. the 2.4.7.9.11.14.16.18.21. Others also do
number the perfect Concordances thus, the 1.3.5.8. because they respond to the
Pythogorical Quaternary. But it behooves them to play the Philosophers of
Concordances more acurately. There are seven Concordances or simple
Consonances. Of which the Octave is the first, which is of a dupla proportion
between 2. and 1. In his Terms the most simple Convenience is diverse, as is
between the whole and the half. The Fifth does obtain the second place; then
follows the fourth; then the Ditone or third in a sharp Song; then the
Semiditonus, which is the third in a flat Song; in the last place save one is
the Sexta major in a sharp Song; and in the last place, the Sexta minor in a
flat Song. And this is the Order of Perfection. For although every Simple
Consonancy is perfect in his degree; yet notwithstanding in respect of another,
it is either more perfect or imperfect; yet so as the first and most perfect is
the Octave, that compounded Unison; the most imperf^ct and last, is the lesser
Sixth; the intermediate are measurably as the most perfect or most imperfect
are nearer. Here Musicians do wonder, why the Septinary begets no
Consonancy, when as it numbereth all simple Consonances. And this is the Scheme
of those seven simple Consonances. ^

Of these the first three are perfect, the four latter are imperfect. And
indeed principally the Octave, in respect of his excellent perfection does
equisonate and unisonate after the Unison an^ ^imple Equison. After it the
Fifth for its perfection does consonate by his most grateful, firm, and
masculine Sound. After it the Ditone or greater Third by his sweet Imperfection
does concent but more cheerfully, strongly, and lively. Then the Semiditone or
lesser Third also by his sweet Imperfection does concent more softly, remisly,
and heavily. Then the greater Sixth by his Imperfection does circumsonate as it
were more high and pleasantly. Last of all the lesser Sixth does also so
circumsonate but more slowly, flatly, and weakly. These four latter Consonances
were not used by the Ancients in their Diatone Scale: but now they are used
most chiefly, naturally, and artificially in the Syntonian Scale. And this is
the Order of Perfection in the seven simple Consonances. The Order of the
Crassitude of Sound, or of Intension and Remission is this, which is firmly
contrary to the first. After the simple Unison is the Semiditone, then the
Ditone, then the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth minor, Sixth major, and Octave. From
these it is an easy thing to Judge of Simple Dissonances, to wit, because they
are all Tones placed without the Septinary of Consonances; as the greater and
lesser Tone; the greater and lesser Semitone; the greater and lesser Seventh,
and lastly Intervalls not just deficient. For in these are disagreeing
Proportions, whose extreme Sounds do but ill agree, and therefore if they be
put together, they offend the Ears.

4. Compounded Dyads do imitate the nature of Simple.
This is true both of compounded Concordances and Discordances, according to
that elegant Axiom of Musicians. Of Octaves there is the same and like
Judgment. And that for the essential Similitude of dupla, quadrupla, octupla,
and sedecupla Proportion, as 16.8.4.2.1. Also of compounded Dyads the Order of
perfection and Crassitude, is like unto the Order of their simple Dyads.
Otherwise although the Composition of perfect Concordances might proceed in
infinitum: yet notwithstanding because they are not the same Terms of Sound and
Hearing (which thing therefore obtains in the rest of the Senses) it is
necessary that we be mindful of Mediocrity, lest we create trouble to the Ear,
by any Sound too great or too acute.

5. It behooves us always to have in our Eye the Radixes of Simple Dyads.
As it is very compendious, to observe simple only and radical Dyads both
consonant and dissonant, and then by those to judge of compounded Dyads: so
also it is very compendious to consider the Roots of those simple Dyads,
according to this Type.

Bo. ni. ma. lo. ga. di. ce. 90. 96. 108. 120. 135. 144. 160. 1.2.4.8. 3.6. 5.

See before in the Syntonic Table. Here, between the Consonances of the Octave
and fourth, the Radix is the Fifth: of both Sixes, both Thirds. Therefore the
Octave and fourth may be reduced to the Fifth; and the sixth to the third. The
Root of simple Dissonant Dyads is the second, to which both Sevenths may be
reduced.

CHAP. VII. Of the Musical TRIAS.
PRECEPTS.
THE Musical Trias is that which does arise from three sounds and as many
Dyads: otherwise called the unitrisonous Radix.

And it is either consonant or dissonant.

The consonant Trias is that in which a third and a fifth does concur, yet so
as that it arises from two thirds.

The dissonant Tryas is that which arises from seconds.

RULES.
1. The Harmonical Tryas is the Root of all the Harmony that can be invented,
And may be called the unitrisonous Radix: because it does consist of three
Monads or Sounds, and as many Dyads: all of them in that whole Tryas, and every
one most sweetly concenting one with another, because they are joined together
in a certain Order by just Proportions. Those Sounds or Monads being three in
number, and as many Dyads, making this Trias, are these. First, the two
Extremes are distant one from another by a Diapente, which is of a Sesquialtera
Proportion. Then there is one middle, which by his softer sweetness does join
those two Extremes, concenting together by a perfect and masculine Sound, and
is distant from one of them by a Ditone, and from the other by a Semiditone.
There is the Proportion of a Sesquiquarta, here of a Sesquiquinta. e. gr. ^

Here 4. and 5. then 4. and 6. then lastly 5. and 6. do conspire. This
unitrisonous Radix is the Rule and Measure of all Consonances, and is always
in one manner. Yet this only is the difference, that in a flat Song it is more
imperfect and soft, but in a sharp Song, more natural, perfect, nobler, and
sweet. The first has the Ditone above the Semiditone, the latter has the
Ditone beneath the Semiditone. Moreover this Radix is either increased or
diffused. The increased, is that which has the Octave for his Companion, to
excite the more various and fuller Harmony. The diffused is that, who^e radical
parts or voices are not so near unto one another, because dispersed into
various Octaves. For the nearer the Voices are one to another, the more
excellent is the Symphony. The best Disposition of all look above Chap. 5. Rule
6. where I do write of signed Keys.

2. The Musical Trias does arise both from Arithmetical and Geometrical
Proportion.
Proportion is threefold: First arithmetical, which is, when the numbers are
distant one from another by an equal Difference, and that either continued; as
1.2.3.4. or dis-joyned, as 3.6.8.11. The^e the Difference is an unity, here a
ternary. Secondly, Geometrical; which is, when there is the same Ration of more
Terms compared with one another: and it is either continued, as 4.8.16. or
dis-joyned, as 2.4.8.16. Thirdly, musical or harmonical Proportion, arises
from arithmetical and geometrical: and it is no other, then a Symmetry of
Concents, which is discerned in the most perfect musical Triade; which Lippius
therefore calls the chiefest, sweetest, and plainest Compendium of
Melopoetical Music. But let us pursue these things further. Musical or
Harmonical Proportion is the Symetry or Equality of Concents which does arise
from Proportion arithmetical and geometrical; so that three Terms being put,
even as the greatest is to the least, so is the Differ^nce of the middle, and
the greatest to the Difference of the middle and least. As 3.4.6. Here, as Six
are the Duplum to three: so two (which is the Difference between 4. and 6.) are
the Duplum to the Unity, which is the Difference between 3. and 4. Such is the
proportion in the unitrisonus Radix. 1.3.5. Also between 6.8.12. For three
Terms musically proportional are found from three arithmetically proportional,
if the first arithmetically proportional be multiplied into the second and
third, and the second into the third. So from these three arithmetically
proportional 2.4.6. are found these three musically proportional. 8.12.24. But
that numbers are musically proportional, is hence manifest, if in them those
three Proportions are found, on which all Music does depend: to wit, Dupla, or
Diapason, which does constitute an Octave: Sesquialtera, or Diapente, which
does constitute a Fifth: and Sesquitertia, or Diatessaron, which does
constitute a Fourth. So in these Numbers 6.4.3. between 6. and 3. is dupla:
between 6. and 4. sesquialtera: between 4. and 3. sesquitertia. I say, three to
four, are in the sesquitertian Ration, as the Diatessaron System: four to six
are in the Sesquialtera Ration, as the Diapente: three to six are in the dupla
Ration, as the Diapason System. And of these the rest a^e compounded, viz. the
Disdiapason, etc. This also is of force in Organical Music. For if two Strings
equally thick and stretched differ in Longitude by a Sesquialtera Ration, benig
struck, they will equally Sound the Harmony of a Diapente: if they differ in
Longitude by a Sesquitertiae Ration, a Diatessaron: if by a dupla, a Diapason,
which vulgarly they call an Octave, as a Diapente a fifth, and a Diatessaron a
Fourth. The same is in Hollownesse, or in Whistles. From this Operation always
except the unitrisonous Radix, because it is the foundation of other musical
proportions.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Form of an Harmonical Song.
PRECEPTS.
THus much concerning the matter of an harmonical Song: now of the Form
thereof, which is the artificial disposition of Musical Monads, Dyads, and
Tryads, according to the Text, and this is called Melody.

Melody is simple, or compounded. That is called Monodie, this Symphony.

Simple Melody is that which is content with one only Series of musical
voices: as is discerned in Choral Music, called Unicinium.

Compounded Melody is that which does conjoyne more simple Melodies between
themselves: and is usually called Counterpoint; as is discerned in figural
Music. To which appertain Songs of two, three, and four voices, etc.

Counterpoint is either simple or colored.

Simple Counterpoint is that which has least of Artifice: and may be called
pure Composition, whose Rules or Ornaments are the Sounds of Longitude,
Latitude, or Crassitude.

Counterpoint colored is that which has more of Art: and may be called
adorned Composition, whose Rules or Ornaments do respect the Longitude,
Latitude, and Crassitude of a Sound.

RULES.
1. A Musical Text does give as it were a Soul to an Harmonical Song, as to the
Image thereof.
Wherefore seeing the Image is such as is the Archetype, the practical Musician
or Composer as they call him, is to take care that he understand aright the
nature of his Text, in respect of things and words. For an Harmonical Song
ought to be accommodated both to things and words. The things may be all divine
and humane matters, but chiefly practical, which concern the active felicity of
man; the mean to acquire which, is virtue moderating the Affections, which do
depend upon things or objects either great, or low, or mean: and those again
either pleasant or delightful, or unpleasant and sorrowful, or moderate. Words
may be either of prose or verse, yet so as that they be like unto things
practical, even, and congruous. So that he ought to know the nature of all
Letters, (of which in my Rhetoricks.) Moreover, an harmonical Song will rightly
express the Text, if the Musician give heed to the trine Dimension of Sound,
viz. Longitude, Latitude, and Crassitude. For things grave are rightly
expressed by long and profound Sounds: light things by short and acute Sounds:
Masculine things by sharp Sounds: soft things by flat ^ounds: pleasant things
by lively and quick Sounds: Sad things by languid and slow Sounds: and mean
things by mean Sounds; as we see it falls out in Poesy.

2. More Simple Melody, which is called Monadie, is first to be composed.
A young Composer should first compose the most simple Melodies, which arise
not from Musical Dyads and Tryads, but from Monads, or a simple Disposition of
musical Voices. e. gr. Let this be the Subject, Laudate Dominum, which may be
sung with this Melody. ^

Or after the new manner, which Lippius has, which depends upon the
Syntonick Table, in the 5 Chapter before mentioned.

288. 320. 288. 270. 270. 288. Lau da ^e do mi number. 2. 1 1/2 2.

Here the Numbers placed above the Text do show the Notes of the Syntonic
Table: and the numbers underneath do express the measure of the Touch.
Therefore such will be the Series according to this new Mode. ^

3. Compounded Melody does respect either two, three, or four Simple Melodies,
cardinal and radical.
Of these the Composition and Connection of four Melodies is most perfect. For
as a body mixed of four Elements, is a temperament of four humors: So every
harmonical Polyphony does arise from four simple Melodies. Of these two are
extreme, the Bass which is the gravest; and the Discantus which is the acutest:
and two are intermediate; the one is nearer to the Bass, which is the Tenor;
and the other is nearer to the Discantus, which is the Altus, according to the
Disposition of the four Elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire. Of which, two
are extreme, and as many Median, as is noted in our Physics. And this is the
Musical Tetras, in which the Melody of the Bass is fundamental* whence its name
is from Basis a foundation: or Bassus profound: the Melody of the Tenor and
Discantus (whose vicissitude is very elegant) is principal or regal. Lastly the
Melody of the Altus is explemental. This Tetras, or Song of four voices, does
comprehend both musical Monads, Dyads, and Tryads, as well Simple as Compounded,
and is the Radix of all perfect Musical Composition. This therefore is the
Order in Musicks. The Musical Monade is the Radix of one Melody, or Song of
one Voice: the Dya^ of two: the Trias of three: and the Tetras of four:
Moreover this Composition is called Counterpoint, because point is put against
point.

4. Pure Composition, or Simple Counterpoint; has this Artifice.
1. Pure Composition does make the four Melodies, more simple, plain, and
easy: yet so that it keeps the trine Dimension of Sound. 2. This is the Rule
of the Longitude of a Sound. Every one of the four radical Melodies does so
proceed by his Monads, that Notes of more simple value may be added, the Touch
being every where equal. 3. The Rules of Latitude is this. 1. All the members
of all the Melodies do make a Consonancy; which does depend upon that
unitrosonous harmonical Radix, of which mention is made in the foregoing
Chapter. And because the parts and productions of that Triade are various, the
Consonancys may be mingled among themselves, yet so as that the peculiar Ration
of the perfecter of them be kept: for in every Genus that which is most perfect
is the measure of the rest. 2. All melodies should be compared with themselves
most diligently. viz. The Bass with the Tenor, the Tenor with the Altus, the
Altus with the Discantus, the Bass with the Altus, the Tenor with the
Discantus, lastly, the Bass with the Discantus. Or more briefly, the Tenor with
the Bass, the A^tus with the Tenor and Bass, the Discantus with the Altus,
Tenor, and Bass. For so every one compared with another will make six times an
excellent Song of two Parts: So that every part of the Melody will be adorned
with some harmonical Dyade. And also in those Dyades, variety is to be used,
yet so that the perfecter do rule. 3. Consonant Dyades by ascending and
descending together may all mutually antecede and follow one another, if they
be of diverse species: but if of the same, as the three perfect Consonancies
with the simple unison, they may not, but the other imperfect Dyads may. But
more briefly, two simple Unisons may not be put together ascending or
descending: nor two Octaves, nor two Fifths, nor two Fourths. 4. Those Dyads
which are nearer in Crassitude, will better precede and succeed, then those
which are more remote. To which purpose is that saying of Musicians, By how
much nearer Voices are to one another, by so much they make the better
Symphony. 5. Monads should be applied so in all Melodies, that every one should
elegantly walk in his own Region, and commonly of one Octave, or Diapason. 6.
Let the Bass always take the lower part or foundation of the harmonical Triade
in the place of the gravest: but the Tenor in the place of the graver, the
Altus of the acuter, and the Discantus of acutest Monads: So let them take all
three parts of the harmonical Triade, viz. The lowest or first, the middle and
last. But in augmentation and multiplication the first of the Triade is chiefly
to be repeated, the last more rarely, the middle seldomest. 7. ^et Melodies
associate by gradual, not by skipping motion. For if every Melody do proceed
rather by degrees, then fly violently by greater Intervalls and Leaps, it will
be more grateful to the Ears; yet the Bass is allowed to move by Leaps. 8. Let
the Bass be first composed. Because it is the foundation of the Triads. Hereto
belongs th^s Rule. Better is that harmonical Triade who^e Basis is lowest,
then those whose Basis is in an hi^her place. But now let us see an Example.
Let the Text be Laudate Dominum. And this you may thus express in a pure Song.
Go to the Syntonian Table, and from thence pick out Consonancies after this
manner.

2. 1 1/2 2. Discantus. 180 192 180 180 180 180. Altus. 240 240 240 216 216
240. Tenor. 288 320 288 270 270 288. Bassus. 360 480 360 540 540 720. Lau da te
do mi number.

These Consonancies you may thus transfer into the great System. ^Lau -- da --
te -- do -- mi -- number.

Or if you had rather you may thus write the several * Touches in several Cells.

* Touch is that which Musicians call Tactus, or the stroke of the hand by
which Time is measured. Or it is the successive Motion of the hand, directing
by equal measure the Quantity of all Notes and Pauses in a Song, according to
the variety of Signs and Proportions. The parts thereof are Elevation and
Depression; or the Fall and Rise of the hand. ^ Be -- ne dic -- a -- ni -- ma
-- me -- a -- Je -- ho -- vae.

In the latter Example you may observe the Tenor to have the same Voice with
the Bass in the first Cell: and in the Sixth and Seventh, two Minums put for
one Semibreve.

V. Adorned Composition, or Colored Counterpoint, is contained in these Rules.
1. Adorned Composition does constitute a Song ^armonical more broken, florid,
and colored, therefor more difficult and effectual. Therefore this does as it
were garnish these three Dimensions of a Song with various Gems and flowers: so
that pure Composition may rightly be compared to Grammar, which teach^th to
^peak purely: and adorned Composition to Rhetoric, which teaches to speak
Elegantl^. 2. Artificial Licenses are used in adorned Compos^tion. For as there
are allowed Poetical Licenses, which do beautify Art, and not destroy it: so
also there are Melopoetical Licenses, by which the pure and simple Dimensions
of a Song are beautified. 3. These are the Orn^ments of Longitude. 1. An
harmonical Song is adorned with the variety of a Spondaic, and trochaic Touch:
and of unequal Notes, especially Syncopated. So the Bass does move more slowly,
and the other Melodies with colored celeritie; which is that in Music, as
flourishing is in Writing. 2. An harmonical Song according to the Nature of the
Text, is distinguished by Rests and Closes. For even as Speech is distinguished
by Comma's, Colons, and due Periods; so ought an harmonical Song, according to
the nature of the Text, to be distinguished by greater and lesser Rests; also
by Closes native, primarie, secondarie, tertiarie, peregrine, more perfect, or
more imperfect. A perfect Close does consist of three Voices; the antepenult,
penult, and last: by which the Close is chiefly known, and which is to arise
out of an harmonical Triade. e. g. ^

The Primarie Close is that whose last is the first; the secondary, the
supreme; the tertiarie the middle of the Triade; but of these in the following
Chapter. 4. The Ornaments of Latitude are these. An harmonical Song should be
so expressed by Voice or I^strument, or both together; that according to the
Condition of the Text, an asperous, sharp, swift, full, gentle, flat, submiss,
or small Spirit, etc. should be heard. 5. The Ornaments of Crassitude have
these Axioms. 1. Variety should chiefly rule in an harmonical Song; I say
variety of Dyad's and Triads, more grave, more mean, more acute, simple and
compounded, diffused and augmented, more perfect, and more imperfect, natural
and fict. Hence is a various License: for in the Bass it is lawful to use the
last and middle Monade of an Unitrisonous Radix: and Dyads prohibited, may
antecede and follow one another; and a Dias and a Trias also anarmonical may be
used. All which things are done either covertly or openly. Covertly, either by
greater Rests, or by Sounds not offending by reason of their swiftness, or by
contrary made Sounds; or by an excuseing Polyphonie, or by Syncope. Openly for
the texts sake, and singular Artifice. v. gr. If the Text command, and as it
were compel to manifest some Discord. According to that of the Logicians;
Contraries placed nigh themselves are the more clearly illustrated. When
therefore in Singing some harsh sound is heard, which presently passes into a
sweet harmony, the hearing is therewith more affected, than if there were a
current of perpetual Harmony. 2. When the whole harmonical Song is rendered more
beautiful by the ornament of Celerity and Syncope; then chiefly the Close
should be artificial. 3. Polyphony or multiplication of cardinal melodies do
very much ^dorn Singing. e. gr. As if there be two, three, or more Basses,
Tenor's, Altus's, Discant's, and those placed in certain Quires, according to
the Text and Circumstances. 4. The various manner and motion of ascending and
descending, is granted to principle Melodies and sometimes out of their Proper
Regions; as for the Bass to invade the Confines of the Tenor, or the Tenor of
the Altus. 5. The ornament of musical ornaments is that which they call a Fuge.
This Ornament at this day is most excellent, difficult, ingenuous, efficacious,
and full of Liberty. And this Fuge is nothing else then a more artificial
repetition and imitation of certain Parts: to which a more Simple Repetition
and Imitation is opposed, which also has his Commendations amongst Musicians.
And this is the Example of a Fuge in the Unison after two Times. ^ ^ Unum est
necessarium. ^ ^

* I suppose that this Example was mistaken or rather mis-placed by the Printer
or some other, for I cannot imagine that the Learned Author would give the
Reader Four parts of Simple Counter-point, for an Example of a Fuge in the
Unison after two Minims. Of which let this be an Example. ^

And thus the Composer may continue his Fuge as long as he pleases.

6. The Exercise of a Fuge is to begin in an Harmonical Tryade only. For so
other forms and species of Fuges may more easily be apprehended. And for
Examples you may look amongst those Principal and Heroic practical Musicians,
as Orlandus and Marentius. Of which two, the one in his Mottets, and the other
in his Madrigals, has brought Melopoesie to his highest pitch. There are
latter Imitators of these principal Melopoets, who notwithstanding ought to
have their due praise.

CHAP. IX. Of the Affections of an Harmonicall Song.
PRECEPTS.
IN the last place the Affections of a musical Song do follow, wherewith it is
affected and perfected.

And they are either material or formal.

The material Affection of a Song, is that which flows from the matter
thereof. And it is a certain Genus of Modulation.

The formal Affection of a Song, is that which flows from the Form thereof:
and is called a musical Trope or Mood; which is a Rule, according to which we
direct the course of a Song. Otherwise called Nomus and Tonus. And it is the
same in Music, as a certain kind of verse is in Poetry.

A musical Mood is either simple or compounded.

The simple is primarie or secondarie. That is called Authentic, and this
Plagal.

The primarie mood is either legitimate or spurious.

The legitimate is either more natural in a sharp Scale, or more soft in a flat
Scale. And both is threefold; the Ionick, Lydian, Mixolydian, Dorian, Phrygian,
and Aeolian.

The spurious, bastard, ^or illegitimate Mood is the Hyper-Aeolian, and
Hyper-Phrygian.

The secondary or Plagal Mood is also called remiss and submisse: and it is
Hypo-Ionic, Hypo-Doric, Hypo-Phrygian, Hypo Lydian, Hypo-Mixolydian, and
Hypo-Aeolic.

The compounded or connex Mood, is that which does arise from simple Moods:
when the Authent is joined with the Plagal Mood: whence it is called the
Plagiosyntactical-Trope.

RULES.
1. The mixed Genus of Modulation is now for the most part in use.
The Genus of Modulation is certain, according unto which the Song does proceed
in his Melodies in a certain Musical Scale. Therefore as the Scale of Music is
simple, or mixed, and that old or new: (also the old Scale is either
Enharmonic, or chromatic, or diatonic: the new, Syntonic) So also the Genus of
Modulation is simple, or mixed, or compounded: the simple is old or new: Again
the old is enharmonic, chromatic, or dia^onic. And is also called Enharmonisme,
Chromatisme, and Diatonisme. The new is Syntonic or Syntonisme. The mixed Genus
of Modulation is that which is variously compounded of the Simple. Of the
Simple, at this Day, Enharmonisme and Chromatisme (to wit alone:) partly for
their Imperfection, partly for their Difficulty are not in use; but the
Syntonian-Diatonisme, or Diaton-Syntonisme, yet so, that chromatisme be often
mixed, and sometimes also Enharmonisme, if there be need, according to the
force and acuracy of the Text.

2. A Musical Mood is the most certain Rule of a Song.
A musical Mood is that, according to which a musical Song is limited, and
without it would be too ample and wandering. The Mood therefore does contain
Melody with certain Limits, and as it were Bounds of an ha^mon^cal Trias, in
the Compass of an Octave or Diapason; so that wholly it does continually
proceed in a due order, from the beginning, by the middle, to the end, for the
artificial expressing unto, and imprinting upon the hearers the virtue of the
Text.

3. The Doctrine of Moods is contained in these Rules.
1. We cannot moderate or modulate any Song, unless we first know the Tone
thereof. The Tone is known by the end, according to Rule: in the end it is seen
of what Tone it is. The end also of a Song is judged by the musical Mood, which
therefore by some is called a Tone, according to this Diversity of Tones, there
are also diverse Melodies. For as one Tone is in vt, and another in re: So also
are the Melodies. Yet here you must remember, that every Tone or ^ood may not
only be known by the end, but also by the beginning, and middle or Division
thereof: al^o by his skipping. 2. A musical Mood, is an Octave mediated by his
neighboring voice. Otherwise it is defined to be the Species of a Diapason,
which is made up of a Diatesseron and Diapente. 3. The Simple Mood is that in
which one harmonical Triade only does rule with his Octave, in respect of the
Text and more simple Affection. 4. All the Moods are six, even as there are six
voices. vt. re. mi. fa. sol. la. The Ancients had only four Moods, the first,
second, third, and fourth: to which now the four final Voices do respond. re.
mi. fa. sol. These four Moods the Grecians call Authentic, and the Latins
herile or Clamous. For they have, as I may so speak, a greater Authority of
ascending then the rest. But the Latins more narrowly considering the
ascension and descension of every Tone, have constituted to every Mood a
subjugal Mood; and those four they call Plagal; also subjugal, servile, and the
like. And these descend more then the first. And hence arise the eight Moods,
by which every Song is governed per Arsin and Thesin, by rising or falling. But
our Latter Musicians more diligently considering the variety of Tones, have
constituted twelve legitimate Tones. viz. six Authent, and as many Plagal. For
as there are six Voices. vt. re. mi. fa. sol. la. so also there are six
Authent, and as many Plagal, which are vulgarly named by strange Names of
Nations: I say, of those Nations who commonly were delighted with them. And to
these twelve legimate Tones, two illegitimate were added. Unto all which,
various mixed Moods may be added. 5. An Authent Mood is primary, the Plagal
secondary, and this does not differ from that, but in respect of subjection,
when it is called Hypotropus, remiss and submiss, because the harmonical
Mediation of the Octave, which does agree with the primary, is changed into the
arithmetical, by the inversion of the fourth beneath the fifth with the Triade.
6. Concerning the Excellency and Efficacy of the musical Moods, there are
diverse opinions. Casus in politicis lib. 8. chap. 5. says thus, Music is
various and manifold. One kind is humble and remiss, as the Lydian; another is
vehement and more moved, as the Phrygian; another is more moderate and mean
which is called the Doric; and a little after, that grave, divine, and
oraculous Music, called the Doric, allureth the mind to the study of Wisdom
and true Piety. This, both the heathen of old used in their Synagogues, and
Christians now use in their Churches. For in it there is a certain imitation of
Celestial Harmony, by which as by a sweet and wholesome Medicine, the Diseases
of the mind are cured, Vices are dissipated, Cares are lessened: and the Dew of
Divine Grace is leisurely, and by little and little distilled. And in the end
of the Chapter, he says, that the Doric Music has respect unto Virtues, and
divine Inspiration; and that it forces men into Ecstasy of mind, and oblivion
of the world; so that it drives away evil Spirits, which he proves by the
Example of Saul. Lippius in his musical Synopsis, says thus: the most natural
and chief of all the Moods in these times, is the Ionic, with his secundary the
Hypo Ionic. (against which many ancient and modern Musicians do speak.) But let
us look upon the nature of the Moods in Specie. 7. The nature of the Authent
Moods is this. The Authent Mood has his final Key in the Diapente below, and
is divided harmonically. And that is called harmonical Division, where the
Octave has the Fifth beneath the Fourth, thus; First the Ionic does occur,
which is by Lucian called Glaphyrus. i. e. pleasant: and by Apuleius wanton.
And now it is much used. It runs between C. and c. is divided in G. and
ends in c. In a flat Song it runs between F. and f. and is divided in C.
and ends in f. It is most agreeable to Iambic's and Trochaic's. Then the
Dorian Mood runs between D. and d. and is divided in a. ending in d. but
raised, or in a flat Song, has his course between g. and gg. and is divided in
d. and ends in gg. By Lucian it is called grave, and by Apuleius warlike. It
is most fit to sing to heroic Verse: for it has wonderful Gravity with
Alacrity. The Phrygian Mood has his course between E. and e. and is divided in
mi which is in b. ending in e. In a flat Song it runs between a. and aa. and
is divided in e. and ends in a a. Lucian calls it Entheus, Apuleius
religious. For it has the severe Insultation of an angry man, whence it is
called Scolius. It is impetuous, accommodated to warlike Affairs. It is also
Iambic and tragic; distracting and ravishing the mind, putting it as it were
out of it self, as Aristotle says, 8. pol. c. 5. and Plato 3. de Instit. The
Lydian Mood does take his course between F. and f. is divided in c. and ends
in f. in a flat Song it runs between b. and bb. and is divided in f. and
ends in bb. It is harsh, threatening, and merry. As Plato 3. dial. de rep. who
condemns the Lydian and Ionic Harmony as sottish. This Mood is sharp, and
according to Apuleius, threatening: and to Lucian Bacchicus. q. raging. The
Mixolydian Mood runs between g. and gg. and is divided in d. and ends in
gg. In a flat Song it runs between c. and cc. and is divided in gg. And
ends in cc. It moves the Affections, and renders them sorrowful and
contracted; because it is mingled with the Dorick gravity. Lastly, the Aeolian
Mood runs between a. and aa. and is divided in e. and ends in aa. being
raised up, it runs between d. and dd. and is divided in aa. and ends in
dd. It is mild and very sweet, being sung to Lyrick Verses. 8. The nature of
the Plagal Moods is this. This Mood is called Plagal, as if we should say
oblique or inver^ed; which has its final Key in the lowest part of the fifth,
but above the fourth: and is divided arithmetically. That Division is by
Musicians called arithmetical, Where the Octave has the fourth beneath the
fifth; which is the more unpleasant. This Mood borrows his name from the
Authent, Hypo being prefixed thereunto. First the Hypoionic Mood runs
between G. and g. and divides and ends in C. being raised up, it runs
between C. and c. it is divided in F. In this Mood, the Molity of the Ionic
Mood is rectified. The Hypodorian Mood runs between A. and a. is divided and
ends in D. being raised up between D. and d. is divided and ends in g. It
has a harsh kind of Gravity, and flattereth not. The Hypophrigian Mood runs
between B sharp, and b sharp, is divided and ended in E. being raised up, it
runs between E. and e. is divided and ended in a. This Mood is humble, and
inclines to weeping, as making a sorrowful Complaining and pitiful
Lamentation. The Hypolydian Mood runs between C. and c. is divided and ended
in F. being raised up it runs between F. and f. is divided and ended in b
flat. It expresses a kind of sorrowful Continency, and is called the pious,
and as it were puling Mood; and stirs up tears. The Hypomixolydian Mood
runs between D. and d. is divided and ended in g. being raised, it runs
between G. and g. is divided and ended in c. In it there is a certain natural
jollity. The Hypo Aeolian Mood runs between E. and e. is divided and ended
in a. being raised up, it runs between a. and aa. and is divided in d. 9.
This is the nature of the illegitimate Moods. An illegitimate or bastard Mood,
is that, which cannot aptly be divided into the fifth and fourth: but into the
Tritone and Semidiapente. And it is either the Hyper Aeolian Mood, or the
Hyperphrygian. The Hyper Aeolian Mood is the illegitimate of the Authent; which
runs between b. and bb. having below a Semidiapente, and above a Tritone.
The Hyperphrygian is the Bastard of the Plagal Mood, which runs between F.
and f. having a Tritone below, and a Semidiapente above. 10. Every simple Mood,
out of his own proper harmonical Triade, does give to every harmonical Song,
peculiar Ornaments. To wit, Fuges and Closes proper, primary, secundary, and
tertiary. Unto which, strange Closes from a strange Triad may be added; if they
be well taken. The primary Fuge, and also the Close is from the first of his
proper ^riaede: the Secondary from the highest: and the ^ertiat from the
middle. 11. Every Mood in respect of his Effect and Affection, does follow his
Radix. i. e. his Monads, Dyads, and Trias of which he does consist. Hence it is
(says Lippius) that one Mo^d is very cheerful and lively; as the Ionic very
much, the Lydian devoutly; the M^xolydian moderately; another flat, soft,
sorrowful, and grave, as the Doric meanly; the Aeolian less; and the Phrygian
exceedingl^. 12. A compounded Mood does proceed from simple Moods, and from it
a Song is called mixed. A Mood is compounded of Moods near unto him, as the
Ionic and Hyper-Ionic which is often seen: or of Moods wholly diverse, as the
Ionic and Doric; which is less used. This mixture depends more or less upon
the affected Text. 13. The Mood in instrumental Music, by the Mediation of
Chromatisme, is transposed either to the fourth above; or, which is the same,
to the fifth beneath. Hence, from a regular or sharp Mood, an irregular Mood is
made, which is called mollis. It is transposed also to the second, third, or
other Interval: So that one Mood is changed into the nature of another; as the
Lydian, into the Ionic: the Hypolydian into the Hypo-Ionic. 14. Always the two
proximate Moods (the Authent with his Plagal) have the same fifth, and the same
fourth. Thus, 1 and 2. Quartam. re sol. Quintam. re la. 3 and 4. Quartam. mi
la. Quintam. mi mi. 5 and 6. Quartam. vt fa. Quintam. fa fa. 7 and 8. Quartam.
re sol. Quintam. vt sol. 9 and 10. Quartam. re sol. Quintam. re la. 11 and 12.
Quartam. vt fa. Quintam. vt sol. But here let us place Schemes to illustrate
this thing.

Authent Moods in a sharp Song.


Authent Moods in a Flat Song.


Plagal Moods in a Sharp Song.


Of the Plagal Mood in a Flat Song.


By these Tables it does appear that the Plagal Mood differs not from the
Anthent but by remission into the fourth: when in the Authent here is an
Elevation into the fi^th v. g. if in the Ionic Mood it be vt, sol, in the
Hypolonic, it will be vt. fa. hence also the Compass of all Moods may easily be
found. v. gr. the Compass of the Ionic Mood in a sharp Song, is sol. vt. in a
flat Song fa. vt. the Compass of the Dorian Mood in a sharp Song is re. la. in
a flat Song re. sol. and so of the rest.

CHAP. X. Of Special Music.
PRECEPTS.
THus far of the general part of Music: the special remains, concerning the
various kinds of Music, which are taken eith^r from the matter: or the
Character of the matter: or the Organical Cause: or Artifice of Music.

First, From the Matter, Music is either sacred or civil.

Secondly, From the Character, Music is either great, or mean, or humble.

Thirdly, From the Organical Cause, Music is vocal, instrumental, or mixed.
That is made by the voice of man, the next by diverse Instruments, and this by
the Uoice and Instrument together.

Fourthly, From Artifice, Music is either Choral or Figural. That does in his
Notes observe an equal measure, and from the Author is called Gregorian: and
this is either old or plain.

This is such whose unequal Notes do vary their measure, and from the Author is
called Ambrosian.

Also mensural, and new Music.

RULES.
1. The asper Artery [or Windpipe] of a man, Vocal by the Tongue, is the Law of
all Musical Instruments.
Lively or Vocal Music as they call it, seeing it is the Cause of Instrumental
Music, without Controversy is the noblest of all. And if it be joined with
instrumental Music, it is an incredible Means of moving the Affections and
Senses. Also Vocal Music is called the Exemplary or paradigmatical Cause of
Instrumental Music: whatsoever they talk of Pythagoras, that he found out
Music by the striking of diverse Hammers upon an Anvile.

2. A Song which may be sung both by Voice and Instrument, is various.
To this belongs a Mottet, Madrigal, Intrade, and bound Fuge: and this of one
harmonical Triade only, or of more. Also the unisonous Simply, or multisonous,
and that through the eight, fifth, third, etc. Also to these may be referred
Songs of one, two, three, four, or five Voices, and likewise Songs of many
Voices, or Polyphoniacs: which for their perfection may swell to forty or more
Melodies. Of these the Song for one Voice is an harmonical Song potentially:
the Song for two Voices, is the first harmonical Song, in Act; but more
imperfect: but the Song for three Voices is perfecter: and the Song of four
voices most perfect.

3. Musical Instruments may conveniently be reduced to these two kinds.
For some are called Pshelaphetus: and others are called Pneumatic: and these
are called Crosta's, which only by striking do make a Concent, and by others
are called Entata. These are also called Empneusta, and they are moved with the
Fingers and Wind. Various kinds of Instruments are comprehended under these. As
the Whistle, Pipe, Cornet, Sackbut, Trumpet, Bagpipe, and the like, which are
blown. Also the Clavichord, Psaltery, Pandore, Cithren, and the like, which are
struck with strings: So also the Lute, Harp, Lyre, Tabor, and other Instruments
struck with strings. The Cymbal, great Bell, and others struck with Brass. Also
the musical Triangle struck with Iron or Steel. Or the Wooden Craticle (by the
Germans called einstrofiedel' item ein holtzerngelachter) struck with Wood. And
lastly the great Wind Instrument or Organ which is both blown and struck
together. And here it will be necessary to lay down certain Aphorisms
concerning musical Instruments. 1. The Canon, Mother, and Radix of all
Instruments, is the Monochord: which is an Instrument most simple, and entire,
made of one or more unisonous Chords; and may be divided into how many, or how
great parts you please, according to radical numbers by the bipartition,
tripartition, quadripartition, etc. thereof. And we may observe fully in this
Instrument, all the proportions of all musical numbers. And this will be the
most simple Example of a Monochord, if you shall put one Chord upon a fit pe^ce
of Wood; into so many parts as you shall divide the Wood, certain Notes being
added, so many distinct Sounds there will be, if you apply your finger to the
Chord. 2. The Wooden Craticle is next in plainness unto the Monochord. This is
made ready without any trouble, if a Wooden stick being very dry, be
proportionably divided into many parts; which according to the Order of
Proportions, being bound together by links made of a string, do afford
harmonical Sounds, if they be struck with a stick, and put to straw bound
together. 3. The Lute is the chiefest of all Instruments of Music. For no
Invention of ancient or modern Musicians did ever make a more grateful concent.
4. In Clavichords and the like Instruments there is the most evident Reason of
the Scale of Music. Those Instruments do consist of certain Tetrachords, which
are double, ordinary, and extraordinary. The ordinary Tetrachords are four. The
first is called Hypaton i. e. of greater and gravest Chords: from B. to E. and
this is the Bass. The Second is Meson, i. e. of Means: from E. to a. and this
is the Tenor. It is called Meson, because in old time when there were only
three Tetrachords, (the Tetrachord Hyperboloeon not being added) it was in the
midst. The third is Diezeugmenon of distinct Chords, which is disjoined from a.
by a Tone, which is from b. to e. and this is the Altus. The fourth is
Hyperboloeon i. e. of excellent or most acute Chords: from e. to aa. and this
is the Discantus. The extraordinary Tetrachord is Synemmenon. i. e. of connexed
Chords; so called because it is joined with a. and it extends from a. to d.
There is also a threefold progression of these Tetrachords, viz. diatonic,
enharmonic, and chromatic. The diatonic progression is by a Ditonus and lesser
Semitone. The enharmonic by a Ditonus and two Dieses, viz, the greater and
lesser Diesis. i.e. the half of the lesser Semitone. And the chromatic
progression is made by the Semiditone, and greater and lesser Semitones. (vide
triple Scale chap. 5.) This Doctrine will be clearer, if the Doctrine of
Sounds, or musical Intervalls, or Moods (as they vulgarly call them) be rightly
propounded. For there are in all Ten Moods according to a known Song. The Moods
are three times three, and one, by which every Song is made. sc. The Unison,
Semitone, Tone, Semiditone, Ditone, Diatessaron, Diapente, Semitone with a
Diapente, Tone with a Diapente, Diapason. And whosoever shall diligently
consider these Moods, shall easily know the Ration of musical Intervalls, and
so of all Harmony. And the Artificial Division of these Moods is this. A Mood,
or rather a Sound, is an Intervall or Distance from another, and that is either
equal or unlike. An equal Mood is that which is in the same Degree, and is
called the unison or Basis. Also an Unison is the conjunction of two or more
Notes in the same place. c. gr. if sol be ^epeated in the same Key, or la, the
Mood is unlike, in which there is both Arsis and Thesis. i. e. Elevation and
Demission of the Sound. And this is either continued or interrupted. A
continued Sound is a Tone or Semitone. A Tone is the skipping of a Voice from a
Voice by a perfect Second sounding strongly. Hence it is called a Second. In
the progression of six musical Voices, every next is distant from his next by a
Tone. e. gr. vt re. except mi fa joined together; which Connection is called a
Semitone, which is the skipping of the Voice into a Voice by an imperfect
Second, sounding flatly: as is the Leaping from mi into fa, and again from fa
into mi. scil. the next. By the Greeks it is called Hemitone: and by Musicians
the lesser Semitone. The interrupted Mood is discrete by certain Intervalls.
The first is Diaphonus, as the Ditonus and Semiditonus. The Ditonus is a sharp
and perfect third: and does consist of two Tones, as is between vt mi. fa la.
otherwise called the Third. The Semiditonus is the Intervall of the Voice from
a Voice by a flat and imperfect Third As between re fa. mi sol. The Second is
Paraphonus. As a Diatessaron and a Diapente. A Diatessaron is the leaping from
a Voice into a Voice by a fourth. As is between vt fa. re sol. and mi la.
otherwise called a fourth. The Diapente is the skipping of a Voice from a Voice
by a Fifth: called vulgarly Quadrimode and Quinta. As between vt sol. re la. mi
mi. fa fa. And again a Fifth is either compounded with a Tone or a Semitone.
Hence a Tone with a Diapente is a perfect Sixth, as is between vt from c to la
in a. The Semitone with a Diapente is the imperfect Sixth. As between mi from e
to fa in c. and contrarily. The Third is Antiphonus. as the Diapason: which is
the Distance of a Voice from a Voice by an Eighth; whence it is called an
Octave. And it is made seven ways i. e. from every Letter to his like; as from
A to a. from a to aa. etc. To these Moods or Intervalls there are four
prohibited Intervalls opposed by vulgar Musicians. 1. A Tritone which
contains three Tones, and is made from fa to mi. 2. A Semidiapente which
passes from mi to fa. containing two Tones and as many Semitones. 3. A
Semidiapason, which is an Octave containing three Semitones and four Tones,
reaching from mi to fa. 4. A Disdiapason, which is an Intervall by a Fifteenth;
within which there is a Limit appointed to the Voice: beyond which it may not
wander; and if it wander it is but feigned; For if more Distances then a
Diapason occur, they will equisonate with the former Distances in the Octave.

Conclusion.
AND this is the MVSICAL TEMPLE, whose Foundation is Harmony, or Concord: whose
Covering is honest Pleasure: whose Wood and Stones are the Harmonical Monads,
Dyads, and Tryads. That thou may not only enter this Temple, but build thy
self; after the diligent reading of this Synopsis which we here present thee
with: Consider those melopoetic Classic's and prime Musicians, Orlandus and
Marentius. But chiefly exercise thy self in the Analysis of many examples; and
then from that betake thy self to the musical Synthesis.

FINIS.

