THE SVBSTANCE OF Christian Religion: OR, A plain and easy Draught of the
Christian CATECHISM, IN LII. Lectures, on chosen Texts of Scripture, for each
Lord's Day of the Year, Learnedly and Perspicuously Illustrated with Doctrines,
Reasons and Uses.

By that Reverend and Worthy Laborer in the Lord's Vineyard, William Ames,
Doctor in Divinity, and late Professor thereof, at Franeker in Friezeland.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb for Thomas Davies, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Sign of the Bible over against the little-north-doore of Paul, Church,
1659.

To the Reader.
SOme years are now passed, since it pleased divine providence to put a period
to the life of Dr. William Ames, in whose death very many did interest
themselves, as no indifferent mourners. Not only those, who either under the
notion of Scholars or Friends were become his familiars; but universally all
such, who had been sensible of enjoying the fruits of his labors: And who were
fervent lovers of sound literature, purity of heavenly Doctrine, and godliness
in sincerity of heart. Knowing indeed, that in Ames, the garden of learning had
lost one of its choicest flowers, the fortress of truth, one of its stoutest
defenders, Piety its most faithful favorite, the School a most able and
reverent Doctor, and studious youth their most diligent instructor. That we
have (...) (...) (...) (...), those, who have derived (...) (...) of learning
from (...) (...) (...); ^und ^able witnesses. In further testimony are those
his elabourate (...) in opposition to the Idolatrous tyrany of Popery, and the
spreading gangrene of Arminianisme, especially his A Book so called.
Coroni^, whereby he obtained the Crown in the conflict. As also those things
which he Dedicated to both Religion and P^ty; his Marrow of Divinity* his C^ses
of Conscience, Explication of the Psa^mes, Pe^er, etc. And these his
Catechistical Commentations, which indeed he designed for the private use of
his Scholars* upon whose entreaty he laid th^n down: But things so eminently
conducing to the public, were not to be confined to the narrower limits of
private profit. Amongst those diverse ways by which diverse do handle
Catechistical Doctrine, this Author thought fit above all to make use of this
method: He takes out of the Word of God a Text most apposite, resolves and
explaines it su^inctly, then draws out examples containing Doctrinal
instructions, and lastly, applies them to their several uses. If this shall be
disgusted by some ^cer pa^at, I entreat him onl^ by little and little to remit
that prejudicate opinion, which he can deduce from nothing but a slight
perusal; and must upon a more settled introspection confess, that in this Piece
Ames has most prudently chose, and dexterously handled, the most plain and
regular method, for the Preachers function, and Christian instruction. But if
any should please themselves with any other method, they may with little pains
and exceeding profit produce a compliance between it and our Amesian System.
The truth of this is sufficiently attested, not only by our own Country men,
but also by the Dutch, French, and others, among whose Catechistical Treatises
this was and is in no small esteem.

I need not have taken thus much pains to premise a Prefatory Epistle, when
indeed I am not ignorant how that the least knowing among us, will conclude me
but weak to suppose, that I might induce them to prize this Piece by a second
motive, when the Title has already presented them with the name of Ames: But
least a total silence should bring this Work at first sight to be questioned
for spurious, I thought it not altogether unnecessary to usher it into the
world with this short Preface.

Farewell.
A Catalogue of Books printed for, and to be sold by Thomas Davies, at the
Bible over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church.
THe History of this Iron Age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe,
as it was in the year 1500. also the original and causes of all the Wars and
Commotions that have happened, together with a description of the most
memorable Battles, Sieges, Actions, and Transactions, both in Court and Camp,
from that time until this present year 1659. illustrated with the lively
Effigies of the most renowned persons of this present time. folio.

Bp. Andrews his Lectures, which he preached at St. Giles Cripplegate, and
elsewhere; with a Preface written by Mr. Th. Pierce, Minister of Brington in
Northampton Shire. folio.

A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Ephesians,
wherein the Text is learnedly, and fruitfully opened; with a Logical Analysis,
Spiritual and holy observations, Confutation of Arminianisme and Popery, and
sound edification of the diligent Reader, by Mr. Paul Bain, sometimes preacher
of Gods Word at St. Andrews in Cambridge: The fith Edition, to which is added
the life of the Author, and a Table of all the Doctrines. folio*

Hewes his Phrases in English and Latin with an augmentation of several phrases
by A^. Rosse, a Book very useful for all (...) School^* octavo.

The Preachers pattern, (...) (...) handling in 52. Lectures on chosen Texts
of Scripture, the Substance of Christian Religion, learnedly and solidly
illustrated, with apt Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses; By that late, famous
Labourer in Gods Vineyard, Will. Ames, Doctor in Divinity, and Professor thereof
at Franeker in Friezeland. octavo.

Basilius Valentius his last Will and Testament, showing the ways he wrought to
obtain the Philosopher's Stone, and taught it to his fellow*Collegians. octavo.

Ougtredi Trigonometria, hoc est modus computandi Triangulorum latera and
Angulos, ex Canone Mathamatico traditus and demonstratus. (...).

A Discourse of the Empire of Germany, and of the Election and Crowning the
Emperor and King of the Romans, with the interests of the Electors, and the
reasons why the present Emperor was lately chosen; By James Howell Esquire. octavo.

A Discourse made in the solemn assembly of Nobles and learned men, at
Montpelleier in France, of the cure of wounds by the powder of Sympathy, with
the manner of making and applying the said powder; By Sr Kenelme Digby Knight. 12.

By whom also all sorts of Latin Books transported from beyond the Seas, are
to be sold.

THE SUBSTANCE OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
The first Lords day
Psalm 4. verse. 6, 7, 8. There be many that say, Who will show us any good?
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. 7. Thou have put
gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine
increased. 8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for, thou Lord,
only make me dwell in safety.
THe scope of this Psalm is, to teach us by the example of David how we ought
to carry our selves, when we are compassed about with the greatest dangers.
Now, two things are here performed by David, which make up the two parts of
this Psalm. First, He prays for the turning away of imminent danger, verse 1.
Secondly, He sets out the effect of this his prayer, in the strengthening of
his mind, which he attained to by this means: and of that in the rest of the
verses.

This confirmation is declared by a double reason, First, By an adhortation,
which he uses toward his enemies, verse 2, 3, 4, 5. Secondly, By a profession
of his confidence that he had in God, from the sixth verse to the end of the
Psalm. In this profession of his confidence, the Royal Prophet shows, that he
places his chief felicity in Gods favor toward him. And this profession is,
first illustrated from a comparison with a very unlike and vanishing care of
worldly men, that they have concerning their own happiness or felicity, verse
6. Secondly, From the effect of Gods favor; to wit, that it brings with its
self wonderful gladness to the minds and consciences of those that have
received it, verse 7. In which words the reason and cause is given of the
former confession. And then this gladness is illustrated by a comparison of a
less joy or gladness, which yet by the world is taken for a full joy; and that
is, the joy that arises from the plenty and abundance of the goods of this
life, verse 7. Lastly, this profession of the Prophet is illustrated from
another effect, that it brings with it, to wit, security and safety from fear,
and all cause of fear; the true cause whereof is placed in Gods protection,
ver^. 8.

That all these things may be the better understood, we must know and observe,
for the explication of the words, that by many in this place, all are
understood* because what is here attributed to many, (...) to all. Secondly,
That by the word, (...) (...), is not here understood properly an external and
vocal sp^ech, but the inward affections, desire, and endeavor; because this
saying is affirmed of such also as abstain from outward speech, and perhaps
cannot speak. Thirdly, That by this exclamation [ Who will show us any good?] a
vehement desire is imported. Fourthly, That by good, all and every thing is
understood, which appears delectable, whether it seem profitable, pleasant, or
any other way desirable. Fifthly, That by lifting up of Gods countenance upon
us, by a constant phrase of Scripture is understood, the communication and
manifestation of Gods gracious presence and favor; for it is a metaphor or
speech that seems to be borrowed from the Sun arising and spreading abroad the
beams of his light, whereby he brings a certain lif^ and gladness to all
creatures here below.

Doctrines from hence arising.
Doct. 1. Our chief felicity and happiness ought above all other things to be
regarded and sought after, and that throughout our whole life.

This Doctrine is thus raised and gathered; In that David proposes this, as
his only comfort which he regarded in the time of his affliction, and which he
would regard all his life time. Now by the chief good* that properly is to be
understood, wherein our felicity consists; in which felicity, is contained an
affluence or fullness of all desirable good things. And this chief good, as it
is imperfectly here attained to, and possessed in this life, is properly called
our consolation, or comfort: It is called Comfort, because it is that, which as
it were strengthens and comforts the mind, and makes it strong and firm
against all oppressing pains, griefs and terrors, for consolation or comfort
is properly a mitigation of pain and grief, or a remedy against sorrow and fear.

Reason 1. The first reason of this Doctrine, is; because in this chief good
the end of our life does consist; and the end in all things is chiefly to be
looked on; because whosoever does any thing not in order to a fixed end, he
does it but rashly, and without reason. So he also, who lives without having
his eye still fixed upon his chief good, lives but rashly and at random, and
like unto a brute and unreasonable creature.

Reas. 2. Is, because from the regard we have to this end, all our actions are
to be governed; whereof these only can be called right, which, as it were in a
right or straight line tend to this end; and all others are wrong, and like
crooked lines, or bypathes turning out of the right, and straight way. He
therefore that lives without regard to this chief and last end, does just as
he, that intending to shoot at a Butte, would not yet look at the mark, but let
his Arrow loose at random; or as he that would commit his Ship to the wind and
waves, never looking to the load-starre, or having any care of the haven
whereunto he would arrive.

Reas. 3. Because the chief good is of chief excellency and worth, and
therefore also deserves to have the chief place in our thoughts, studies, and
cares. Whosoever therefore neglecting this, suffer themselves to be taken up with
other things, *are like unto children, who misregarding commonly things of
(...) worth, busy themselves altogether with (...)*

(...) The use of this Doctrine is for reproof, against such as seldom or
never think of the end and mark* whereunto their life should tend; and are not
careful about that perfection* and chief good, whereunto they ought mainly to
contend; and such men's lives are neither Christian nor rational, but rather
brutish and bestial.

Doct. 2. Is this, That a man's chief good or happiness cannot be found in the
goods of this life.

And this is gathered from verse 6. where this opinion of worldly men, that it
may be found in such things, is rejected, as vain. The meaning of the Doctrine
is, that a man's happiness consists not either in riches, or in honors, or in
renown, or in power, or in any goods of the body; nor yet in pleasure, nor in
any perfection of the mind, nor in any other the like created good.

Reas. 1. Because such goods do not make the man himself good, and therefore
neither can they make him happy; but they are common to the worst of men, as
well as to good men.

2. Because such goods are oftentimes the instruments and means of sin and
misery.

3. Because there is none of them, which ought not to be referred to a further
good: therefore in them cannot consist the last, chief, and perfectest good.

4. Because none of them can perfect the soul and spirit of man.

5. Because most of these goods are common to beasts with men; and yet beasts
are not capable of happiness.

6. Because oftentimes it is a man's virtue and perfection to neglect and
contemn such goods; so that such are the best and perfectest men, that make
least account of these outward and worldly goods.

Use. The use is of reproof against such, who esteem as much of these goods,
seek after them as lawfully, keep them with as great care, when acquired, and
are as loath to leave them, as if they placed their true and only bliss and
happiness in them.

Doct. 3. Is, That our true and chief good consists in our union and communion,
that we have with God.

This is gathered from these words; Lift up the light of thy countenance upon
us, O Lord. The meaning is, that God himself is our true chief good, as well
effectively, as objectively; because he alone makes us happy, as the efficient;
and makes us happy in himself, as the object; that is, by communicating himself
unto us, according to that model of the Covenant; I will be thy God: I will be
thy rich reward: And that our communion with God, is our formal or inherent
happiness, which is wont to be called the vision o^ seeing of God, and the
beatificall vision. Now to see God, in Scripture Phrase, signifies not either
the sight of the eyes, or the bare speculation and beholding with the
understanding, but the full fruition and enjoyment of God, as far as (...)
makes for our blessedness. And to this fruition and communion we attain by
Jesus Christ our Lord; and therefore this consolation must be referred to
Christ, as to its cause; and all that belongs to our happiness, must be
acknowledged to come by him.

Reas. 1. Because there is nothing else that can bring (...) and solid quiet
and peace to our souls, or satisfy (...) (...) of the nature of man; for all
other things (...) well noted by Isa. 35. 2. to be things unsatisfa^; where
also on the contrary, the fat and (...) (...) of our souls, is said to consist
in this (...) communion. And this same in like manner is preached unto us in
several places of the Psalms, That (...) the Lords House, that is, in the
communion that we have with God, our souls are filled as it were with f^t and
marrow, Psalm. 83 6. and 65. 5. And as any natural body, out of its own place,
has never that kindly and natural rest which it desires: So also man
standing without God, is as it were out of his own place, and so cannot rest
with true and solid contentment. Also as nothing which is less can fill up the
whole capacity of a vessel that is bigger; so nothing that is worldly can
(...) up the capacity of our souls, and that because our souls are of an
higher and larger capacity, than (...) whole world is.

Reas. 2. Because there is no other thing without or besides God, which for its
self, is in the last place to be desired; For all things ought always to be
referred to God, because he is the first efficient and last end of all things.
Therefore as one going a journey, can never perform it, so long as he stays at
half the way; but ought to proceed to the end thereof: So they, that stick
either at any creature, or at any worldly matter, which are but parts of the
way, whereby we ought to be led unto God; can never arrive at the end and
perfection of their life.

Reas. 3. Because there is no other independent good; for he that trusts in
him, that depends on another is not sure in his trust, because the other is
uncertain, in that he depends upon another pleasure.

Reas. 4. There is no other good, that can be imparted to all, and every man
together and at once, that are heirs of happiness: For that which is wholly
communicated to all, and every one at once and together, ought to be infinite.

Reas. 5. Lastly, There is nothing else, which either in it self is free from
all mixture of imperfection, or can keep us free from all kind of evil, or
make us partakers of all sorts of good.

Use 1. Of Exhortation, to seek God and his face and favor above all things
else whatsoever.

Use 2. Of Comfort for the faithful, who have God for their God, in Christ;
for they are partakers of that chief good, and so are truly blessed or happy,
whatever otherwise befall them in this world.

Doct 4. Is; That joy that the faithful have from the commi^ion that they have
with God, in its sweetness, surpasses all other humane delights and Joys.

This is gathered from verse. 7. and from 1. Pet. 1. 8. from these places this
Doctrine may be illustrated and cleared, as from the place cited, and such like.

Reas. 1. Because this joy is about the true and chief good; and other worldly
joys are either about false and counterfeit goods; or about such, as in
comparison of the chief, are but light and of no great value. There is a great
difference between these joys as is between the fancy and affection of a
child, that is moved by the picture, or resemblance of meat or drink, or of
some other delightful thing; and that affection* that men feel in themselves
arising from the use of convenient and (...) meat and drink, after great thirst
and hunger.

(...)* (...). Because the conjunction and presence (...) this good, is ^ost
intimate and inward to our (...)* for it does not only tickle the senses,
whether external, or internal; but it also seizes upon and possesses the soul
it self, and spirit of our mind. Hence it is also, that in Scripture, Ps. 103.
not only the soul, but all that is in a faithful man, is said to (...) in
God. In this respect, there is as much difference between this spiritual joy,
and that worldly gladness that arises from other things, as is between the
small besprinkling of the earth, with the Morning or Evening dew, and the
through wet^ing of it with a plentiful and seasonable rain.

Reas. 3. Because all other worldly joys are ^ding, temporary and but for a
moment; and do often end in mourning and sorrow: Whereas, that spiritual joy
endures to eternity, as does the good, from whose possession it arises: In
this regard also, there is as much difference between this spiritual joy and
gladness, and that of this world, as is between the flame of straw, or of
thorns burning under a Pot, and the light of the Sun it self.

Reas. 4. Because worldly joy is overcome and interrupted by the travails and
afflictions of this life, and much more by terrors and anguishes of
Conscience: but this spiritual joy does so overcome all other afflictions and
swallow them up* that not only it makes a man to rejoice while he is in them,
but also to rejoice of them and for them, Act. 5. 41. Iam. 1. 2.

Use 1. Of Admonition, That we suffer not our selves to be deceived by the
pleasures and delights of this world, so that they may not in the least take us
off from seeking of God; as the Apostle says, That the afflictions of this
world are not worthy that eternal weight of glory, which we expect in heaven:
For indeed we ought to think of the pleasures of this world, as not worthy to
be compared with that spiritual joy, whereunto we are called in Christ, and in
our God through Christ. For such as are led away by the pleasures of this life,
from seeking that solid joy in God, do as if they should rest in the smell of
meat or drink, and should so think to feed themselves, neglecting the solid
food it self, until they perish for ^inger.

Use* 2. Of refutation against that carnal imagination of the world, whereby
many think that there is no joy nor gladness in the practice of godliness, and
so they shun godliness, and the care of it, as that which is full of sadness
and melancholy: But the Scriptures teach otherwise, that the godly are called
to this, that they may always rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. and that they always are
as it were, feasting with all gladness, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 15.
15. The proper cause of this error is, ignorance and a depraved sense of their
sins, (...) in this like unto an herd of swine, who make it their greatest
pleasure and delight, to wallow in the (...).

Use* 3. Of Consolation for the godly, in that (...) their outward condition
is, yet they have (...) of more true joy, than can be either felt, or
understood by worldly men.

Use 4. Of Exhortation, that striving with our utmost endeavor, we must labor
more and more to receive, and be sensible of this joy. Now the mean^, which we
ought chiefly to use for attaining and (...) thereof, are these; 1. We must in
good (...) remove all hindrances of this joy; that is, that by repentance and
a real amendment of life, we (...) cleanse and disburthen our selves of our
sins. (...) We ought to have a true care, that we daily make more sure and
constant to our selves our union and communion with God, by diligent
examination and confirmation of our faith and hope. 3. That we (...) much and
often exercised in the religious meditation of Gods Promises, which promise all
good things to such, as have God for their God. 4. I^ ^duceth much to this
purpose, if in our selves we exercise and excite this joy, in and by the daily
praise of Gods name; that is, as well in private as public thanksgiving,
coming from the bottom of our heart, for all those blessings, with which God
has blessed us in Christ Jesus.

Doct. 5. That this joy^ and this comfort brings a certain holy security to the
consciences of believers.

This is gathered from the last verse of the Psalm. And this is that security,
wherein the Apostle ^oasts and glories, Romans 8. If God be for (...), who (...)
be against us, etc. For I am persuaded that nothing can separate me, etc. And
David every where in the (...); Why do I fear? God is my rock, etc. This
security differs much from carnal security, wherein men of this world lie and
sleep. 1. Because true and praisworthy security is grounded upon true faith,
and not upon vain imagination. 2. Because it is bred in us by the Word and
Promises, and by the preaching and knowledge of the word of God: It does not
proceed from traditions or men's dreams, and customs in sin, as that does. 3.
Because this security relies always upon Gods protection, as it is in the
Text, Thou only make me, etc. it does not rely on outward means, or on our
own strength and wisdom. 4. Because this security is fed, cherished, and
advanced by diligent use of calling upon Gods name, and of all other means that
God has prescribed and appointed us

Reas* 1. Because Gods protection secureth believers from all evil, at least
from the sting of it, by reason whereof it is only truly evil; for God has
all things, both evil and good in his own power.

Reas* 2. Because Gods presence brings all other good things with it, for God
is so good in himself, that in himself virtually and eminently he contains all
things, that can be called good.

Reas. 3. Because Gods goodness toward believers is unchangeable, so that
there can be no danger of the changing of this happiness into misery.

Use, The use of this Doctrine, is for consolation to the faithful, to wit,
that from this ground they (...) and ought to depend upon God; and lay aside
all those anxieties, whereby they may be discouraged from adhering to God with
joy and gladness.

The second Lords day
Romans 7. verse. 7. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid. Yea, I
had not known sin but by the Law. For I had not, (...) that concupiscence or
lust was a sin, unless the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.
THe Apostle, that he might stir up the faithful to a new obedience, had
proposed to them the difference of their condition that are under the Law, and
of them that are under Grace; to wit, that such as are under the law of the
flesh and sin, bring forth fruits unto death; but such as are under the grace
of the Spirit, bring forth fruits in a new obedience unto life eternal. But
because of this opposition between the Law and Grace, some might gather, that
there was then a very great agreement between the Law and sin; therefore in
this seventh verse, this objection is preoccupated by the Apostle. 1. Then the
Objection is proposed; What shall we say? Is the Law sin? 2. It is rejected
with a certain kind of detestation; God forbid. 3. The case is plainly set
down and resolved in these words; I had not known sin, etc. Where the singular
effect and use of the Law is declared; to wit, that by forbidding and
reproving, is begotten in man a sense and acknowledgement of sin, as of that
which is contrary to its self; and therefore it cannot be the cause of sin.

The Explication. By the Law is understood in common* a way and rule of
walking. Now this way and rule is imposed upon reasonable creatures by divine
authority, and the greatest obligations that can be. And this is the Law, to
wit, of God, which the Apostle here understands; especially the moral Law. By
sin here is not only understood the transgression of Gods will, but also all
those things that follow upon such a transgression, which in this Chapter is
defined by the name of Death, and is called sometimes misery: Sin is either
known confusedly and speculatively only, or more exactly and practically. Now
the accurate and practical knowledge of sin is here understood, whereby it is
efficaciously concluded in our consciences, that sin is a detestable thing, and
by all means to be avoided.

Doct. 1. Men of their own nature are so blinded, that although they be
altogether drowned in sin and death, yet of themselves they cannot know it.

This is gathered from these words;

I had not known sin. Reas. 1. Because the very mind and conscience of man,
which is his eye and light, is corrupted after a twofold manner. 1.
Privitively, In that it is deprived of that light, whereby it might rightly
judge of it self, and of such things as belong unto its spiritual life. a.
Positively, In as much as it is possessed with a certain perverse disposition,
whence it often calls evil good, and good evil: For as the eye being put
quite out feels nothing, and as the eye infected with humors, and depraved
by the indispositions of the organe, sees all things otherwise than they are
presented; so is it with the eye of the soul.

Reas. 2. Because the whole man is possessed with a certain spiritual
distemper, and as it were with a drunkenness, and lethargick stupidity,
whereby he is sensible of nothing rightly and spiritually.

Reas* 3 Because we are so borne in sin, that in a manner it becomes natural to
us, nor ever have had we experience of any other condition. As those that are
borne with deformed and crooked limbs, and never saw aright and well
proportioned disposition of all the members, do not know that their own limbs
are deformed and ill proportioned, but esteem their distortion and
disproportion to be the right proportion it self; even so is it in this case of
sin, and corruption of nature.

Use 1. Of Admonition, that for this cause we might more and more humble our
selves before God, seeing that we are so miserable, that of our selves we can
never know our own misery.

Use 2. Is of Direction, to deny all our natural wisdom; that so we may fly
to God, and seek wisdom from him, that we may know our selves and him aright.

Doctr. 2. The only way to know sin aright, and the cause of our mysery is by
the law of God.

It is gathered from these words,

For unless the law had said, etc. Reas. 1. Because the law of God does in
some way enlinghten the eyes of our mind, Psalm. 19.

Reas. 2. Because the law of God is the rule of our life, and is therefore the
touchstone, not only of the straightness, but also of all the obliquity and
crookedness of it.

Reas. 3. Because the law of God is set before us, as a glass, wherein we may
clearly see our faces, and quality. James 1. 23. Now it performs this use of a
glass to us, by a comparison made between the perfection which the Law requires
of us, and the manifold defects and deformities that are found in our life.

Questions hence arising.
Quest. 1. Whether did not some wise men, at least among the Heathen, know sin
without this Law of God?

I answer; 1. That they were not altogether without this law of God, because in
part they had it written and engraven in their hearts. But yet, 2. They knew
not many sins, which by the Law might easily have been known. 3. They knew not
sin under the first and most proper reason of it; to wit, as it was an offense
against God; but only as it was repugnant to reason in man himself. 4. They
knew not those spiritual miseries which accompany sin. 5. They did not know
sin practically and efficaciously, so as to be by that knowledge driven to a
spiritual humbling of themselves before God.

Quest. 2. In what manner does this Law of God show us our sin?

I answer; 1. It shows us our duty, or the will of God, that we should do. 2.
It shows us our fault in transgressing of this will. 3. It shows us our guilt,
whereby for this guiltiness we are bound over unto punishment. 4. It shows
also the punishment it self: for the threatenings of the Law, wherein the
punishments are contained and denounced, are parts of the Law, and belong unto
its sanctification or ratification.

Use 1. Of Direction; that in passing judgment upon our lives, we follow not
either our own fancies, nor the tenets and opinions of the vulgar, but the law
of God alone.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we often make trial of our life according to that
law; and that as well for time past, for our greater humiliation; as for the
time to come, for our caution and better direction in every part of our
conversation.

The Third Lords Day,
Romans 5. verse. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned.
THe Apostles purpose in this place is to illustrate that Doctrine, which he
had before taught concerning justification by Jesus Christ; for which end he
makes a comparison of the likeness between this grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the sin of Adam, our first Father after the flesh. And the comparison runs
upon the efficacy and effects of each of them: The Proposition of the
Comparison is in ^. 12. and the Reddition to that is after explicated by way of
Parenthesis. In the Proposition, Adam is set forth, as the cause of a twofold
effect; to wit, of the bringing in of sin, and of the bringing in of Death. And
the reason of the Connection of these effects with that cause is given in the
last words of this verse, to wit, from the conjunction that all had with Adam
in that first sin; in these words, In whom all men, etc.

Doct. 1. Sin entered into the world, not by Gods creation, but by man's
defection.

This is manifest in the Text, by man, not by God, etc.

Reas. 1. Because God made man upright and after his own image; that is, not
only free from all sin (which may in some sort also be said of all other
Creatures) but also adorned him with all those endowments and faculties,
whereby Gods nature might, as it were in a pourtrait be expressed and
represented; and by help whereof in keeping of the law, he might have attained
unto a certain sort of divine blessedness or felicity. For as there is no fault
in a pourtrait, so it be well drawn or made by a perfect workman, unless the
fault be in the Original, from whence the pourtait is taken: so also no fault
could be in man created according to Gods Image, and that by God himself,
unless some fault be attributed to God himself, whose Image man is.

Reas. 2. Is, because God did not only prescribe a law unto man in the
Creation, but also engraved it upon his heart; by which means it was, that man
had in himself a most certain Testimony of his uprightness, in which and to
which, he was created, and withal a most sufficient and ready means of living
well and unblameably to God: For the law of God perfectly and purely written in
the heart of man, is as it were a solemn Testimony registered in a Table or
Book, that man was made fit and able to keep that Law. It is as it were the
voice of God sent down from Heaven, whereby man was called and stirred up to
observe that way of living, which is taught thereby.

Reas. 3. Because God added thereunto a pledge and Sacrament in the Tree of
Life, whereby he would have that Covenant of the Law, written in the heart,
more clearly confirmed also outwardly; to wit, that he would by the observation
of his Law, first perpetuate man's life in this world unto the solemn
justification of him, at his appointed time; and then advance him to a further
and heavenly Felicity. And on the other side, he threatens Death unto him, in
case he should depart from that Will and Law of God: all which had been done to
no purpose, if man had been at first made by God himself, in any measure or
manner sinful and perverse.

Reas. 4. So far was God from being the cause of sin in the first creation of
man, that by no means it can be conceived, how God at any time can be the cause
of any sin; because, seeing sin is a defect, it can have no other cause, but a
deficient one; and God, seeing he is perfection it self, can no ways, nor ever
be deficient.

Use Of Direction; that in all our speeches and thoughts we may keep Gods glory
untouched and unspotted, and confess that all the good we have comes always
from him; but that all the evil that either we do, or suffer, arises not
from him, but from our selves.

Doct. 2. Through Adams first disobedience sin passed upon all his Posterity.

Nor did this happen only by way of imitation* as the Pelagians teach; but
also by way of propagation or natural descent. This is proved by this Argument.
If this had only come to pass by imitation, then the Apostle might as properly
have said, that Adam with all his Posterity sinned in the Angels, who first
fell from God; as to have said, that all men sinned in Adam; because they as
much follow the example of the Angels, as of Adam. For it is expressly said,
verse. 14. That death (and so also sin) reigned over them, that sinned not after
the similitude of Adam: that is, by the imitation of Adam; therefore verse. 19.
men are said to be made sinners by Adams disobedience it self.

The manner of this propagation is taken up and understood, 1. To stand in
imputation, because that first transgression was held as the transgression of
the whole nature of mankind: For as in the receiving of the benefits and
endowments that belonged to all mankind, Adam bore the place and person of all
men; so also it was but right and reason, that he should maintain their place,
either in their conservation by obedience, or loss by disobedience, until
they were capable of standing to, or falling from their primitive condition in
their own persons. Herein he was as it were the Surety of all mankind, so that
what he did in this business, was to be held valid by all, as done in their
names. 2. The second degree of this Propagation stands in the derivation, or
traduction of that corruption, which by our first transgression seized upon the
person of Adam himself. This corruption is usually called the languishing of
nature, the seed or tinder of sin, the law of our members, the law of the
flesh, lust and sin that dwells in us; but most usually original sin, because
it cleaves unto us even from our first original, and is some way natural unto
us, to wit, as in our nature corrupted; also it is the original of all other
sins: for all actual sins flow from this as from their fountain.

This corruption first and principally consists in the privation of original
righteousness, the absence whereof, so far as it is penal, is inflicted by
God* but as it is a privation, having the nature of a fault, to wit, the loss
of that rectitude, or right constitution, which we should have kept and
preserved entire, it depends upon that relation, that all men have to Adam, and
to his first sin.

Now that such corruption naturally is found in all men, is not only proved
from Scriptures, but seems also to be confirmed by experience it self.

Reas. 1. For in all men there appears a manifest perversion of our wills, and
inward appetite; as much as spiritual and truly good things are of no good
relish to all animal and natural men: but the contrary evils, which of their
own nature have no good relish, seem to them most sweet: Now as the perversion
of the sensitive appetite does denotate bodily sickness; so the perversion of
the inmost and most spiritual appetite, does point forth unto us sickness that
is inward and in the spirit. The same also may be observed of the perversion of
the judgment and understanding, from whence come so many and shameful
errors, whereby good is esteemed evil, and evil good.

Reas. 2. It is manifest that there is in all men a certain rebellion of the
inferior and animal faculties and appetites against the superior and most
spiritual faculties of the soul; which shows the ficknesse of the upper part,
as not having strength enough to govern the lower; and again a disorder and
confusion of the inferior faculties, whereby they will not be subject to their
Superior. For as as every infirmity, debility and perturbation in the body, so
also in the soul, has its cause of sickness, disease, or certain corruption
from the depravation of other parts.

Reas. 3. There may be observed in all, a certain natural crouching of our
selves to things that are below us; and a certain aversion and turning away
from those, that are above us, and for which we were made; so that there are
few amongst men, that live not more like beasts, stooping naturally to their
belly-food, and bowing toward the ground, than according to the nature of man
whose body was erected to look up to heaven and seek after God. Now as a
crouching in the constitution and fashioning of the body, is a sign of a
bodily: sickness; so also this soul crouching of the spirit does manifestly
declare some foul sickness of the spirit.

Reas. 4. There appears manifestly in all men, a certain insensibleness from
nature it self, in discerning of things truly good, and truly evil; howbeit
there is a far greater sweetness in true spiritual good things, than in
corporal; and a far greater bitterness and sowreness in spiritual, than in
carnal evils: Now this insensibleness and spiritual blockishnes is a manifest
defect, and vice cleaving to us from our very original, even as the want of any
outward sense is a great defect and fault of the body.

Reas. 5. Experience teatheth with how great difficulty and slowness men are
stirred up to things that are truly good; therefore as it is the definition of
a good habit, that makes a man ready and quick unto good works; so must it be
an evil and corrupt habit, whereby the contrary comes to pass; because slowly
and with difficulty men set themselves to any good endeavors.

Reas. 6. It is well enough known to all, that man has not the power to do so
much good, as he knows should be done, and as he desires to do: Wherefore when
one has not the power to move the members of his body, it is a manifest
disease that hinders its motion; so where one has not the power to move
himself spiritually, it is a manifest spiritual disease; as when there is
difficulty of corporal motion, and one moves his body with great pains, it
discovers a great weakness of his body; even as this other does a weakness of
the spirit.

Use 1. For Humiliation, by reason of this misery.

2. Of Exhortation, that we rest not, till we perceive that by the grace of God
we are freed from this misery.

3. For Direction, that in our Prayers before God; and in all parts of our care
for amendment of our life, we may chiefly go about this, that not only in our
outward words and works, as being but the rivulets and branches of our sin, we
be reformed; but that in the fountain and root of this sin dwelling in us, we
may be cleansed and renewed.

The Fourth Lords Day.
Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these
things the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.
IN these words is contained an argument, whereby the Apostle labors to
persuade all the faithful, that they may keep themselves from those sins,
whereof he had made mention a little before. The Argument is drawn from an
adjunct, that follows upon sin, to wit, the wrath of God, of which sins are
not only the antecedents, but also meritory causes, certainly procuring it, as
is intimated in these words; For these things: The connection of this effect
with its cause, is limited and confirmed.

1. It is limited by a description of the subject, wherein Gods wrath does
always pursue sin, in these words; upon the children of disobedience.

2. It is confirmed by rejecting of all vain shifts, in these words; Let no man
deceive you.

The Explication, by the wrath of God. 1. Is understood Gods vindicative
justice. 2. His will to inflict punishment according to that justice. 3. The
punishment it self, that is so inflicted. And in this place most properly the
punishment is understood, which in other places is often called death,
distress, severities, hot anger, and the like. This wrath of God, is said to
come against, or upon men, because as it were coming down from Heaven, it
suddenly falls upon and overwhelms, and holds as entangled in a net the sinners;
so that by no means they can escape it. In the same sense, that not unlike
phrase is used, Romans 1. 18. by the expression of the children of contumacie or
stubbornness, upon whom this wrath comes, those sinners are understood, which
can by no means be persuaded to leave their sins and seek God by true faith and
repentance; where this is to be marked, that (...) may be turned both children
of incredulity, and children of disobedience; but it agrees better to this
place, to be turned children of disobedience and of rebellion; because we read
not this phrase, the children of says, but of obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 14.

Doct. 1. Such men's condition is most desperate, because they are not only
sinners, but also stubborn in their sins.

Its gathered out of these words; Upon the children of disobedience or
stubbornness: So they are named here, as men, whose condition is much to be
abhorred, and whose example and company is most to be shunned, as appears from
verse. 7. be not therefore partakers, etc.

Reas. 1. Because such men serve a most miserable servitude to a very base
Master, that is, to sin: for sin exercises a spiritual Kingly power and
dominion over them, because they do all that the lusts of sin commands them;
and can by no means be persuaded to shake off that slavish yoke; and so much
the less, as they perceive that slavery, by so much are they the more fully
under its command, because by this means it comes to pass, that their very
will it self, and the spirit of their mind is possessed by this slavery and
oppressed: For as a brute or a man that comes near to a brute, serving some
cruel Master, takes no thought for that his condition, because of his
stupidity; neither cares nor wishes for a better; is a more full and perfect
slave, than some freeborn and free-minded man, who is by force constrained to
serve one, but yet under such servitude and force, keeps a free mind* even so
it fares in this matter.

Reas. 2. Because such men are furthest off from repentance, and so from the
kingdom of God, and from salvation: For repentance does most consist in the
turning of the heart from sin to God, by persuasion of the Word and holy
Spirit: And to this temper the obstinacy and unperswasibleness of such men, is
flat opposite; who are not only not persuaded to turn to God, but are
persuaded to the contrary; that such persuasion of converting is not to be
embraced or regarded; for such are properly called the children of rebellion or
disobedience. As therefore those diseases are most mortal, which admit of no
cure, and are but the more exasperated, the more they are dealt with; even so
also is it with such kind of men.

Reas. 3. Because these men do most grievously increase their guilt in this,
that they withstand the means, that God has sanctified for procuring their
salvation: For while they will not suffer themselves to be persuaded to that
conversion unto Faith and Repentance, they directly fight against God, and not
only so, but in this very thing, that he would, and is some way striving, as
it were, to save them.

Use Of Adm^nition; That most of all we be careful of this stubbornness or
rebellion, which is not only to be understood in common of that con^umacy,
whereby men refuse altogether to be converted; but also specially, and in every
part of obedience: For if we perceive that God calls us to this or that special
duty, it is then our part mainly to take care, that even in that, we present our
hearts to God flexible and perswasible whereunto we are invited.

Doct. 2. Upon the children of disobedience, certainly and unevitably the
horrible wrath of God comes. This is clear in the Text without any collection
made from it.

That this wrath is horrible, and altogether intolerable, the Scripture every
were testifies, as Heb. 10. 27. Apoc. 6. 16, 17. and elsewhere. And the thing it
self does sufficiently show it, if we consider Gods anger as to its intensness,
extensness and duration; as to its intensnesse, it is called in Scripture a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. Now this fire of the wrath of God consumes not
lightly, or light things only as in the superficies, but as it is said,
Deutro. 32. 22. Gods wrath set on fire will burn down to the grave, etc. Nah^m
1. 6. Where there is a most likely and pithy description. By all which
descriptions is signified, that the wrath of God does thoroughly pierce not
only into the body, but into the soul and inward part of the spirit, for which
reason in many places of Scripture, it is compared unto sharp arrows peircing
into the heart its self, and consuming the spirit and life. As to the
extension; this wrath of God contains in it all sort of evils, whether corporal
or spiritual; whether in this life, or at the end of it, and in death, or at
death. ^ither belong those catalogues or inventories of curses, that are found
Deutr. 28. and Levit. 26. 3. As to the duration, it remains upon impe^ient
sinners, John* 3. 36. not for some short space, but unto all eternity, and
without end: For as that obligation, whereby we are bound to render God all
obedienees without end; so consequently the transgression whereby sinners break
that obligation, is in a manner infinite and without end: so also the
punishment, which takes away its measure from the nature of the transgression,
will be without end and infinite, and that as well in the privation of an
infinite good, as in the endless duration of this privation or loss. Neither
ought it to seem strange, that for a sin, which is committed in a short time,
an endless punishment should be inflicted; because equity its ^elf requires
this, that every one should be deprived of that good, of which by his own fault
he has turned from. But every ^inner has turned himself away from an endless
good, by a fault he can never come out of by himself, and make an end of; and
therefore it is but reason, that he be endlesly deprived of that good. And
moreover, because he has disturbed that order that God set and appointed; it
is but ju^tice if he never be freed from the punishment of this fault, until
he have repaired God his honor; which an unrepenting sinner can never do unto
eternity.

It ought not therefore to move any, that sin, which is but momentary, should
be punished eternally.

Reas. 1. The committing of it, is as it were a spiritual wounding; and yet a
wounding, in what ^ort time soever done, does often leave behind it a wound of
long duration, and often endless and eternal death.

Reas. 2. The committing of sin, is as it were a spiritual fall, or sliding:
and yet the fall in short time passed, may be such, that thereby for a very
long time, or without end, the party may remain in the depth or pit, whereinto
he fell.

Reas. 3. The committing of sin, is as it were a ^ying with bands or thongs;
whose nature is, that it may quickly be done, and yet for ever keep the party
bound, as long as the bands themselves remain unloosed, or unbroken.

Reas. 4. It Is as it were a bargain, in which the sinner for the enjoyment or
use of some short pleasure, out of a madness sells himself into slavery.

Now from a bargain of buying and selling, though passed in a short time, the
right is conveyed to the buyer for ever; and the alienation is eternal or
endless in its own way.

Reason 1. It is as it were the putting out of a lamp; for a sinner once
drowning himself in the ^ilth of sin, puts out as it were the whole light of
his mind; and a lamp once put out, though it be done in a moment, yet by virtue
of that putting out, remains of its self endlesly extinct and put out.

Use 1. Of Condemnation, against such as remain in their carnal security and
please themselves in this condition, over which perpetually hangs the so
horrible wrath and anger of God.

Use 2. Is of Admonition, that with all care above all things else we go about
this, to show this wrath of God, Matt. 3. 7. where also the way to shun it, is
showed to be by repentance, verse 8. And yet this is not so to be taken, as if
this shunning lay in our repentance, as it is our action, and as if that had
some vircue of freeing from the wrath of God; for Christ alone is our
enfranchizer from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. We therefore truly flee
from the wrath of God, when we fly to this mercy in Christ Jesus by true faith
in him, and repentance unfeigned.

Doct. 3. All such speeches as promise impunity of sin, and indemnity from the
wrath of God, are but vain and seducing.

This is also clear in the Text. Now that they are vain, hence it appears,
because they are against his decree, and his will clearly revealed; and
therefore can have no solid truth in them. And that they are seducing, is
apparent enough also from the first author of such speeches. For the devil,
when he would seduce our first Parents, promised them this impunity in these
words; Ye shall not dye.

The Fifth Lord's Day.
Romans 8. 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh.
THe Apostle in this place expounds, why the faithful may be freed from sin
and death by Christ: The reason is given as it were from the cause moving God
to this giving of Christ. And this moving cause was the needinesse of our want,
which appears in the defect of power in any other means to produce such an
effect, as if the Apostle had said; because it was needful for us, to be
delivered from sin and death; and yet this could be effected by no other means,
therefore God performed it by Christ. The strength and necessity of this
consequence depends upon the will of God, which tacitly supposes, that God
would not have mankind fall, utterly to perish, but to be restored again. The
whole syllogism or reason is this. If by no other means fallen men could be
restored, but by Christ, then that way was to be taken, because God would that
some way it should be done: but the first is true; and therefore also the
latter. The assumption is proved, to wit, that man could be restored by no
other means; by the most likely instance of the law, which once had been of
great power, and of force sufficient to bring man to happiness: For except
Christ and the Gospel, never any thing was given of God to man, that was more
perfect and divine than the Law. That therefore which the Apostle says here of
the law, has the force of such an argument as this: If by virtue of the Law
man could not be restored, than by no other means could he be but by Christ;
but the first is true, and therefore the latter also. The Apostle both proves
and expounds the Assumption at once, from the reason or cause of this defect or
weakness of the law, to restore man; that it is not properly inherent in the
law it self, but in our flesh or corruption, whereby it is, that we cannot
fulfill the law, that so it might save us; much less by the Law rise up again
from Death to life.

Doct. 1. It is the will of God, that miserable men may be delivered from their
misery, and restored to life eternal.

This is here presupposed by the Apostle, as granted, and is used by him as the
ground of his reasoning.

Reas. 1. Is taken partly from Gods mercy, partly from his wisdom, partly from
his power, and partly from the stability of his decrees: from his mercy God
would relieve miserable men, therein to show the glory of his grace and free
mercy, as it is called Ephesians. 1. 6. the riches of his mercy, his great love,
and the supereminent riches or treasures of his grace and bounty, Ephesians. 4. 7.
for unless God had helped miserable men, that were all drowned in sin and
death, he had not accomplished above the half of his goodness and bounty
toward mankind. For that bounty that was manifested in the creating of us, was
neither fully completed in its last perfection and end, because no man by it
arrived to eternal happiness; neither was it in its self the greatest, the
highest, the fullest goodness of God; because an higher, fuller, and more
surpassing sort of goodness appeared in the preservation of the elect Angels;
and that also is far greater, which is now revealed in the Gospel, and brings
perfect salvation to mankind that is fallen. Now this was most sitting, that
the goodness and mercy of God should as well be perfected toward men, as his
justice. From his wisdom God knew the best way, whereby he could conveniently
help miserable man, and therefore it was meet that his wisdom should be made
manifest in its effect. And this is it, which the Apostle every where teaches,
that in this mystery of the Gospel there was a wisdom of God, which was kept
up, and hidden from all the Heathen; which therefore by way of excellency, he
calls that wisdom of God, into which the Angels themselves with desire and
wonder are said to look, 1 Pet. 1. 12. For such was our misery, that not only
we could not rise out of it ourselves by our own power; but could not so much
as think upon, or devise a way or means, whereby we might be delivered: But
this was the proper work of the wisdom of God himself conjoined with his own
mercy. From his power also, he had the ability of helping and bringing to
perfection therein, what he would. For so our redemption in Scripture is not
only usually adscribed to Gods grace and mercy, but also to his power. For the
highest power and sovereignty was required to dissolve the works of the Devil,
and the bonds of death and the grave, for raising of dead men to life again,
for guiding and protecting them so, as they might be brought to life eternal,
maugre all opposition of their enemy; and most of all for laying that
groundstone of the whole, and uniting the second person of the Deity, his own
Son, and the nature of man, into one Person. From the immutability also of his
decree, it was in some sort necessary for God to procure their deliverance from
death, whom from eternity he had chosen, and appointed unto life. Hence a
twofold necessity of the restoration and liberation of mankind is rightly by
some determined; on our part, the necessity of want; on Gods part, the
necessity of his immutability.

Use, Of Exhortation, that with all admiration we behold and look into this
good will of God, and with all thankfulness as well in our thoughts, as in our
speeches, all our life time we publish and praise it.

Doct. 2. The Law cannot deliver miserable men from their misery.

It is clear enough in the Text; and is grounded moreover on the following
reasons;

Reas 1. Because the Law promises no good to miserable sinners, but only to
just persons, and such as keep it.

Reason 2. Because in it self, it has no force of taking away sin, but only
of punishing it.

Reas 3. Because by no sinner can it be fulfilled, and that because of the
weakness of the flesh, or the impotency of carnal and fallen mankind, as it is
in the Text.

Reas. 4. Because though it might be fulfilled for time to come, yet bypast
sins would take away all hope of receiving the reward of Life from the Law.
Hence is it that the Law is called a killing l^tter, and the minister of death
and of condemnation.

Use, Of Re^utation, against such as put their trust in their own works, and
look for salvation from their good intentions and endeavors: which is the
error of Papists, Remonstrants or Arminians, and Anabaptists, who cry up
always an honest life, and good works.

Doct. 3. No sinner can deliver himself from this misery.

This is thus gathered, because none go above the Law. For if the Law cannot
for the weakness of our flesh, then neither can we our selves, for the same
weakness of our flesh.

Reason 1. No debt can duly be blotted out by the debtor; till paid.

Reas. 2. Because, though any one never augmented his first debt, by sinning,
yet should he in all this do no more, but pay what he owes, in so doing; and so
could not by that means make satisfaction for his former transgression.

Reas. 3. Because, if man could not preserve himself, nor did not do it, in
that integrity wherein he was created, it cannot reasonably be thought that now
he can recover it again.

Reas. 4. If he could recover his first integrity, he would be as subject and
easy to lose it again, as our first Father was at first.

Use, Of Direction, that we put no confidence in our selves, nor in our own
strength, but denying our selves, we depend altogether on Gods grace and mercy
in Jesus Christ.

Doct. 4. No mere creature in heaven, or in earth, can deliver miserable men
from sin and death.

It follows from the Text, because no such creature is above the Law.

Reason 1. Because no external thing, that is a mere creature, has in it self
that worth, that it can be a compensation for sin to Gods justice and truth,
and so a price of redemption from death, Mat. 16. 26. Yea, not all the world.
For that is it that i^ hinted, 1 Pet. 1. 18. where all corruptible things,
amongst the best whereof are gold and silver and the like, are determined to be
below the redeeming of man.

Reas. 2. Because whatsoever any mere creature, whether man or Angel, can do,
ows all that for its self, and on its own behalf.

Reas. 3 Because if we were redeemed by a mere creature, for this very cause we
should become the servants of that mere creature, and that of justice and
gratitude; as we are the servants of Christ our Redeemer, because our Redeemer,
as is already taught. But this would be an unworthy thing, and would infer a
kind of contradiction to it self: For seeing man before his fall was not the
servant of any creature, but of God alone; if by redemption he should become
the servant of any creature, he should not be redeemed and restored into that
perfect liberty, from which he fell; and so though redeemed (as we suppose) yet
he should not be properly redeemed, that is, by redemption made free.

Reas. 4. The evils that are to be removed from us, are greater than can be
taken away by any mere creature; as the wrath of God infinite and eternal, the
guilt of sin confirmed by the force of an eternal law; the command that sin and
death has over us. Of these that is true which we have, Luke 10. 21, 22.

Reas. 5. The good things to be imparted, and before that to be purchased, are
of greater worth, than that they can be communicated to us from any mere
creature; as namely a righteousness going beyond the righteousness of the Law;
and the resurrection as well corporal as spiritual; the communication of the
divine nature, life eternal, and a happiness that surmounts that of Adam in his
innocence; that is, a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 11. last verse.

Use. Of Instruction, that in the business of our salvation we turn away our
eyes from all creatures, and lift them up above in manner aforesaid to the
fountain of salvation.

The sixth Lords day
1 Timothy 3. 16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness* God
was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angelis, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.
IN these words is contained an argument, whereby the Apostle endeavors to
stir up Timothy to procure diligence and care in the Church of God. It is drawn
from the object, if we consider Timothy's Ministry, which now ought to be
busied about the greatest mysteries, and so to be exercised with greatest
reverence, diligence, and care: Or from an adjunct, if the Church her self be
considered, that was to be cared for by Timothy, whereof mention was made in
the preceding verse; to wit, because a matter of all others, the greatest was
concredited to this Church, to wit, the mystery of godliness; and so Timothy's
greatest diligence and care ought to be bestowed upon the Church. In these
words then properly is expounded the nature of the Gospel, 1. From its Genius,
or general notion, that it is a Mystery; 2. From its end, that it is a mystery
of godliness. 3. From the degree of its worth and excellency; that it is a
great, or noble mystery. 4. From the most certain and undoubted truth of all
these, in complexion and communication; without controversy. And all these are
demonstrated by induction of the parts or members, that make up this mystery,
as the whole. For seeing in every part there is something altogether singular
and wonderful, it follows necessarily that the whole mystery is altogether
admirable, and to be stood amazed at. These parts are they which are contained
in these words; God manifested in the flesh, etc.

Doct. 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ is true God and true man.

This is clear from the Text, God manifested in the flesh; and that he is true
God, appears from the following reasons.

Reas. 1. From plain testimonies of this sort, whereby the name of God is
simply and absolutely given unto Him in the same manner altogether as unto the
Father; as in this place, and so Isa. 9. 6. Ioh. 1. 1. R^m. 9. 5. 1 Ioh. 5. 20.

Reas. 2. From the divine properties that are given unto him, as Eternity, Ioh
1. 1. 7 5. Omnipotency, Ioh. 3. 21. Phil. 4 14 and the like.

Reas 3. From the divine works whereof he is made Author; as of Creation, Col.
1. 16. the Sustaining of all things, Heb. (...). 2. and of all sorts of
miracles.

Reas. 4. From the divine authority that every where is given to him in
Scriptures, as he gives authority to the W^rd and Sacraments, and other divine
Ordinances.

Reas 5. From the divine Worship, Honor, and adoration that is due unto him,
He^. 1. 8. and in other places.

Reas. 6. From that efficacy which by his Ministers, through the power of the
Holy Ghost, he puts forth in the Preaching of this his Doctrine, as it is
evident in our Text in these words, justified in the spirit, preached unto the
Gentiles, and believed on in the world.

That he is true man, from hence is apparent enough, that he was made like unto
us in all things except in sin, Heb. 4. 15. Why our Mediator ought to be true
God.

Reason 1. Is that he might be able to sustain the weight of Gods wrath, and
perform the other divine duties, that belong to the perfecting of our
Redemption and Salvation.

Reas. 2. That the works of his Mediation, which on our behalf he was to
perform, might have divine virtue and worth from his person.

Why he should be also man;

Reas. 1. Is that he might be fit to suffer and do all those things which were
necessary for the Redemption of men, and were below the divine nature alone to
do or suffer.

Reas. 2 Because without effusion of blood, or death, whereof the divine nature
is not capable, there could be no remission nor redemption, Heb. 9. 22.

Reas. 3. That the whole mystery as well of our Redemption, as of the deity it
self might be some way made familiar to us, so as to be seen with our eyes,
heard with our ears, and handled with our hands, 1 John 1. 1, 2.

Use 1. Of Instruction, That we may always keep a right and pure belief about
the divine and humane nature of Christ, both in our hearts, and in our mouths
or confessions.

Use 2. Of Comfort to all such as are by true faith ingrafted into Christ;
because in him they are advanced into a state more than humane, and are made
partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

Use 3. Of Exhortation, That we may more and more exercise our selves in the
religious contemplation, and study of this mystery; so will that love of God in
Christ, which shines forth in this dispensation of God, confirm our hearts,
that it will powerfully stir us up unto all care of thankfulness for glorifying
the name of God and Christ.

Doct. 2. The nature of God and the nature of man were ^onjoyned in Christ into
one person.

This is gathered from these words, was made manifest in the flesh, for thereby
is signified the conjunction of the divine with the humane nature, so that God,
because not conspicuous in his divine nature, was made manifest in his humane.
This communication in respect of the divine nature, is rightly called an
Assumption, Incarnation, Manifestation in the flesh, as in this place.

But in respect of both natures together, it is called an union personal,
because these two natures are together united in the same person. In respect of
the humane nature, it cannot be called an Assumption (actively understood, that
is an assuming, but passively only, that is a being assumed) nor a
De^fication, because the divine person existed from eternity, and took unto
himself and adjoined the humane nature (not the person) in time, because the
humane nature assumed, did never exist apart, and by it self, and therefore
never had in it self the formal reason of a person; and therefore also it
cannot be said to have assumed the nature, or person divine, but only to have
been assumed by it; Seeing actions are of suppositions or persons, and not of
the nature: But the divine person (not the nature properly) is said to have
assumed the humane nature, not the person. Therefore the humane nature cannot
so properly and rightly be said to be deified, as either the divine nature or
person is said to be incarnate, or made man; for that is equivalent to made
flesh, which the Scripture often uses. We read then in this place, and its
like that God was made manifest, or visible in the flesh, that is, in the
nature of man (for flesh there) by a Synecdoche signifies the whole nature of
man, as well the soul as the body, and to the like sense we read that the Word
was made flesh, John 1. 14. But we no where read that flesh was made God, or
that the flesh or humane nature was made invisible in God; although these
things may be said, but not so properly, nor so freely from danger and abuse.
But here we must not think, that for the union of the divine nature with the
humane, that therefore there was any real change properly produced or made in
the divine nature, but relative and of reason, or notional only; all the real
mutation being in the humane nature only. For whatsoever is mutable is
imperfect, but the divine nature is no ways imperfect. Therefore though the
divine nature in Christ be under another relation or habitude, than before the
incarnation; yet that is for no real change in it self, but in the humane
nature assumed: As the Sun is called illum^nating from his action that he has
on the air, which was not before (let us suppose this) and yet the Sun is not
thereby changed in it self, but the air only is changed. In this conjunction,
when the flesh or humane nature is said to have been assumed, is so to be
understood, that not only the essence of humane nature is assumed, and all
that necessarily follow the essence, but that also were assumed all the
weaknesses, qualities, and common or universal defects (which follow not from
nature, but from sin) that are in themselves si^less, and as they are si^les*
only and penal; and these only are excepted that have in them the nature of
sin, or tend of themselves to sin.

Reas. 1. Because the mediatory actions of Christ ought to be both humane and
divine, and all his actions are of the person, as of the principle which
acts; though they be of this or of that nature, as of the principle whereby,
or by virtue of which they are extracted from the person Therefore the divine
and humane nature ought jointly to subsist in one and the same person.

Reas. 2. This union of the divine and humane nature ought to have been most
intimate, and of all unions the highest, because the perfection of the person
assuming, from which the union flowed, was absolutely the greatest, but the
inwardest union with him that could be, was personal; Therefore also that union
of men with God, that flows from, and depends upon this union, is of very great
perfection, though not personal. Therefore next unto the unity of the three
persons in one divine nature, there is no other union of more things, more in
ward and perfect, than is this of two natures in one person, in Christ.

Reas. 3. The essential worth of the mediatory obedience and passion of Christ,
which properly agreed to him, according to the humane nature, ought to have
been also in some kind divine; but that divinity of worth is derived from the
person, or this union; as the esteem of all the actions and passions depends
upon the person; and therefore the humane nature ought to have subsisted, and
been sustained in the nature or person divine.

Use 1. Of Instruction, for directing and establishing our Faith, about the
person of Christ, that we may neither here imagine confusion of the natures,
nor multiplication of the Persons in any sort; but the union only of two
natures into one and a single person, to wit, the second person of the Trinity,
which is the primary principle of Christian Faith.

Use 2. Of Direction, that in seeking union and communion with God, wherein our
whole happiness does consist, we wholly adheere to Christ above; because there
alone we have the certain and manifest foundation of this union between God and
men, so that in this very respect Christ may no less truly be called the way,
than the truth, and the life; because as he has the truest and highest union
of man with God; so is he the way because of this union, whereby we may come to
the beatifical union, which is our eternal life.

Doct. 3. This of the divine and humane nature in Christ, is a mystery most
divine.

It is called a mystery, 1. As it contains in it self that divine wisdom of
highest and rarest price, or that treasure of wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. 2 Cor.
4. v. 7. 2. Because this wisdom is a thing hidden and remote, not only from
humane sense, but also from our understanding and comprehension. 1. Cor. 2. 7.
8, 9, 10. it is called a depth for this cause; so also Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. And it is
called hidden or secret, 1. because it was not possible for the wit of man or
Angels to have so much as thought upon, or devised such a means of Redemption
and Salvation, much less to have gone through with it. 2. Because it was not
revealed to the Church her self for many ages, but under a certain veil, and
sparingly. 3. Because by our selves now in the light of greatest revelation, it
is not understood but very imperfectly, and in the least part of it. 1 Cor. 13.
12. in part; a little but in comparison of the whole; as in a glass, and like
a riddle, do we know here, for the darkening and lessening of our knowledge by
sin, which is signified by these phrases.

The Reason why this wisdom is not fuller comprehended, is not in the
darkness of Scripture, as some blasphemously will have it: but partly in the
depth of the thing it self, and partly in the blindness of our minds; 2 Cor.
4, 4. unto the depth of the thing it self belongs this, that in Christ's person
highest power with lowest weakness; greatest glory with greatest humility,
highest justice with highest mercy, eternity with novelty of being, agree
together, and abide in one subject.

Use Of Admonition, that we suffer not the nature of our Faith to be troubled
in any sort with vain speculation of humane reason, whereby this mystery is
wont to be opposed: For though it has nothing in it contrary to reason; yet it
contains many things above reason, and the capacity of the mind of man:
otherwise it would not be a great mystery, as here it is called, but the
vulgar and common verity.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that we may seek from God the spirit of wisdom and of
revelation in the acknowledging of him, that the eyes of our minds being
enlightened, we may perceive so much of this mystery as is needful for us unto
salvation, and glorifying of Gods name as it requires, Ephesians. 1. verse. 17. 18.

Use 3. Is of special Admonition, to the Ministers of the Word chiefly, that
with all reverence and religious faithfulness, they behave themselves in their
charge, because they are called to this, to be Stewards of this great mystery,
1 Cor. 4. 1. where this reverence and fidelity are pointed out to them.

Doct. 4. All true godliness depends on the belief of this mystery, so that
there is no true and solid or sound godliness without this belief: neither can
this belief be true and solid* unless it have also true godliness joined with
it.

This is gathered from that title; the mystery of godliness: because godliness
both rises up to this Faith, and flows down from it. This most practical
doctrine, is the general use of all the rest that went before.

Reas. 1. Because in this mystery appears Gods greatest goodness, grace, mercy
and love; which if they be rightly taken up, cannot but stir up our minds unto
care and zeal of honoring, loving and adhearing to God, and pleasing him in
all things, wherein he has shown us, that true godliness consists.

Reas. 2. In this mystery is contained both the merits and efficacy or power,
by virtue whereof men are regenerated, that they may live acceptably to God and
Christ; that is, godlily.

Reas. 3. Because in Christ we have the perfectest pattern of all godliness,
and with all the perfectest doctrine, which is called the doctrine of
godliness, or according to godliness.

Use The use of Reproof, against such as profess the faith of this great
mystery, but in the mean time most foully profane it, and make it to be
blasphemed through their impiety.

The seventh Lords day
Acts 16. verse. 31. And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved and thine house.
IN this Text is contained Paul and Silas their answer to the question proposed
by the Jailor concerning the way how to be saved; wherein these two things are
proposed: 1. An act absolutely necessary for attaining of salvation, to wit,
that of Faith, believe, say they: and this act is declared by its proper
object, our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. The effect, that is certainly to follow upon
this act, is set down, and that is the salvation of him, that believes.

Doct. 1. All are not saved by Christ, but such only as are united or grafted
into Christ by Faith.

It is gathered from this Text; in that one careful how to be saved, is sent
to Christ, to believe in him, and so to have union with him by this belief,
that he may be saved.

Reas. 1. Because although there be sufficiency enough in Christ, and in
abundance, to save all, and any man; yet this sufficiency is not reduced to
efficiency or into act, unless a due application be (...)* as neither meat
nourishes, nor physic cures, nor cloth covers, nor silver makes rich,
unless they be rightly applied tothe party to be nourished, cured, clothed and
made rich: so it is in this business.

Reas. ^. As the first Adam neither received, nor lost his righteousness, and
life, but for such, as were some way, that is, vertually in him, and afterward
actually descended from him, or were in union of the same blood with him: so
also the second Adam Christ restores not righteousness and life, but unto such
as are in him, to wit, ingrafted by Faith, and adhear unto him by the union of
one and the same spirit. Hence it is, that effectual vocation, whereby this
application of Christ, or this conjunction with him, is brought to pass, does
in order go before, not only our glorification and salvation, but also
justification and all sound consolation, that we have concerning salvation.

Use Of Admonition, that we may chiefly care for and go about this, that we may
both be and remain in Christ, and live in him; because without this union with
him, we cannot come to be saved. The sign or mark, whereby we know, that is
ordinarily, or according to the order of means appointed, that this or that man
is in Christ, is this, if drawing virtue from Christ, as a branch drawing
spiritual ^ap from the stock, he has care to bring forth fruits to him and in
him, John 15. verse (...), 4.

Doct. 2. Faith is the tie whereby we are first united to Christ, and ingrafted
into him.

This Doctrine is couched in the Text, in the word believe: for there are three
ties of Union, whereof there is need in our conjunction with God, and Christ;
the Spirit, Faith and Love. The Spirit is that tie, whereby Christ lays hold
upon us, and tyeth us to himself. Faith, is that tie whereby we lay hold upon
Christ, and apply him to our selves, and is always the effect of the spirit in
some measure. Love, is the band of perfection, whereby we wholly give over our
selves to Christ, and consecrate our selves to his will, and is the effect of
both the former: Amongst these, Faith is the first bond by which we lay hold on
Christ. For though it follow the operation of the Spirit, as its effect, in
that respect, it is called the gift of God, and the gift of the Spirit of God;
yet it goes before both Love and Hope that are saving.

Reas. 1. Because the proper nature of Faith is, to be a spiritual hand,
whereby we lay hold on, and receive that good, that is needful to us for
salvation, John 1. 12. where to believe is meant to receive, that the true
office and nature of Faith may be se^ forth.

Reas. 2. Because a Faith receiving Christ, does also receive life in Christ,
and Faith is the principle of our spiritual life, according to that of the
Apostle, The just shall live by Faith.

3. Because Christ is not proposed unto us to salvation, but in the promise of
the Gospel; and the proper and immediate end and fruit of this proposal, is to
make Faith, or to gain belief; and so the first receiving as well of the
promise, as of the thing where about the promise is, is by Faith.

Use Of Direction, and that such, as upon another occasion the Apostle has
Ephesians. 6. 16. to wit, that above all things we be careful to acquire, keep, and
increase true Faith.

Doct. 3. The adequate object of Faith, as it justifies, is Jesus Christ, as
offered in the Gospel for righteousness and life; or the mercy of God in and
through Jesus Christ thus offered.

It is evident in the Text. The explication is, that although with our
understanding we ought to assent to all things that are contained in the word
of God; and especially to those that are contained in the promises of the
Gospel; yet the power of justifying us does proceed from no other object, but
from Christ alone: And so Faith, though it look at other objects also, yet it
justifies not, nor absolves from guilt of sin and death, but as it looks at
Christ alone, as offered us to that end.

Reason 1. Because Christ alone is our Righteousness and Redemption; but our
justification consists in the application of this Righteousness and
Redemption; Therefore Faith in that respect justifies, as it looks at Christ
and applies him.

Reas. 2. Because if all other things revealed in Scriptures, and to be
believed by us, belonged to our justification, as objects of justifying faith;
then not only the belief of the creation would justify us, but also the belief
of man's falling into sin, and of being dead therein: And so Faith about sin and
death should as well justify us, as Faith in Christ.

Reas. 3. Unless Christ be looked upon by Faith, Faith has nothing in it, why
it should more justify us, than any other virtue, or grace and gift of God, as
charity, temperance, and the like.

Use 1. Is of Refutation, against such as attribute justification to Faith, as
it is an act and part of our obedience, as a condition required of God. For
thus the strength and life of justifying Faith is destroyed, and Christ is
robbed of his glory, and the consciences of Christians of their solid comfort
and tranquillity of mind.

Use 2. Is of Direction, that we may always set the the eye of our faith
directly upon Christ, or on the grace and mercy of God in him, that so we may
from him draw Righteousness and Salvation.

Doct. 4. Justifying and saving faith consists not properly in any knowledge,
but in certain, solid or sound affiance or trust.

Justifying Faith is an act and fruit of the experience of Faith; and not the
first affiance and trust, that justifies. Our Doctrine is hence gathered, in
that the object of Faith in this place, is no intellectual or logical truth, as
such; but some good, as the object of the practical mind and of preelection,
viz. the means of salvation, which is a single or incomplex term (as Logicians
call it) in these words; on the Lord Jesus Christ; where not any thing of or
about Christ, but Christ himself is the object. Next, because Faith is said to
be busied about this object, as about a prop or stay; so that the heart of a
man otherwise destitute of all help, and about to run into despair, casts it
self upon Christ, as a stay, that by him it may be sustained and upheld; which
is intimated by this phrase, believe in our Lord Jesus Christ. By affiance, we
understand not any assent or act of the understanding about logical truth, or
affirmation, or negation; nor yet properly the confident expectation of the
will, which is assigned to our hope, and confidence therein contained, or from
thence arising; but that act of the will or heart, which properly is called
e^ection or choice: whereby we rely upon Christ, repose and rest on him, and
adhere to him, as a fit and sufficient Mediator, by whom we may be saved. By
this affiance we are said every where in the Old Testament to be united or
joined to God, as Isa. 48. 2. and 50. 10. And by this affiance properly we come
unto Christ, Ioh. 6. and are said to receive Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. which things
cannot be affirmed of any complex knowledge, or assent of the understanding,
whether general or special. It is true, that such a knowledge, on the behalf of
such as belong to Christ, is a necessary antecedent, and the cause of this
faith, and affiance that justifies; and so in that respect, it has the title
of this faith as well in Scriptures, as in commn discourse: But yet when Faith
is considered precisely as it justifies and saves, then it is understood either
as an act or as a disposition of the will or heart, which follows the foresaid
knowledge, and for the begetting whereof that knowledge does serve. From this
affiance if it be lively and vigorous, and joined with fitting knowledge, there
follows a certain persuasion of remission of our sins; and therefore true
Faith uses often to be described by this persuasion; especially when the
controversy is with Papists, who oppose this persuasion, as a vain presumption.
Yet this persuasion is not properly justifying faith, but an act of hope and
experience (rather a fruit) in him, who already is justified. It is also such
an act, that for some time may be wanting, where yet true justifying faith is,
though insirm, as experience in the godly teaches; and therefore it ought not
to be proposed in the essence and definition of justifying Faith, least so the
weak consciences of some believers should thence be heavily troubled, as if
they had not true faith, when they feel themselves to have no such certain
persuasion of the remission of their sins. It will appear then to any rightly
weighing all things, that justifying Faith, as such, is properly, the affiance
of the hear, not any complex knowledge, or judgment of the understanding.

Reason 1. Because nothing in the whole Gospel is promised to any that has
yet no affiance or trust in Christ; before this affiance therefore, nothing can
be known, that has the virtue to justify, until it be trusted on; and
therefore no knowledge going before this faith of affiance, can justify.

Reas. 2. We cannot conceive any knowledge before this affiance, which is not
found sometimes in such as are not justified: As for example, such as have a
spirit of illumination and light, but not of regeneration; and therefore fall
away afterward from that glory, which inseparably follows justification,
sinning against the Holy Ghost.

Reas. 3 Because in every part of Religion, and so in Faith also, these two
things are distinguished; to wit, to know and to do. To know what is to be
believed, and what all ought to believe; and to give assent to truths that are
to be believed, is not yet to do that which believing imports, and is the
proper obedience of Faith it self, which is the root of all other obedience,
and therefore jointly to be understood under this, as both comes from Faith,
Romans 1. 5. And in very truth such is the formal reason of obedience in true
Faith, that under this name and nature it ought to be referred unto the will
properly, because it is the part of the will, and not of the understanding, to
obey.

Reas. 4 Because by this act of the will, we have an inward union with God in
Christ, even as amongst men there is a greater conjunction, by a constant
inclination, and affection of the will, than by the judgment of the intellect.

Reas. 5. Because the act of faith is such, that by it we cast our selves
wholly upon Christ, or upon the mercy of God in Christ. But the act of the
understanding properly and immediately does not transfer the whole man, but the
act of the will, which alone therefore properly is called the act of the whole
man: Nor can it be here answered that Faith is an aggregate thing. consisting
partly of knowledge, and partly of affiance; because unto such aggregate
things, single and distinct operations can not be attributed, as are attributed
unto Faith. For example, the health of the whole body, has no distinct
operation, but is conceived as a single thing, extends it self alike to
soundness of all, and of every part; and as holiness, as it is in this, or that
virtue, has no distinct and single operation. Moreover, no more reason can be
given why knowledge and affiance should make up one aggregate thing, than
knowledge and hope, or knowledge and love, or than knowledge and justice or
temperance. Besides all this, however knowledge be aggregated with true Faith,
yet because a great part of this knowledge which goes before affiance, is found
also in the Devils themselves, neither yet can any knowledge be shown that
goes before affiance, which is not found in some unregenerate persons; no
reason admits, that this knowledge should be an essential part of Faith, and of
the spiritual life, because it is found in them that have no part of spiritual
life.

Use. Is of Exhortation, against Papists, and others, who know nor acknowledge
no other faith, but knowledge, and a certain material assent, which yet may may
consist with greatest diffidence, and most wretched desperation.

Use 2. Is of Direction, that we may enquire of the knowledge of the truth,
which is necessary for us unto Faith, and to Salvation; and that we be wary
that we rest not on any bare knowledge; but then think we have true Faith
only, when according to the knowledge of the truth, we rely upon Christ with
our whole heart for salvation, to be obtained by him alone.

Use 3. Is of Consolation, to those who with all their heart strive to rest
upon Christ, and yet cannot for a time, or presently and certainly persuade
themselves, That God is reconciled unto them, for such have true Faith, though
weak. For this certainty of persuasion, is the effect of a more strong and
perfect Faith, whereunto also in their own time such believers shall be brought.

A Question is here propounded; By what means is such a Faith begotten, and
promoted in our hearts?

Answer. This Faith is properly begotten in us by the Holy Ghost, through the
Ministry and Preaching of the Gospel, because Faith is above nature, while we
believe these things that surmount all reason, and are lifted up above our
selves by Faith, as the Apostle says, that Abraham hoped above hope, that is,
beyond humane, natural, and ordinary hope; so also they that truly believe,
believe beyond belief, or above belief. It is begotten in us by the Gospel,
because in the promises of the Gospel Christ is offered and exhibited to us;
and the efficacy or power of the Holy Ghost accompanies the preaching of the
holy Gospel. Now from these things it follows, that such have not true
Faith, who either believe nothing above what is natural, or in a supernatural
way, or else have not their Faith from the Gospel and word of God.

Doct. 5. Such as truly believe in Christ, may and ought to be sure of their
salvation.

This is gathered from the connection between the antecedent and consequent, in
the Text; believe and thou shall be saved. For as particular men while they
remain in their particular sins may be assured, that for that time they are
subject to the curse of God; so may some believers be particularly assured,
that they are partakers of eternal blessing and salvation. For as that other
assurance of the curse, comes from the Law toward impenitent sinners, or
breakers of it; so this other assurance of the blessing, comes to repenting and
believing sinners, through the promises of the Gospel. The whole order
therefore of this consolation, whereby we may be certain of salvation, is as
follows; in such a Syllogism (wherein both will and understanding have their
parts) whereof the proposition stands in the assent of the understanding, and
makes up a dogmatical Faith. The assumption is not principally in the
compounding understanding, but in the single apprehension and will, so as to
make it true and of force to infer the certainty in the conclusion; which the
heart does by this act of affiance, that being the property of justifying
Faith, and thus existing in the heart. The conclusion is also principally and
ultimately in the single apprehension and will, or in the heart, by the grace
of hope; and both it, and the experimental reflection joined with it (which is
in the understanding, and the other also, by this reflection) are the effects of
the experimental knowledge and reflection of our understanding, in the
assumption upon the true existence of the single term in the heart or will,
which bears the whole burden of the assurance.

Use, Is of great Consolation to believers, whereof they are Sacrilegiously
robbed by Papists and all such, who impugn this certainty of salvation.

The eighth Lords day.
Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptising them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
IN this verse is contained that principal command, which Christ left to his
Apostles and Ministers; and it consists of two parts; whereof, in the first,
the preaching of the Word; and in the other, the administration of the
Sacraments is commanded. The chief scope of both parts is showed in the last
words; to wit, That men may be taught and confirmed in the true faith and
obedience of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. From this place was the Creed
taken and framed, which is called the Apostles Creed* but as to the foundation
of it in these words, not first taught by the Apostles, but to the Apostles by
Christ himself, at that very time, when he spoke those words: 2. By the
Apostles at the command of Christ to all Christians, for a rule of Faith, and a
badge, whereby Christians should be discovered* as well from Heathens, as from
Jews and other Sects. Nor was there any other or longer Creed than this,
contained in the words of our Lord, in the times of the Apostles, and of the
Church that next followed their times. But afterward diverse Heresies laid a
necessity upon the Church of adding diverse articles to this Creed, not that
they should be new additions to the old Faith, but needful explications of the
same. Hence it is, that all things that are now contained in the Creed, are
referred unto these three heads, which are set down in these words; viz. either
unto the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Ghost.

Doct. 1. Though God be one in essence only, yet is he three in persons; the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Reas. 1. Because in this place Faith is presupposed, and prerequired, for
baptising one of age, whereby he believes in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and this same Faith, is as it were sealed by Baptism, as with a seal; and the
open profession of this Faith is solemnised by this Badge, or Confession, and
Creed, that our Lord himself taught, and gave in command. And these things were
not done for once, or in a temporary way, but by an unchangeable Institution,
and perpetual Covenant, they were delivered to the Church to be observed
through all ages, as necessary foundations of salvation. The consequence of
this argument has certainty and confirmation from thence, in that divine Faith
and spiritual neither ought^, nor is any where used in Scripture to be directed
to any creature, but to God alone.

Reas. 2. Because one and the self-same authority and power is attributed to
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. For when the Word is preached and
Baptism administered, not only in the name of the Father, but likewise also of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; It is manifestly showed, that by the authority
and power of this most holy Trinity, Baptism with other the like sacred
Institutions, were delivered to the Church; and that for the same authority
they are by all men to be received and acknowledged, with religious subjection
of souls and consciences thereto. The reason of this consequence is, because
however supplication uses to be made in some parties name, without respect had
to his authority, and power, and with respect only to the grace of God, to
whom we make our supplication, yet when an Institution is published as a Law,
and proclaimed in the name of this, or that party, the authority and power of
him in whose name this was done, is always declared, and is used as a sanction
or means to make inviolable the Institution.

Reas. 3. Because an operation truly divine, and an omnipotency is here
attributed to these three, while they are set out and acknowledged as the
authors of all the spiritual good things, which are imparted to the faithful,
and in Baptism are signified and sealed. For in vain had mention been made of
their name and authorities in that solemn promise, unless they had the power
and faculties to perform and perfect the things promised.

Reas. 4. Because in this place we are taught to invocate the Father, the Son,
and the holy Spirit, that by their grace and power Baptism may have its due
effect, in the same manner almost, as the same is done in the Apostles
salutation: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and
the communion of the Holy Spirit be with you all. And the reason of the variety
or little difference that is between the these forms, seems to be this; that
in Baptism, where authority and power are regarded, there the first place is
given to the Father; but in the salutation aforesaid, where regard is had to
the receiving consolation, whereunto none does attain, unless he first come to
Christ, and lay hold of his grace, that by him he may be reconciled to the
Father, and made partaker of the Holy Ghost, there in the first place mention
is made of the grace of Christ; and then afterward of the love of God the
Father. The strength of this whole argument hangs on this, that invocation of,
or praying to, and the worship of God, belongs to none but to God alone.

Reas. 5. Divine honor and glory are not only here given to the Father, but
also to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, in as much as all baptized in these
names, are directly consecrated to these three, that they may always live unto
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. And hence are these Apostolic phrases,
wherein the faithful are said not only barely to live to God, but also to
live to Christ the Son, and to the Spirit of God. This reason is confirmed
from hence, that neither it is lawful wholly to consecrate ones self to any
other, but to God, and this also is the Tenor of the New Covenant, that God be
acknowledged for our good, and we be* to him for ever his people. Hence also
hangs the direction of our whole life, that we may always have this proposed
to our selves, to be serviceable to his glory in all things, whereunto we were
consecrated from the beginning.

Use Of Instruction, that we may always keep this rule of Christian Faith,
safe, pure, and unviolated, against all the gates of hell, as the chief
principle and foundation of salvation, on which both our Baptism, and all
things that in our Baptism are signified and sealed, do depend.

Doct. 2. The divine essence, and all its essential attributes, and all divine
works external, equally agree to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. It is
gathered from the Text.

Reas. 1. Because the same name, the same honor, the same power and glory is
attributed to the three.

Reas. 2. Our Faith is here in like manner directed toward all, as the same in
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Reas. 3. All things that belong to the divine essence, are such, as can
neither be multiplied, nor divided, nor admit of variety of degrees, for their
immensity and perfection. If therefore at all they agree to the Son and Holy
Ghost, as that they do is apparent from what has been said; it must needs be
that they agree to them idemtically, that is, in the greatest equality they are
one and the same.

Use, Of Direction, That in exercises of our Faith, Hope, Charity, and in all
parts and appurtenances of religious worship, and the practice of godliness, we
lift up our minds as much as can be, not only to the name of God in common,
but distinctly, to the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, as
equally in all our addresses to be honored and celebrated.

Doct. 3. Between these three persons there is a certain distinction, as to the
form and manner, or order of subsisting.

It is gathered from the Text; because they are disposed or set in a copulative
enunciation. For if there were no distinction between them, then would that
copulative be impertinent; and it would have no more ground for it, than if one
should say, in the name of the righteous God, and the merciful God, and the
omnipotent God, etc. Which are not to be taken in propriety and rigor of
conjnction, but exegitically. They differ then from the essence, as essential,
or substantial concretes do from their abstracts. They differ from themselves
as relatives, and some ways as unlike; this unlikeliness or dissimilitude, is
in certain as it were, of their individuant and characteristical proprieties,
which are not inherent qualities, but relative affections or properties. As to
the point of order, the Father is the first, the Son the second, the Holy Ghost
the third, not in order of time, or of nature properly so called, but in order
of origination. Hence is it, that such works, wherein the beginnings of things
are most apparent, are attributed to the Father by appropriation, as the
creation. But those things wherein the second, and successive dispensations or
procurations are most conspicuous, are attributed to the Son; as redemption:
and such, wherein the perfection and last consummation are manifest, are
attributed to the Holy Ghost, as our sanctification, and glorification.

Use, Of Direction, That as well in receiving such blessings as are bestowed on
us by God, as in performing the duties of Religion and Obedience, we have
regard to (...) observe this distinction, as much as may be, to the glory of
God, and our own consolation. For this is every way a divine meditation,
whereby the hearts of the faithful are singularly affected, and lifted up, if
they well ponder with themselves, that in the descent or coming down on us of
Gods benefits, whereof we are made partakers, the beginning is taken from the
Father, the progress is by the Son, and the accomplishment is through the Holy
Spirit. And morever the ascent or sending up of our duties to God, which we ow
to him; the beginning is taken from or through the Holy Spirit, the progress is
made by the Son, and termination or resting is made by the Father. For thus
through the Holy Spirit his teaching, and assisting or helping us, we begin to
pray; that is, conceive and make our prayers here; and our prayers so conceived
or made, ascend, and enter into Heaven by Jesus Christ; and lastly, they are
ultimately heard and accepted by the Father.

The ninth Lords day.
Rev. 4. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, that thou should have glory, and
honor, and power; because thou did create all things, and for thy pleasure
they are, and were created.
A Reason is given in these words, why all glory should be given to God; and it
is taken from the effects. For that is more praiseworthy, that it be taken
from the effects, because the power and virtue of the cause, whereunto the
praise is due, exists and is properly seen in its effects. The effect of God is
creation, which in this place is illustrated, First, By his effects, which are
declared by the universality conjoined with them in these words; because thou
did create all things. Secondly, From his manner of creating; that God out of
a wise purpose created all things; and for thy pleasure, etc. Thirdly, From the
adjunct of duration or lasting, and for thy pleasure they are, and were
created. For one thing is understood by the words, they are, and another by,
thou createdst, etc. as might be evident from the tense, thou createdst in the
preter-tense; they now are in the present-tense, by which the duration of
things is evident.

Doct. 1. All things that now are in the world, were produced and made out of
nothing by God.

Reas. 1. Scriptures evidenceth this truth.

Reas. 2. Partly also all nations testify it, because there is no Nation which
believes not, and tells us not something concerning its beginning.

Reas. 3. The world it self witnesses this of it self, for as much as in all
creatures almost there appears such imperfection in their power and
mutability, whereunto they are subject, that of themselves they could not have
their own act and first existence, but of necessity they must depend upon some
pure and perfect act, and that is God.

Reas. 4. The world also witnesses this same, for as much as in its parts a
certain perfection appears, which is such, as that it cannot be the first,
and yet it is such as must needs be from the first perfection. Such are these
perfections that use to be observed in this sentence, whereby all things are
said to be made in number, weight, and measure: Where, by measure is meant the
perfection that each thing has in it self; and number that which is referred
to others, as to defect or excess; and weight, that of motion and inclination
that all have to their own ends and uses, as well particular to themselves, as
common to others and the whole.

Reas. 5. Lastly, all right reason confirms the same, because in all order of
causes, and things existent, common reason brings us to one first cause, and to
one first existence. Besides it implies a manifest contradiction, to conceive
the world to have been eternal. For if the world was from eternity, then
infinite days were before this day, and so these days are not yet ended, and
consequently this day exists not, because it cannot exist but after the other
days before it were ended, and gone. Also, if the world was from eternity,
there was no one day of the world, before there was a thousand years of the
same world, because in eternity no point or moment of time can be defined,
before which there were not many thousand of years: But this is a manifest
contradiction, that one year of the world that is made up of many days, should
be together, at once with the first day; or that there is no day of any year
before which there was not a thousand years; or lastly, that there were as many
thousands of years already, as there were days in the world.

Use 1. Is of Instruction, that in this part of our faith, we study more and
more solidity to ground and strengthen our selves, because this ground being
well laid, our faith and affiance does much more easily and freely make
progress about all such things, as God has revealed in his Word, that either
he has done, or will do about this world, or some parts of it, or other things
that require the like might and power to that which was snewed in the creation
of the world.

Use 2. Is of Admonition, That we suffer not our minds to cleave to this
world, or stick there, but that we lift them up higher, and adhere to him, that
made the world. For it were a very great folly and perverseness, if after we
know that all these things were made by God, we love the world better than God,
and for the love of the world should forsake God.

Doct. 2. God of his wise purpose and good pleasure created all things, not out
of any necessity.

It is gathered from these words; and for or by thy pleasure or will, etc.
There be some Philosophers that have said, that all created things do come from
God by way of emanation, as little rivulets come and flow from their Fountain.
But that which does proceed in this kind, must be part of that River from
whence it flows, which cannot properly be affirmed of things created, if we
reflect on God the Creator. Others are of opinion that the universe came from
the Creator, even as the form or fashion of him that looks into a glass
passes from him into the glass. Neither is this fitting to be affirmed,
because the universe is in no other subject, as the shape is represented in a
glass or mirror. Others have said, that the universe went from God, as a
shadow from its body. But this is altogether impertinent, because a shadow goes
not out of its body, but follows it by a privation of light, and by reason of
the interposition of the opacous or gross body between the light and that
place. Others have said, that the universe went forth from the Creator, like
(...) the footstep is made by the print of the foot of one that walks. But God
had nothing without himself, upon which by his walking he could imprint such a
footstep. All these had a good intention, though they spoke not accurately and
properly enough. For even as these comparisons are otherwise profitable to
raise the mind of man in the contemplation of the eminency and majesty of God
the Creator: For they point out the eminency of the Creator to be
incomparably greater, than that of the whole universe it self; and the vanity,
or at lest littleness of all things, even such as seem greatest in the world,
if they be compared with Gods perfection. For they are in respect of God as
little streams, or as little droppings are in respect of an ever and
overflowing Fountain, or of the whole Sea; or as a light resemblance of ones
feature appearing in a glass, is in respect of the solid substance or party
himself, and as dark and vanishing shadows in respect of a most firm body;
Lastly, also as the footstep of a man imprinted on the sand, is in respect of
the living man himself. These same comparisons show also, that the world and
all its parts, or all things in this universe, are certain tokens and
way-markes, ^s it were leading us to the Creator, as the streams leads to the
fountain, the image in the glass shows the man's face, and the shadow respects
the body; or brings one to find it out, as the footstep of the foot does to the
man. But the holy Scripture leaving these comparisons, is wont to make use of a
truer and fitter one, when it says, that the world so came from the Creator,
as the workmanship from the workman, and every building from its builder, Heb.
11. 10. Now every workman does what he does of a determinate reason, purpose
and will, in as much as he is a workman. And in this sense it is said both in
our Text, and every where else i^ Scripture, That God made all things by his
word, of his determinate purpose of mind and will. Yet there is this
difference between other Artists and God, that all other artificers bring to
perfection their works by diverse motions. For so soon as they have taken up a
purpose with themseves to make some work, first, they move their own members;
secondly, by their members they move other external instruments; thirdly, by
these instruments they move the matter unto the form, or act, which they intend
to imprint upon it. But God perfects his work with saying and willing. And this
is it that the Scripture every where inculcates to us, Psalm. 33. 6, 9, etc.

Reas. 1. Because there is nothing in the world, that has a necessary
connection with the divine essence; and so nothing external comes from God by
any necessity of his nature, but from his wisdom and free will.

Reas. 2. Because this is the noblest and perfectest way of working, to work
advisedly and with a freewill.

Reas. 3. In the beginning of the Creation there was nothing, that could have
the place either of matter or of instrument; nor can we conceive in God any
other power really distinct from his understanding and will. This therefore is
of necessity to be granted and believed, that God created all things out of his
own free wisdom and will alone.

Use 1. Is of Instruction, for by this foundation we may forearm our faith
against the curious queries of some men, who are used to ask, or wonder why the
world was not created before that time, in which it was indeed created; or why
such a part of it was not in such and such a manner? The Scripture answers,
that God created all things by his own free choice, wisdom, and will; so that
in this work, he was neither subject to any necessity, neither should any other
reason be enquired for, beyond or above his free will.

Use 2. Is of Direction, that from this consolation, we establish our Faith
about all things that he has revealed in his Word, that he will do. For
howbeit they may seem very improbable or impossible to our staggering reason,
yet seeing God does whatsoever he wills, and he made the whole world only with
saying and willing, it is not to be doubted of, but that he will most truly
perform all such things as he has said, that he will do.

Doct. 3. By the same efficiency whereby God created all things, he sustains
also, and preserves all things in being.

From these words in the Text; and for thy pleasure, or by thy will they are.
Heb. 1. 3. Acts 17. 28. In him we are or have our being. For as in the
beginning, when God cherished the world of waters, or the waters, the spirit
moved upon them, and so did sustain, conserve and cherish them; even so also
perpetually the same spirit sustains, governs, and cherishes all created
things. Now God is said to sustain and conserve created things, not only
indirectly, as he removes and hinders from them causes that would corrupt or
destroy them; but also directly, as he gives a conserving power for continuance
of their existence. Neither does he this alone by means, as he sustains an
infant by its nurse; and a building by its pillars; but also immediately, in as
much as being most inwardly present to all things, he furnishes the means
themselves with all their efficacy, when at his will they concur, and does also
many things himself for their conservation, for the doing whereof there is
found no virtue at all in any means. This sustaining of all things is rightly
by some called maintenance, because thereby God ^olds as it were in his hand
the creature, that it fall not back to that nothing from which it was at first
brought by that same hand. For as if one with his hand lift up something from
the ground, unless he hold it also, after it is lifted up in his hand, of its
own accord, it will fall again to the ground: so also after that God by his
omnipotent hand, lifted up the creature from nothing, with the same hand he
upheld it also, otherwise it would fall back and return to nothing again.

Reas. 1. Because sustentation is a sort of continued creation. For creation
brings it to pass, that a thing first is; and sustentation brings this about,
that the same thing yet is: So that creation has almost nothing in it beyond
sustentation, but only a newness of being, wherein it is terminated. The same
omnipotency therefore and power of God, is required unto sustentation of
things, which was required at first to their creation.

Reas. 2. Because to be, or to exist, agrees so imperfectly to the creature,
that if it were removed or separated from the first being, whence the beginning
of its being was, it would presently cease to be. For as in the enlightening of
the air, the light is so received by the air, that so soon as ever the Sun is
removed from it, whence this illumination depends, the air presently cease
to be illuminated; so is it in this busiess.

Reas. 3. Because God is so universally and inwardly the cause of the creature,
that he is not only in place of an external efficient cause, but also of an
internal, and does no whit less communica^e to things their being, than matter
and form, which are other internal causes, and essential too, which being taken
away, the essence and being of such things is taken away it self. Although
therefore many effects consist or keep their being, when their efficient causes
are removed or ceased, as a building remains after the death of its builder;
yet without the presence and power of God the creature can no more consist and
keep its being, than without its matter and form.

Use 1* Is of Direction, that we may strive to open the eyes of our mind, and
may pray that by the grace of God they may be more and more opened, that we may
see both God in our selves, and in every other thing in some manner. For that
is it which the Apostle teaches, Act. 17 27

Use 2. Is of Admonition, that for this cause we take heed to our selves, that
we sin not against God, because we are held up, in and by the hand of God. If
therefore witting and willing we offend God, it is even as if a child out of
petulancy should hurt his Fathers face, while he is held by his Father in his
arms, and in his bosom.

Doct. 4. All the glory that can be given by a creature to God, is due unto him
^y reason of his only creating and ^ustaining of all things.

It is out of the Text; Thou art worthy, etc. Where this glory is expounded by
three words, which design one and the same thing, though in a diverse manner,
because no one word can be found, which can sufficiently mark out the duty of a
creature to God its Creator.

R^as. 1. The reason in general is, Because the greatest perfection of all
divine power appears in the work of Creation, and such things as therefrom
depend. Now by how much the more the power of the cause appears in the effect;
by so much the more praise and glory is due to the efficient cause. The^ First,
Gods goodness appears, for whose sake chiefly he is ever to be glorified;
because what ever good is in the creature, all this is derived from Gods
goodness; and it is nothing else as it were, but a certain slender scent, that
is breathed from the infinite goodness of God, and flows from it. This is some
way pointed at in these words; God saw all that (...) made, and they were very
good.

Secondly, His greatest and infinite power appears in the Creation, in that by
his word, and his command he made the whole world suddenly, and of nothing, or
matter praeexistent.

Thirdly, His highest wisdom also appears, in that he made all things, not
confusedly, that there should be and remain a Chaos; but in all perfection of
order and proportion; so that to one who attentively considers things, so much
wisdom appears, not only in the fabric of the whole, but in the disposition
of the parts in one man, or in one flea, as all the wisest men in this world
can never be able either to in^itate, or to explicate, or by all the diligence
they can use, sound the bottom of it.

Use, Is of Exhortation, that with heart, ^ind, and work, we study always to
give this glory unto God, that he deserves, and which justice requires from
us; to which we are perpetually called and stirred up by all creatures in
heaven and in earth.

The tenth Lords day.
Romans 11. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things.
THe Apostle brings an argument here to prove that which he had before put,
viz. That God ows no man any thing. He proves it from the opposition thus; the
cause ows nothing to its effect; but contrarily the effect ows all to the
cause. Now God is as the cause, not as the effect, in respect of all things
whatsoever, that either are, or are done in this world. But God as a cause
comes under a threefold reason or notion; as 1. either of a procreating cause;
(...) ^im are all things: or 2. of a conserving and directing cause; and
through him or by him are all things: or 3. of a final cause, or for which; and
to him, or for him are all things. In the first notion, creation is attributed
to him; in the second susten^ation and gubernation of all things; in which two,
the providence of God does properly consist: in the third notion, perfection
and conservation of all things is attributed to God; in which the end and
accomplishment of creation, sustentation, and gubernation is seen and consists.

Doct. 1. God (...) a sure providence, whereby he takes care for al^ things*
and directs them to his own glory.

It is (...) from the Text, in as much as all things by him, and for him are
(...) (...) directed.

(...). 1. Because God is the (...) of things from reason and wisdom of the
greatest excellency, (...) from any necessity of his nature, nor yet from (...)
ca^ualtie or coaction. And in such a cause, there is always a regard had to the
end, and an efficacions willing of it, together with an ordering of the means
for attaining of that end accordingly.

Reas. 2. Because if God had only made the creatures, and had no care of them
afterward, or did not direct and govern them, the work of creation had been
but idle, vain, and as done in jest. For workmen use not to take pains to
perfect a work, and then neglect it, unless from too much leisure, and sport,
or pastime they do it; which agrees not to God.

Reas. 3. Unless God directed and governed all things that he created, his work
would be imperfect, as not bringing it to its destinate end. It would also be
subordinate to the operation or influence of some other upon it, that is not
the principal, as we see it is among men. For he that makes a Ship, and
directs, and governs her not afterward in her ^ailing; his work about her, it
is but imperfect, and as it were vain, and his art and work is subordinated to
the art of sailing, which does the other and better sort of the work about that
Ship.

Reas. 4. Common experience teaches, that there is some present and powerful
wisdom every where, that is efficacious in its workings and intentions,
whereby creatures are directed in their operations. For without it, the kinds
of all things could not have been preserved, and propagated under the same
forms and figures, parts and dispositions, through all generations. Without it
also, creatures that want reason, could not be directed to tend to some certain
end unknown to themselves, and to possess certain places most convenient for
them, and to seek the order and preservation of the universe or whole, rather
than their own particular. Without this providence it cannot be understood, how
some beastshave such instinct, and as it were some beams of a certain wisdom
imparted unto them, as they have; as may be seen, in Ants, Bees, Spiders,
Swallows, Storks, of which the Scripture it self speaks, and in many other
beasts, which are rightly said to be borne, as it were with a Law, a Book and a
Lantern; with a Law, which they follow and observe constantly* in all their
operations, in which Law a certain art and wisdom manifestly appears. With a
Book, wherein they have that Law written down to them, because it is ever
present with them, and indeed written or engraven on their souls. With a
Lantern also, because at all times they so radily read therein, and perceive
all such things, as agree to their condition.

Use 1. Of Information, that we may have a care solidly to establish our Faith
in this behalf, because providence is amongst the first principles of Religion,
whence the glory of God mainly depends, and our affiance, patience, reverence,
humility, and all the rest, that belong to the real practice of religion.

Use 2. Of Direction, that we lean not to our own, or to other men's wisdom and
providence, but to apply our selves always to lay hold on the providence of
God, that we may rely on it in all things.

Doct. 2. The providence of God includes in it self not only the intention,
but also the attainment of its end.

For all things are no less certainly for him, than they are either by him, or
from him.

Reas. 1. Because divine providence is most perfect, and therefore always
attains what it intends properly. For that is the imperfection of man's
providence, that it often attains not its end, but is hindered by some other
causes.

Reas. 2. Because if God attained not his purposed end, then would he suffer
some change in his blessedness and happiness of condition; because it is a more
blessed thing to have all ones desires and purposes fulfilled, than to fall
beside some of them.

Reas. 3. Because thence also would follow diminution of Gods eternal
knowledge. For no wise man proposes that to himself to be attained, which from
the beginning he knows, that he shall never attain.

Use 1. Is of Refutation, against such that turn divine providence into a
humane providence.

Use 2. Of Consolation to all believers, to whom God has promised, that he
will provide and see for them, so as all things at last shall turn to their
good and eternal happiness.

Doct. 2. This providence of God extends it self to all things. This is clear
in the Text.

Reas. 1. It is as much extended to all in the world as a good and wise master
of a family, has a care (as much as in him lies) of all things, that are done
in his house.

Reas. 2. It is extended to every thing that was created of God. For in the
same manner providence follows upon creation, as the Apostle teaches that
provision does upon procreation, and seeing to children and others in the
family, 1 Timothy 5. 8. For God in some sort is called the Father of all things
that he created.

Reas. 3. He has a care of all noble and great things, because the direction
of such makes evidently for his glory.

Reas. 4. He cares also for the least and vilest things, as the hairs of our
head, and the like, Mat. 10. 29. Because his wisdom being infinite, these
cannot escape it. As from the greatness of them, his being is not helped, so
from the littleness of them, he is not hindered to care for them. Oftentimes
also, from least things, very great things depend, and from vile or base
things, a noble change follows, either for the better or for the worse.

Reas* 5* This providence is extended not only to things that of necessity
are, or must be, but to contingents also, or things voluntary; because
contingents, they are mutable, and subject to many casualties, coming from the
course of many causes, and do most of all require the government of a superior
power, that they may be rightly ordered, left all should run into confusion.
And voluntary things are of a most noble operation, and of a higher nature,
than any natural things are, and therefore most of all do depend upon Gods care
for them and over them. And these things are so cared for of God, that their
nature is not thereby overthrown, but established and governed. For it is
rightly said of divine providence, that though it attains to its end with
strength, yet even in doing so, it disposes all things sweetly; that is,
according to the nature of all and each, that he himself put into them in the
Creation, and yet conserves and governs by his providence. For there is nothing
in Gods providence that brings a necessity upon any thing properly so called;
but only a certainty which no ways withstand the nature of contingency and
liberty.

Reas. 6. This providence is extended not only to things good, but also to
evil; nor yet only to evils of punishment, but also to evils of sin;
because, though evil was not created of God, and in this respect is not
properly and in it self the subject of divine providence; yet because it comes
from the creature of God, and of its own nature disorders the work of God, and
is contrary to the order that God appointed, and therefore ought of necessity
to be ordered and limited of God; otherwise the most noble work of God, if he
had no care to the contrary, would run into great disorder: and because there
is in sins the greatest confusion and disorder, therefore it is most of all
required here, that God exercise the power of his providence; in regard of whom
only evil has some kind of good in it; to wit, as far as it is ordered by
him, and turned to good.

Use 1. Is of Exhortation, that we may always have our affiance firm, and
immovable, and fixed on God; because, If God be for us, who can be against us?
seeing all things are directed and governed of God.

Use 2. Is of Admonition, that we depend upon no creature, but upon God alone;
because all things are governed of God. And then that we learn to reverence and
fear God in all things, seeing his providence, that is to be reverenced and
feared, has a hand in all things.

The eleventh Lords day.
Act. 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other: For there is no other
name under heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved.
IN these words, is contained the reason of the answer, that Peter gave to the
multitude being come together, to the question they made, about the good work
done to the impotent man, verse 9. The question was, How he was healed, and
delivered from his sickness? The answer was, that he was made whole by the name
of Jesus Christ; that is, by that divine authority and power whereof Jesus
Christ was the author. The reason of this answer and deed is taken from the
nature and power of Jesus Christ, which is shown and declared in this verse,
from its effect; to wit, that it brings salvation as well spiritual as corporal
to men. And this effect is so affirmed of this cause; that is, of Christ, that
it is denied of all others: So that there are two assertions contained in these
words; whereof the first is, that Jesus Christ offers salvation to men: The
second, that no other can bring salvation. The reason of both assertions is
given, because the name, that is the power and authority of saving, signified
by the name Jesus, is given to him and to none else. For by name in this place,
as it is referred to Christ, Christ himself is understood, as signified by that
name of Jesus or Savior; as by the name of God, God himself is often thus
understood in Scripture; but withal the power and authority of Christ to save,
is made known in more illustrious persons, titles, and solemn styles, whereby
is declared their quality, and what they import. For the signification of the
name Jesus is here taught. Lastly, regard is had to our Faith* which properly
looks at the name of Jesus Christ, and of God the Father, that is Christ and
God the Father as they are proposed to us, and as it were named in the Gospel.

Doct. 1. Jesus Christ saves us from all our sins.

This is it that is signified by the appellation of his name; and is proper to
the name, containing in it self the whole sum of our Redemption, and its
application: The end also of his incarnation, humiliation, and exaltation. Now
Christ saves us by his satisfaction, merit, and efficacy. By satisfaction,
because he removes the guilt of sin and wrath of God, that were the hindrances
of our safety, and could not be removed by us. By his merit, because he
procures to us the favor and right to all those blessings, that use to be
communicated to the sons of God. By his efficacy, because by his Spirit he
effects indeed, and works all in us that belongs to our salvation. In this sort
therefore does he save us from all our sins, as to the guilt, to the
punishment, and to the andduration, to the defilement.

Reas. 1. Because he was given of God his Father for this end; that is, he was
for that end eternally predestined, from the beginning promised; in the
fullness of time exhibited, for this end, I say (as himself professes) that he
might save sinners; in which speech the Apostle Paul glories much, as in a
(...)* 1 Timothy ^. 5.

Reas. 2. Because he was fit every way to produce this effect; that is, to
procure this salvation; which follows most certainly, even from this, that he
was for this end sent of God. For God sends none to perform any duty, whom he
instructs not, and makes fit for the accomplishment of it* Hither belongs also,
all that before was said of the divine and humane nature of Christ; and what
hereafter shall be said of the spirit resting upon him without measure, and the
like.

Reas. 3. Because willingly and of his pleasure he gave himself to the
performance of all these things, that were necessary for our salvation.

Use 1. Is of Direction, that we may yield up, and give over our selves wholly
to Christ to be saved.

Use 2. That with all Admiration of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we may
live to him; that is, as being saved by him, we may yield him all thankfulness,
and strive to do him all honor and homage to his glory.

Doct. 2. Beside Jesus Christ, there is no Savior.

This is expressly enough in the Text: Neither is there salvation in any other
etc. There are no other Saviors neither in whole, nor in part, nor joint with
him. There are no other causes of our salvation, neither subordinate, nor
ministrating, properly so called. Not total.

Reas. 1. Because none is like, or equal to Christ, that could do the same
that Christ did for our salvation. For he is the only begotten Son of the
Father, the only Imm^nue, God with us, God-man in one person, the only
Medrator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

Reas. 2. Because God gave and proposed none oother Savior to us, as it is in
the Text.

Reas. 3. Because if there were any other Savior, then such exclusive
assertions could have no place, as every where occur in Scripture. Whosoever
believes not in Christ, he shall die: The wrath of God shall abide upon him:
Without him we can do nothing, and the like. Nor yet Mediators in part.

Reas. 1. Because Christ perfectly saves those that believe in him, so that
they need not in any sort to seek salvation in any other, Heb. 7. 25.

Reas. 2. Because our salvation cannot be so divided into parts, that part from
one, and part may be sought from another; for so it might come to pass, that
one might be partly saved, and partly damned. Neither yet subordinate, and
ministering causes. Because properly he saves us by himself, Heb. 1. 3. Now the
Saviors that were typical; and the Ministers of the Word, who now also are
said to save many, together with the Word and Sacraments, which save also; all
these are only said to save, because they are the adjuncts and instruments of
this only Savior, serving him in the application of salvation before
purchased by himself; not that they are causes together with him of his
salvation, and have in themselves power and virtue of saving any, if we speak
properly.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against Papists, who many ways join other Saviors to
Christ: as, 1. While they thrust Angels and blessed spirits upon us for
Saviors, to be religiously invocated. 2. While they teach men to place their
trust and hope in satisfactions of men, and pardons or indulgences of Roman
Bishops. 3. While they will be saved by themselves by merit of their own
works, and place in them some faith and confidence.

Use 2. Of Exbortation, that in every great and lesse^ part of our salvation we
not only fly to Christ, but depend also purely, only, and wholly on him,
saying with the Psalmist; Whom have I in heaven but thee, and I delight in none
on earth beside thee. Psalm. 73. 25.

Doct. 3. All that is made known to us in Scriptures concerning our Lord Jesus
Christ, to be done, ought most of all to be done by us, as bringing salvation
to our souls.

For in this sense it is said in the Text not simply that Jesus saves us, but
that the name of Jesus Christ does it; that is Jesus Christ, as he is proposed
to us in Scriptures to be apprehended by Faith.

Reas. 1. Because such is the nature of our Faith, as it differs from sight,
which we are to have in the life to come, that it is not carried simply and
absolutely to Christ, but only as he is proposed to us in Gods Promises.

Reas. 2. Because in the word of God nothing is taught of Christ, which does
not directly make for our Faith, and for advancing and confirming of
oursalvation, Ioh. 20. 31.

Reas. 3. Because that charity and thankfulness that we owe to Christ,
requires this, that we make high esteem of all things that belong to him;
seeing otherwise we are not worthy of him.

Use 1. Is of Reproof, against the slowness and sluggishness of our minds, who
can hear and read many things concerning Christ, without any affection, or
lifting up of our hearts to him.

Use 2. Is of Direction, that we may get unto our selves that knowledge of the
name of Christ, that may be sufficient to us in all our necessities; and that
we put this in practice and use it, when we are pressed either with our sins,
or our inward corruptions, or the Devils tentations, or the worlds
allurements, or with afflictions, or when we are in the midst or danger of
death. For thus in the name of Christ we have a Magazine or rich Well, from
which at all times, or any occasion we may draw, or take something of
salvation, according to that of the Prophet, Isa. 12. 3. When ye have drawn
waters with joy out of the Wells of this salvation; ye shall say, etc.

The twelfth Lords day.
Acts 2. 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel Know assuredly, that God
has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.
THis is one of the last parcells of that first Sermon, which the Apostle Peter
made to the Jews after Christ's resurrection. It contains the principal
conclusion of the whole Sermon, as appears by the illative particle, Therefore;
and the necessity of the consequence it self, certainly know, therefore, etc.
The conclusion it self is, that Jesus is the Lord himself, and the Messiah that
was promised. The arguments from which it is deduced, are testimonies of
preceding Prophets, and the present effusion of the holy Spirit, which could be
the effect of none other, but of Christ the Lord or the Messiah.

In the conclusion it self two things are explicated; the function or charge of
Christ; and the calling to that charge. The function is included in these
titles, Lord and Christ; the calling is declared in this, that he is said to
have been made Lord and Christ, and constituted so by God. We have three names
here, that are attributes of our Savior, Jesus, Christ, and Lord, which also
elsewhere use commonly to be joined in Scripture; and between them this
distinction may be observed. Jesus is his proper name; Christ is his name of
authority; and Lord his name of power. Jesus points at the end which our
Savior had before him; Christ, the means and way how to come to that end;
Lord, the perfect execution and attainment of that end: Between Christ and Lord
there is no real difference, nor yet so great a notional difference, as is
between Christ and Jesus The Lordship or dominion, is as it were an adjunct
following that function, which is designed by the titles of Christ* Messiah, or
Anointed. But between Christ and Jesus this is the difference, that Jesus, as
before has been said, designs the end, and Christ the means and manner of
attaining it. Jesus denotates Christ's action on our behalf properly; and
Christ, his perfection for it, and reception of that dignity from the Father.

Doct. 1. Our Savior Jesus was ordained and constituted by the Father for the
performing of all these things, that were necessary for our salvation.

It is hence gathered, that he is said to be made Lord and Christ; that is to
say, that Messiah, whom all the Prophets from the beginning of the world
foretold and preached that he was to come, for procuring and perfecting the
salvation of man; and whom all the faithful with great desire looked for, the
only author of their salvation. The things that were necessary for our
salvation to be brought about, are contained in these three functions, which
are intimated in the name Messiah and Christ; to wit, of Prophet, Priest and
King.

Our Savior was the anointed Prophet.

Reas. 1. Because by outward Ministry he proclaimed and revealed the whole
counsel of God about our salvation, Deuteronomy. 18. 8 Ioh. 15. 15. and 17. 8.

Reas. 2. Because inwardly he illuminates the minds, and opens our hearts,
that we may be taught of God.

Reas. 3. Because he told us all things to come, that are necessary to be
known, and belong to his Church and Kingdom.

Our Savior was also the anointed Priest.

Reas. 1. Because by offering up of himself he reconciled us to God.

Reas. 2. Because he yet effectually intercedes at the hands of the Father for
us.

Reas. 3. Because he makes us and our imperfect works acceptable to God, by the
virtue of his own oblation and intercession.

Our Savior is also the anointed King.

Reas. 1. Because he overcame and gloriously triumphed over all the enemies of
our souls and of our salvation.

Reas. 2 Because as Prince and head of his Church he governes the same,
protects and conserves her by his efficacious power.

Reas. 3. Because he shall with the greatest glory perfect the government,
protection and salvation of his Church, deservedly shall at last not only be
called and acknowledged King, but King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

Use 1. Is of Information, that by true Faith and distinctly we may see that in
Christ, which in all our necessities may supply our wants. If we would have our
ignorance and blindness taken away, that we may fly to Christ, as our Prophet,
to be taught of him; and to seek wisdom from him; who is himself the wisdom
of God. If we be pressed with the guilt of our sins, and be accused by our own
consciences, that we may fly to the blood and oblation of Christ our Priest,
which he made of himself for us. If we would attain any thing from God, that we
may use Christ, as our Intercessor. If lastly, our own weakness, and strength
of our enemies discourage and terrify us, that we may look to Christ our King,
by whose help all the faithful shall become more than Conquerours.

Use 2. Is of Consolation, that we never give place to despair, because God
has provided for us so sufficient and able a Savior.

Use 3. Is of Admonition, that by no means we separate such things, as God has
conjoined in Christ. And they are separated by such, as either seek for
knowledge only, but care not to be cleansed from their sins, nor to be
subjected themselves under the obedience of Christ, as King; or seek only
remission of their sins, in the name of Christ, but neglect knowledge, and
other means of this, and refuse flatly to bear Christ's yoke, or to acknowledge
his Scepter and Crown.

Doct. 2. Christ was called to perform all the duties of these offices.

It arises from these words; God made this man Lord and Christ. This calling
contains in it, his election, preordination, mission or sending, and all other
things, that belongs to preparation, inauguration, confirmation, and
consummation of this anointed one now sent. By virtue of election, and
preordination, or predestination, Christ was Mediator from all eternity. By
virtue of this purpose revealed, he exercised the office of Mediator,
immediately after the fall of Adam. By virtue of his mission or sending, in the
fullness of time he was manifested; and after he had manifestly and openly
exercised these functions upon earth, the time appointed for that end, he was
taken up to the greatest glory and dignity, in which with great glory and
majesty he yet exercises these functions that become so divine and exalted a
Mediator. Whence also in the Text* where Jesus is said to be made Lord and
Christ, a singular respect seems to be carried to this exaltation of Christ,
after and in which he came as to the consummate possession of this his
dominion, in respect whereof he is called Lord and Christ.

Reas. 1. Because none could or ought to usurp or assume to himself this
honor, but he that was called of God, Heb. 5. 4, 5, 6.

Reas. 2. Because the whole nature of Christ's mediatory office stood in this,
that he should do the will of the Father, Heb. 10. 7, 9.

Reas. 3. Because in Christ an example is set down of that procedure, which God
observes in us to be brought into life and glory by him. For our life and glory
have their first foundation in Gods electing of us, and begins at his effectual
calling of us.

Use 1. Is of Information, for the establishing of our Faith; because we may
certainly know, that God made Christ every way fit for accomplishing our
salvation.

Use 2. Is of Consolation, against all terrors and tumults, whereby either our
salvation or the Church of Christ is impugned; because we ought certainly to
know, that Christ is made Lord, and has all power of restraining his enemies
at his own pleasure. If therefore nothing at present appear, from which we may
be confirmed against such tentations; yet we ought to live by this Faith;
according to that, The just shall live by Faith.

Doct. 3. All that by true Faith rely upon Christ, are made partakers according
to their measure, of the dignity of Christ.

This is hence collected, that the Apostle so earnestly exhorts to this faith;
especially if we compare this conclusion with the occasion of the question, as
it is explicated, verses 17, 1^. For they are some way partakers of the
fruition and dignity Prophetical, as they have the Spirit of Christ; as ver. 17
18 is apparent, by which Spirit they are taught all things, 1 Ioh. 2. 27 So
that in some sort they may discern all things, 1 Cor. ^. 15. Secondly, they are
made partakers also of the function and Priestly dignity, as it is granted to
them, to offer unto God Sacrifices and Oblations, while they offer themselves
to God, Rom 12. 1. And while all that they can, and have, they dedicated and
consecrated to God; and lastly, while they continually cause to ascend unto the
presence of God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgigiving. Thirdly, they are
made partakers of the Kingly dignity, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Apoc. 1. 6. As they have
through the grace of God got the dominion over themselves, nor are servants any
more of this world, but rather masters of it; and as lastly, they are heirs of
heavenly glory, and receive the right and first fruits of it in this life.

Reas. 1. Because so great is the spiritual and mystical union, that believers
have with their head, that they must of necessity some way or other participate
of his dignity, as the members of the body partake of the dignity of the head,
and as the Wife participates of the dignity of her Husband.

Reas. 2. Because all things that Christ does as Mediator, he does them for us,
and to our good, in our name, and in a manner in our person; that is,
representing, and standing in our stead.

Reas. 3. Bceause so great is the love of Christ toward his own, that he would
have that is his, as far as can be, to be communicated to others.

Use 1. Is of Information, that we may umderstand the force and reason of this
name, whereby we are called Christians. Now believers were rather called
Christians, than Iesu^s, because as has been said, Jesus properly denotats
Christ's action of ^aving us, but Christ the receiving of that offi^e; so that
we are not made saviors of our selves so much, as fitted receivers of this
salvation from him. For what he does as our Jesus, this he does not communicate
to us, but only the fruit of it; but what he received as our Christ* therefore
he received it, that to us he might some way communicate it, and make us fit to
receive it of him. Such therefore alone are truly Christians, that have
spiritual and effectual communion with Christ, or with God in Christ.

Use 2. Is of Admoni ion, that we make not the divine name of Christian to be
dishonored and blasphemed by the filthiness of our life and manners.

The thirteenth Lords day.
Mat. 16. 16. Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.
THis is Peter's answer to the question propounded by Christ to the Apostles.
The question was about their judgment and faith, as to the person of our
Savior. In the answer, there is contained the confession of the Disciples
concerning Christ, and together with this, a description of Christ. In this
description the person of our Savior is described; 1. From his office, Thou
art Christ. 2. From his essence, which is pointed out to us by his essential
relation to that principle, from whence he came forth. This principle is God,
who is illustrated by his attribute of life, the living God. The relation of
our Savior to God, is that of a Son to a Father; the Son of the living God.
And he is also illustrated by a tacit comparison of that unlikeness, that is
between this Son and others that use to get the same name also: And this
comparison is illustrated to us in the particle prefixed to Son; the Son, or
that Son.

Doct. 1. Jesus Christ is the coeternal or natural Son of God.

He is called the Son of God, because he proceeds from the Father, not by way
of creation, but by way of generation. And generation is here used by
similitude or proportion, that this emanation of the Son from the Father, has
with that production, which a child has from its parent; in the comparison of
which similitude or analogy, as in all others that are attributed to God, the
perfections only of the denomination are to be understood to agree; and all
the imperfections and defects are to be removed in our thoughts. Hence, that
which is proper to corporal generation, that he who begets, does it with some
transmutation; and that the thing begotten, is something out of the begetter;
these are not to be imagined in this divine mystery; nor that which is found in
the spiritual generation, in, or by a creature; to wit, that the thing begotten
is of another essence from that of the begetter, as in the production of the
w^rd of the mind in humane understanding. But the perfection that is in the
generation of a body; to wit, that the begotten be in essence and nature like
unto the begetter, is here to be con oyned with that perfection that is found
in spiritual generation of creatures; to wit, that the begotten be in the
begetter, by the most inward and inseparable way of being so; and so we come
^ighest to apprehend, that which can be conceived or apprehended of this divine
generation of the Son by the Father. For Christ proceeding from God the Father,
has the same common nature and essence with him, and is his substantial image,
Heb. 1. 3. Yet he remains still in the Father, and the Father in him, without
total separation of either from other, as God understanding himself, is in God
understood by himself; and God understood by himself, is in God understanding
himself.

Use 1. Is of Consolation, toward all believers* because while they have
communion with Christ, who is the Son, and heir of all the goods of the Father,
they may thence see their felicity; to wit, that they are coheirs with Christ
in the heirship of life and eternal glory, Romans 8. 7.

Use 2. Is of Admonition, to all, that they hear the voice of Christ with all
submission, according to that command sent down from heaven, This is my Son in
whom I am well pleased, hear him.

Doct. 2. Christ is the Son of God in a far more perfect, and a divine way,
than any creature is.

This is from the particle The, or That Son. The reason is, because Christ is
the Son of God by nature, not by adoption, or creation. Christ is called the
natural Son of God, not because in his first or proper nature he is the Son of
God; for so the good Angels may be called the natural Sons of God, if they be
compared with men, who now after the fall, are not thus the natural Sons of
God, but only in their second nature and generation; that is, their
regeneration and adoption: but Christ is the natural Son of God, because the
Father begot him, not of free choice, or decree of wisdom and will going
before, but of natural necessity, as light engenders light. Moreover Christ
has the same most single and singular nature with the Father; whereof there can
be no resemblance found on earth, in any creature, but that which is unperfect.
Therefore Christ is also called the only Son of God, and the only begotten.
For though as to the general denomination, he has many, whom he vouchsafes to
call brothers; yet as to the special manner* and foundation of this filiation
of his, he has no brothers at all, or like unto himself, nor can he have any.

Use 1. Is of Direction, of our Faith and thoughts about Christ. For though we
use the same words of Christ, and of our selves, in relation to God, for the
^overty and want of peculiar, and more proper expressions; because God is
called the father of Christ, and our Father; and we together with Christ are
called the sons of God; yet we ought always to conceive all divine
perfection in these titles and words, that are attributed to Christ; and in the
same, as attributed unto us a far inferior dignity, yet which is sufficient
enough to our consolation.

Use 2. Is of Information, how we ought to seek all that belong to our
adoption, and happiness, only in Christ, and by him. For because Christ is
that son of God, in whom is the principality, and all the excellency of divine
filiation, or sonship; therefore in him, and by him, we always ought to seek
all* our participation of this dignity, that we can have, or may crave.

Doct. 3. Christ is the supreme Lord in the Church of God.

Though this be not expressed in our Text, yet because it is in order conjoined
with the antecedent words in the Apostles Creed (commonly so called) it will be
conveniently in this place joined to the preceding matter. It is thus gathered
from our Text; Peter in the words set down had regard to the Messiah, whom all
the Prophets had preached, that he would be a King, a Lord, and a most glorious
vindicator or restorer of his people And hither also the particle the or that
looks in part. For such a Messiah the Jews at that time did look for, as
appears from Ioh. ^. 10. Thou art that son of God, thou art the King of Israel;
as also in the words of the High Priest, Mat. 26. 63* And Christ in his answer
following, explaines the matter, how that his dominion is contained in these
words.

Reas. 1. Because Christ is one and the self same God with the Father; and God
is the Lord of all that he made, as well in the order of grace, as of nature;
so also Christ is Lord of them all by right of creation; for by him all things
were made, and by right of sustentation, because he sustains all that he made,
with his mighty hand, Heb. 1. 3.

Reas. 2. Christ he is Mediator, is Lord of the Church by right of Redemption.
For he that redeemed the whole, bought the whole man to himself; therefore he
has him in whole and in part in his power, and that by a debt of justice;
whereunto also accrues another debt of thankfulness: Whence it comes to pass,
that a redeemed one wholly yields and gives up himself to his Redeemer.

Reas. 3. As Christ is considered, as the party to whom we subject our selves,
and oblige our truth and fidelity to him by a most holy Sacrament, oath or vow
sealed sole^ly with an outward badge or confession; so he is our Lord by right*
of contract or bargain, of Covenant, of our religious assurance or truth
giving, and of our promise. And for these two last reasons, more peculiarly and
specially he is every where in the New Testament called our Lord, even when he
is together named with the Father and with the Holy Spirit, viz. because he
alone is thus our Lord in our nature, he is only our Lord, who thus only
redeemed us. Lastly, we in special manner choose him to be our Lord, in our
calling to Faith, by our answer of a good conscience, as Peter calls it; whence
it is also, that we are called Christians, or subjects of Christ, and his
Kingdom and call upon his name, as his name is called upon us, and professed
that he is our Lord.

Use 1. Is of Instruction, to establish our Faith, concerning the Godhead of
Christ; because none either can or may be called our Lord absolutely, or God of
the Church, except God alone. For,

First, God only is the Lord of man's life, and of such things as belong to the
goods of nature. For Magistrates and Commonwealths are only by Gods
institution keepers of the lives of their subjects under them, in order to the
public good of all: and every Citizen or Subject is but a tutor and keeper of
his own life, and no absolute Lord, or maker of it.

Secondly, God only may use, or apply to his use the whole man according to
his own free arbitrament.

Thirdly, The things that belong to the goods of grace, are of a more noble
rank, than those of nature. If therefore God alone be Lord of this natural
life, than much more must it be granted, that he is only Lord of grace and
spiritual life.

Fourthly, He that discharges the part of Lord of the Church of God, ought of
necessiity to be omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent, because to him
belongs to have the care over the Church, and all its members dispersed over
all the earth, and under the whole compass of heaven, and to direct them in all
their ways, and defend them against all sorts of evils, and lastly, to heap
upon them all sort of good to their happiness. Seeing then this is the sole^e
title of Christ, that he is Lord in the Church of God, it follows necessarily
that he is also essentially and by nature God, and not by office only.

Use 2. Is of Consolation, to all the faithful, that they have him for their
Lord, who gave himself to the death for them.

Use 3. Is of Admonition, that we subject our selves wholly to this Lord, and
his will; and do him all honor in all and every part of our life and
conversation.

The fourteenth Lords day.
Mat. 1. 20. But while he thought on these things, behold the Angel of the
Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her, is of the
Holy Ghost.
THese words contain a reason given by the Angel of the Lord, why Joseph
should receive his wife Mary. And the reason is, from removing the cause, for
which Joseph might have been induced to put her away. Now the cause was, that
she appeared to be with child by another than her own husband. This cause is
removed, by putting another unblamable cause in its place; and this cause is
determined by the Angel to be the Holy Ghost. The effect then is placed with
its causes in this enunciation. The effect then is Jesus Christ, as to his
humane nature. The causes are two; to wit, the Holy Ghost, and the Virgin Mary.
Mary is the efficient cause less principal, and supplier also of the material
cause; but the Holy Ghost is the most principal and first cause, which brings
the less principal efficient, and the material together into acting, for the
production of this effect.

Doct. 1. Christ the Son of God took unto himself into the unity of his person,
the nature of man truly such, together with the conditions of humane weakness.

This is taught in the Text. When it is said, In time a man born and begotten
of a woman* it is but the same expressed in these words of the Creed, conceived
of the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, etc. He might have assumed the
nature of another creature, as of Angels; he might also have assumed man's
nature in its greatest perfection, as Adam was made (who was never in propriety
of speech) either conceived, or born an infant. But it was his pleasure to
assume the nature of man truly such, and in this manner of sinless
imperfections, and not of Angels.

Reas. 1. That he might do man's business and work; that is, make satisfaction
for them, and save them.

Reas. 2. He would also take this our nature in its weak and low condition;

First, Because he would come down (as far as could be without sin) into the
same very place and condition, out of which he intended to lift us up higher.

Secondly, That by this means he might some way sanctify all the states and
conditions of humane life, least any might imagine that any such low* estate
separateth a man from communion with Christ.

Thirdly, That he might leave this to us in his own experience as a pledge of
his knowledge and like sufferings and affections with us, from whence he might
look upon our infirmities.

Use 1. Is of Information, for establishing our Faith on this behalf, that we
give no place to fantastical imaginations of Heretics, who impugn directly
or indirectly, and fight against the humane nature of Christ; which sort of
errors are some way countenanced by Papists, in their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; and by Ubiquitaries in theirs of Consubstantiation, in as
much as they attribute omnipresence and other the like divine attributes to the
humane nature, which is no way agreeable unto the same.

Use 2. Is of Exhortation, to extol and solemnly to praise the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with all admiration and thanksgiving, who not only
vouchsafes to become man for us, but also in the nature of man disdained not to
become an infant, to be conceived, and born after our manner; and to undergo
other the like infirmities and humiliations for our sake; it is that the
Apostle points at, Heb. 2. 16, 17.

Use 3. Is of Consolation, that we should make no difference between an infant
newly conceived, or born, and a perfect man, or one of age; or between any
other conditions of the nature and life of man, as to our interest in Christ,
as if any sinless condition of nature could make us less regardable by him,
(...) exclude us from him. For Christ descended to the lowest and imperfectest
sinless degree and condition of the life of man; in that he was, 1. conceived;
and 2. shut up in his mothers womb the ordinary time of other births; and 3.
born.

Doct. 2. Christ assumed this humane nature from Mary, as from his Mother.

For though he is said in the Text to be begotten in her; yet elsewhere he is
said to be made after the flesh of the seed of a woman; and a woman is said to
have conceived him, and to have born him as her son; hence also he is called
the son of Mary, the son of David, the son of Abraham, and the like; whereby
that phrase is expounded, and the truth of it confirmed.

Reas. 1. He should have been born of a woman, as of his mother, to the end
that that first Evangelicall promise of the seed of the woman, that was to
tread down the serpent's head, might be fulfilled.

Reas. 2. It was according to right that he was born of Mary, that so it might
be certain, how he descended of the Tribe of Judah* and of the Family of David,
according to the promises, and prophesies that went before of him.

Use 1. Is of Refutation, against Anabaptists, and such like, who
phantastically think that the humanity of Christ only passed through Mary, and
was not assumed from her nature. Of which imagination the first reason seems to
have been, that some simple men could not conceive, how any could without sin
be born of a woman after the fall. But the Anabaptists afterward, though they
took away this ground of their error, of denying original sin, yet they
adhered to this conclusion of mere wilfulness, without any reason.

Use 2. Is of Information, for directing our Faith about Christ's sonship. For
he is the Son of God and the son of man both, yet so, as he is not two sons,
but in a certain way twice one son in one person. The first, from eternity; the
next, in time; and consequently two ways a son, as both by generation eternal,
and by generation in time; yet but one son of God, and of man, because but one
person, who according to his divine nature is the Son of God, and according to
his humane nature is the son of man: So is every man twice a Son, in essence
first to father and paternal generation, and then to mother and maternal
generation.

Doct. 3. Christ was born of Mary, remaining still a virgin after he was born.

This is gathered from the scope of the words; the question being about this,
whether Mary were a virgin or no; and the words of the Angel were to assure
him, that she was.

Reas. 1. Is, that this might be a singular and miraculous sign to the whole
house of Israel, and this is it that is pointed at, in Isa* 1. 14.

Reas. 2. That the prophesies going before of this thing might be fulfilled.

Reas. 3. That Gods omnipotency in this so divine a mystery, and principal a
work of God, might be evidently shown. Now it was not difficult to the power of
God, that a son should be born of a virgin. For seeing all second causes act by
their virtue which they received from God, it is not to be doubted, but that
God can produce all these effects, without this o^ that cause cooperating,
which otherwise use to exist by them. Yet not only the power of God appeared
in that work, but also his wisdom, to which it was most agreeable, that so
singular a substance of humane nature, should in as singular a manner be
brought to pass, that differed from all others. For in three manners all men
were made before, 1. Without the concurrence of either man or woman, as in the
creation of Adom. 2. Without the concurrence of woman, as in the production of
Eve. 3. By the concurrence of man and woman, as in all ordinary generation
afterward. And this only is the proper and peculiar one of Christ, by and of
a woman, without concurrence of a man.

Reas. 4. That it might easily appear how the contagion of sin might be removed
from the humane nature of Christ.

Use, Is of Confirmation, for strengthening of our Faith about the person of
Christ; to wit, that he was both the Messiah of old promised, and the promised
seed of the woman in that peculiar manner, as that promise seems to have
intended; to wit, the son of man; that is, of a woman descending of Adam and
other men in ordinary way, but made mother of a son not vulgarly or after the
common manner, but miraculously and without the company of a man begotten, and
born; so that from his first conception all things were in him supernatural;
about which our minds being busied, ought always to be lifted up to
supernatural contemplations, laying aside carnal and worldly thoughts.

Doct. 4. The Holy Ghost was the principal efficient cause of this generation.

It is from these words in the Text; is of the holy Ghost; the particle of
denotes not any material cause, but the efficient; so that of the Holy Ghost,
signifies as much, as if it had been said, by the power of the Holy Ghost, and
his operation. Now this is attributed to the Holy Spirit for these reasons.

Reas. 1. Because it was a miracle; and all miracles by appropriation are
attributed to the Holy Spirit.

Reas. 2. Because the principal work here was of Sanctification, forasmuch as
the lump of the humane nature, which was to be assumed by Christ, was in a
singular manner sanctified and cleansed from all spot of sin, and all
Sanctification peculiarly attributed to the Holy Spirit.

Reas* 3. Because the Holy Spirit was without measure to rest on, and to dwell
in Christ. It (...) but reason therefore, that the Holy Spirit should prepare
and make such a dwelling for himself, as he also prepares his dwelling in the
sons of God by adoption.

Quest. It may be th^n questioned, whether Christ may be called the Son of the
Holy Ghost?

Ans* It cannot be said; 1. Because it would bring some confusion of relations
and proprieties personal in God, and in the persons. 2. Because the Holy Spirit
neither produced a new person, when he made Christ to be begotten, or
generated; neither produced the nature, which he produced, after his own
nature, or of the same essence with his own.

Use 1. Is of Direction, in our Faith, and in all our thoughts, that we have of
Christ; that we admit of all that is in him, to be spiritual, holy, and full of
mystery; nor that we ever doubt of any part of this mystery; because all this,
as it is above common order, so is it above the reach of common nature. Yet we
may always receive and conceive this, that none of all these things are above
the divine power of the Holy Spirit; nor any thing impertinent or unfitting in
that thing, which is wholly managed by the Holy Ghost.

Use 2. Is of Direction, in our practice, as to the certainty of our salvation;
which depends upon this, if we be sure, that we are conformable to Christ in
his nativity, life, death, and resurrection. And from thence is the beginning
of this conformity to be taken, if we be spiritually regenerated by the Holy
Spirit, as Christ was borne of Mary through the efficiencie and operation of
the holy Ghost. And this is the self same thing, which the Apostle Peter
admonishes us to, that we study to make our vocation and election sure.

The fifteenth Lords day.
1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sinners; the just for the
unjust; that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit.
AN argument is brought in these words, whereby all Christians may be
persuaded, that undeserved afflictions are patiently to be born. The argument
is taken from the greater to the less, in which also is contained the force and
nature of a simily, or example, and also of some dissimilitude. For such
Logical assertions are often joined together in the same thing, as they make to
the same purpose. The argumeat is this; If Christ that was just, has suffered
for sins, and for unjust men, then much more ought we to suffer afflictions
imposed upon us; but the first is true, and therefore the latter also. Christ
considered in himself is the greater, and his sufferings are the greater; and
so the argument is from the greater. But considered as our head, and Savior,
he has the place and nature of a simily or example to be imitated by us in
tolerating afflictions, so it is an argument from a like, or from an example.
Lastly, considered as just, suffering for the sins of others that are unjust,
he is altogether unlike unto us; and so also some force and emphaticalness of
this argument is from the unlikeness. They are ordered in this enunciation, in
which as the assumption of the Syllogism, the cause is contained with the
effect; to wit, Christ with his suffering. For though suffering of its own
nature be an adjunct of the sufferer; yet as it is voluntarily admitted and
undertaken it is an effect. Yet these arguments are so ordered, that they have
mixed with them the affection or property of the argument so called, from
diversit. For Christ and his passions of their own nature are dissentaneous;
When therefore it is said, Christ suffered, it is as if he had said, Though
Christ were the Son of God, yet was he not fr^e from (...). That this may be
the better understood, it is to be known, that suffering in this place, and in
such others, is attributed to Christ by the (...) of Synecdoche* of the more
general for the special; and that it signifies the special suffering of a
grievous evil: Then are these two very dissentaneous between themselves, that
Christ should suffer a great evil: Now that he is said to have suffered for
sins, and for the unjust; the particle for designs the cause of his
suffering, and that is threefold; a meritory or material, a formal cause and a
final. The meritory cause, because Christ suffered for the things, which the
sins of unjust men had deserved. The formal cause, because for our sins
Christ was induced, as the form, as of divine imputation; as of that which by
God was imputed; so of the suretiship undertaken by Christ, or that form which
by Christ was undertaken, or accepted to be accounted his, when he underwent
these sufferings. Lastly, also the final cause, because for this end set before
him, or for this very purpose Christ suffered, that he might take away the sins
of unjust men, and make unjust men to become just, and so might bring them to
salvation.

Doct. 1. Christ the Lord suffered all these evils of punishment, which were
due to us for our sins.

This is not so to be understood, as if in kind and particularly he had
undergone all the evils, but in value only, and generally; in the sum or
upcast of all, and in that which was equivalent and equipollent to all; and so,
he is said to have suffered all the evils of punishment.

Reas. 1. Because he suffered generally all sorts of evil; to wit, as well
spiritual in the agony and horror of his mind, as corporal in his body; and the
extreme, as well positive, as privative, both in a kind of loss, and in kind of
sorrow or feeling.

Reas* 2. Because he suffered from all, from whom any evil could be inflicted.
He suffered from men, as well Jews, as Gentiles; as well his own domestics, as
forrainers; he suffered from the powers of darkness and Hell, which were the
murderers from the beginning, and the authors of all these evils, which
Christ suffered from them, and their instruments; lastly, he suffered from God
himself, whose cup full of wrath he drunk out.

Reas. 3. Because he suffered in every part of himself, every way that he could
suffer. For he suffered in his soul horrors and unspeakable sorrows; he
suffered in his body hunger, thirst, nakedness, wounds, spitting, stripes, and
buffetings, and whatsoever witty malice and cruelty could devise.

Use 1. Of Direction, that continually in meditating on the passion of Christ,
we may look upon the singular and incomprehensible goodness, grace, love,
mercy, justice and wisdom of God, by which he sent his eternal Son to suffer
such things for us, and for our salvation; and together also the abundant grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who was willing to it, and did suffer so many and so
grievous things for us.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that from the consideration of this suffering of our
Lord and Savior, we strive to stir up our selves powerfully, that we may daily
have more faith and hope about grace and our salvation to be perfected by
Christ; and that our hearts may be kindled with greater heat of love toward
God and Christ, and with greater zeal of the glory of his name; lastly, that
with more courage, constancy, and patience, we bear all the troubles of this
life, for Christ's sake, who suffered all things for us.

Doct. 2. Christ suffered all these things, neither out of any necessity of
nature, neither by constraint, neither by casualty and chance, but of his own
^ree choice of wisdom and will.

This is gathered from the Text, in that it is put amongst Christ's praises, as
an example of obedience, that he thus suffered. But there is no place for
praise, nor obedience, in such things as one suffers out of necessity, or
chance, without the free consent of the will.

Reas. 1. Because this was the will of the Father, whereunto he would conform
his will in all things, so far forth as he laid this charge upon him.

Reas. 2. Because this was the very thing, for which Christ came into the
world, according to the form of covenant made between the Father and the Son,
Isa 53 10.

Reas. 3. Because in this consisted the most perfect obediences, which is the
way to the most perfect glory, Phil 2. 9.

Object. Every evil of punishment is against the will of the sufferer; but
what Christ suffered for us were very great evils of punishment; They were
therefore suffered against his will.

Ans. That evils of punishment are said always to be against the will of the
sufferer;

First, Because they are against his natural inclination. For therefore
punishment is only evil, because it tends to the destroying of nature, and so
is against inclination of nature, whereby every thing seeks the conservation of
it self.

Secondly, The evil of punishment is against the will of the sufferer,
conditionally; to wit, if by no other means the sufferer can attain to his
wished end; but it is not always against his will absolutely. The first had
place in Christ, because these passions were against the inclinations of
nature, since otherwise they had brought him no pain; and they were also
against his conditional will, as appears by these words; Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pas^ from me: But they were not against his deliberate,
determinate, and absolute will. The reason is, because he suffered all out of
obedience to the Father, and of love to us, and our salvation.

Use ^. Of Instruction, how we may from this ground arm our minds against
those tentations, that use to come by occasion of Christ's sufferings. For in
this respect Christ was a stumbling stone unto the Jews, and foolishness unto
the Grecians. But if we will well weigh with our selves, that Christ suffered
all these things not out of coaction, or any necessity, or any external
violence, but from the obedience of love toward mankind, and that he might
give us a most perfect pattern of obedience in his own person: We shall be so
far from finding any stumbling block, or foolishness in these sufferings, that
on the contrary, nothing could be found that was, or is more suitable to the
Savior of the world.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that calling seriously to mind this grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, out of thankfulness and mutual love to him, we may be ready with
all willingness and cheerfulness of mind to undergo all sufferings, and
afflictions for his sake.

Doct. 3. Christ's sufferings were an expiatory Sacrifice for our sins.

This is it, which is said in the Text, That he suffered for sins, for the
unjust* that is, he had the virtue to take away the punishment from us, the
guilt also and the spot, and to acquire to us the favor of God, and
righteousness, and life eternal. It is the same that uses to be signified by
satisfaction, by merit, by redemption, by restitution, or restoration made by
Christ.

Reas. 1. Because this was the covenant between the Father and the Son, that if
he would undergo that obedience for us, then we should be freed from our
disobedience, and death, and should live thorough him, Isa. 53. 10. For this
suffering was the perfecting of all his obedience.

Reas. 2. Because Christ by his suffering made satisfaction to divine justice,
and repayed God as much of his honor in our name, as he had suffered in it by
our sins. Therefore Gods justice is now appeased; the grace of God has had its
free course, that it may derive all good upon us.

Reas. 3. Because that Christ now by virtue of his passion and consummate
obedience, as it were of his own right that he acquired, makes intercession
with the Father for us, that we may be, and live with him, Ioh. 17. 24.

Use 1. Of Consolation, to the faithful against the guilt of their sin, and
terrors of their conscience, that arise from sin. For in Christ, and his
sufferings, we have a remedy against these wounds, that are otherwise deadly.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we would detest all sins, as things that brought
our Savior to death, and would wave brought a thousand deaths upon us, unless
he had turned them away from us.

The sixteenth Lords day.
Joh. 10. 17, 18. Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my life*
that I may take it up again: None takes it from me; but I lay it down of my
self. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again. This
commandment received I from my Father.
CHrist in these words expounds what he had said before of the duty, effect,
and sign of a good Shepherd; to wit, that he lays down his life for his
sheep. This he had applied to himself, verse 15. where two things were
propounded; 1. The Object, to which this laying down of the life is referred,
or which be those sheep of Christ? 2. The manner of this laying down the life.
This is explained in the 16, and these two following verses. The death of
Christ, or laying down of his soul or life, is explicated from the efficient
cause; which is Christ himself. I lay down my life. 2. From the manner of doing
of it, that Christ is a cause voluntary, and doing it from a counsel and
deliberation, not of coaction. None takes it from me, but I lay it down. 3.
From the adjunct of this efficiency; that he did it not of weakness, but from
power. I have authority to lay it down. This is shown from another effect that
follows this; to wit, from his resuming it again, or his resurrection. I have
authority to take it up again; as if he would say, he that so lays down his
life, that with power he takes it up again, he lays it not down out of
coaction with weakness; but voluntarily of his own accord he does it: But I so
lay downmy life; ergo. Which is illustrated here from the impulsive cause; the
Fathers commandment. This commandment I received of my Father. 4. From the end,
and effect; to wit, the Fathers love and delight, or complacency in this.
Therefore my Father loves me, because etc.

Doct. 1. Christ so far humbled himself for us, that he underwent death it self
for us.

I lay down my life, etc. Now he underwent a double death for us; a spiritual,
and a corporal death. The spiritual is about Christ's descent into Hell* This
consisted in the separation of God's favor from the soul of Christ for a time,
not really, but as to sense and feeling, and that influence, from which comfort
uses to be felt; as also in impressions of divine wrath, which with horror did
strike all the faculties of the soul; so that for the time the soul was at so
low an ebb and concussion of all its happiness, as any creature could be, that
was without sin formally inherent in it self. The death of the body is that
which consists in the separation of the soul from the body; the confirmation
and continuance was in the burial of Christ. Now such was the separation of the
soul from the body in Christ's death, that the conjunction and union of both of
them with the divine person, remained the same that it was before; as if one
drawing a sword, held the scabberd in the one hand, and the sword in the other*
there would be there a separation between the scabberd and the sword; but of
neither of them from the man, that so held them: So also in this mystery, there
is a separation of the soul from the body; but neither of them was separated
from the divine nature, nor person, but the person still sustained both in the
unity of it self, as one person with him. The reason is, because if there had
been any such separation from the di: vine person, then the second person had
ceased to be God-man, and so could not for that time have been our Priest or
Mediator. Also a new incarnation or assumption had been made again, in the
resurrection of Christ. It is most true therefore, which is in the mouths of
many Divines, and used proverbially almost; That what the Son of God assumed he
never laid aside again.

Reas. 1. Because the perfection and consummation of humiliation is in
undergoing death, Phil. 2 8. And this also was the first reason, why he did not
only undergo death, but the most vise, contemptible, and contumelious death;
that is, the death of the Cross, as in that place is more especially set down.

Reas. 2. Because his charge of redeeming us required this; to wit, that he
should pay that price to divine justice, which we did ow, and so be subject to
the same punishment, that we were liable to. And this was also the reason, why
he chose the death of the Cross, that he might show, that he did not barely
sustain death, but that cursed death that was due to us, and that in our place,
or for us, Gal. 3. 12.

Reas. 3. That by the most convenient way he might procure the death of sin in
us, by assimiliation, and making us conform to himself, Romans 6. from verse 1.
to the 8.

Use 1. Is of Information, for directing of our faith; ^o wit, that while we
seek remission of our sins, and reconciliation, and salvation in God; we so
have our faith in Christ, that we may be specially united to him in his
sufferings, bloodshedding, and death, Romans 3. 25.

Use 2. Is of Consolation, to all those as have such true faith; because they
are out of all hazard of death or condemnation, according to that of the
Apostle, Rom 8. 34.

Use 3. Is of Direction, 1. In the study of Sanctification, that with Christ we
may die to sin. 2. In the study of all obedience, love, and humility, according
to the example of Christ, in whom all the perfections of these virtues we have
marvelously shining to us in a most eminent and excellent way.

Doct. 2. Christ ordained his own death from certain wise deliberation and
power, to dispose of it as he pleased.

I have power to lay down my li^e. From which words it appears first, that the
death of Christ was voluntary. For though it was violent also, as it came from
external agents, and was against Christ's internal natural inclinations; and in
some sort natural also, as it was wrought by external causes naturally
producing such an effect: Yet it was voluntary, not only as to the willing
disposition, and choice of it, whereby Christ set himself to suffer it; but
also as he suspended his own power of hindering it, and averting death, and so
gave way and power to the enemies inflicting it, in which respect also his
death may be called miraculous, or wonderful; because he himself, who was
dying, ordered his own death, and willingly admitted the same: So that by
doing he suffered, and by suffering he acted, and had his own action in it
all, without which he could not have suffered by any creature whatsoever.

Reas. 1. Because it became him to die so, that was God. For since the humane
nature subsisted in the f^me person with the divine, nothing could befall the
humane nature either in doing, or suffering, but as the divine willed and
ordained it.

Reas. 2. Because otherwise Christ in his death had not been together both
Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar. For though it be the part of a Sacrifice to be
passive, and to be offered up to the Father; yet it is the part of the Priest
by being active about it, and ordering the whole, to offer up the Sacrifice.

Use 1. Is of Information, for arming our faith against tentations and
scandals, which use to arise hence, in that Christ, in whom we believe, as our
God, was subject to death. For Christ died not of weakness and coaction, but by
certain resolution, and of his own proper will and power; so that the divine
nature and power of Christ appeared not only in his resurrection, but if the
thing be rightly considered, had as great a hand, and was as evident in his
death also.

Use 2. Is of Direction, for our preparation to undergo death, in whatsoever
way God would have it come to pass. For from these two things that were in
Christ, that he both willingly underwent death; and then also ordered it
himself; the first of these lies upon us all, out of duty; that we be ready at
such time, and such manner to die, as God is pleased we should. The other,
though it cannot be performed by us, because we have not the power of laying
down our lives, and ordering our deaths; yet by faith, and holy desire to our
comfort, we ought to seek this of God, and look for it, that in Christ, who
ordered his own death for us, he would order our death unto our salvation, and
unto his own glory.

Doct. 3. Christ underwent this death by his Fathers command.

It is in the Text; This command I received of my Father. And this command was
neither any of the law of nature, nor of the moral, ceremonial, or judicial;
but it was a peculiar condition of the mediatory office, that was laid upon
Christ by the Father, and of his own free consent. It was therefore a command
to the Messiah alone, as he was our Mediator.

Reas. 1. Because as by disobedience of the first Adam sin and death entered
into the world; so by the obedience of the second Adam, righteousness and
salvation shoud be brought us; and as the disobedience of Adam was the breach
of the command given to him; so also the obedience of Christ, was to be in the
keeping of that command that was given him with his office of mediatorship, or
whereby the office it self was also imposed upon him.

Reas. 2. Because in Christ we were to have such an example of obedience, as
was most perfect in keeping the commandments of God.

Use 1. Of Resutation against the superstition and presumption of popish Monks,
who have devised a kind of perfection in obedience of counsels, beside and
beyond that, which stands in keeping of the commandments of God; when yet
Christ himself, that has given us the whole pourtraict and pattern of perfect
obedience, confesses, that he went no further than to obey that, which the
Father commanded him.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we may set our selves to follow Christ in this
point, that we may even unto death it self, cleave fast unto the commandments
of God.

Doct. 4. God the Father loves Christ for this obedience.

This is in the Text; Therefore the Father loves me; that is, is delighted
with this obedience, and so delighted, that he commends it to be looked upon by
every Christian, and all such as are Christ's.

Reas. 1. Because by Christ's death, God was most glorified by Christ, Ioh. 12.
18. and 17. 4.

Reas. 2. Because by that death of Christ, the counsel of God was fulfilled,
whereby he had from eternity appointed in himself to communicate his grace and
glorious good will unto men, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7, 9.

Use 1. Of Resutation, against such as use to conclude from such phrases,
whereby God is said to love men for this, and not for that; that such men's
works were the first causes of Gods love. For Christ was the Son of God beloved
of him from all eternity; and yet the Father is said to have loved him also for
his obedience.

Use 2. Of Consolation, to all such as are in Christ by Faith. For as the
Father loves Christ, so will he also love them, that are in Christ.

Use 3. Of Exhortation, that with all cheerfulness we stir up our selves to
obey God; because God loves such as obey him.

The seventeenth Lords day.
Joh. 10. 17, 18. 17, I lay down my life, that I may take it up again.

18. None takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have authority to
lay it down, and I have authority or power to take it up again. This
commandment received I of my Father.


SEeing the Text is the same, that it was before, the same analysis, that was
there, may here also serve, and be made use of.

Doct. 5. Christ rose again from the dead.

For this is it, that is understood in the Text, by taking up his life again.
For this taking up again, is a reunion of things that were separated before:
And in this reunion of the soul and body, there was a change or motion from an
inferior condition to a superior of that, which was before in a better also or
superior to this, from which the change is now: And therefore it is properly
called a reassumption, or taking again, and not barely a resurrection. The
form then from which this change was made, was from his state of humiliation;
and the form to which, was the state of exaltation and glory; the subject of
this transmutation or motion was Christ's humane nature, which had fallen unto
the lowest and abjectest condition of his humiliation. Christ's own body arose
again from true death, and from the grave: And his soul also is said to have
risen again, as it was now restored and reunited unto the body, and so
delivered from the state and dominion of death; or as delivered from the
privation of its act in the body, wherein there was some diminution in its
ralative perfection. There were two parts of this resurrection, revivification
or a quickening again of the humane nature, by the renewed union of soul and
body; and its going out of the grave, to make it manifest, that it was
restored. This resurrection was confirmed moreover by Angels, by the
Scriptures, by Christ himself, and by the assent and eyewitness, or experience
of many witnesses, in diverse apparitions reiterated from time to time during
the space of forty days.

Reas. 1. Because it was unbeseeming and impossible that the Son of God, and
author of life, could be long detained by the power of death, Acts 2. 24.

Reas. 2. That by this means Christ himself might be justified in the spirit,
or according to the spirit of holiness, that is by the power of his Godhead
justified to be God as well as man in one person; justly and fully declared and
proved to be God, by his raising of himself again from the dead, Romans 1. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 16. and might show that we were justified by him from our sins, for
which he died, and rose also again to show that he had overcome for us, and
delivered us from them, Romans 4. 25.

Reas. 3. That being now alive, he might powerfully apply to us, what before he
had purchased by his death, Romans 5 10.

Reas 4. That he hereby might be the cause, foundation, and sign of assurance,
and earnest to us of our resurrection, as well spiritual, as bodily, Romans and *
1 Cor. 15. 12, 13, 14.

Use, Is of Information, for the direction of our faith, that believing in
Christ unto justification and salvation, we may so lay hold on Christ's death,
that we still also look upon his resurrection, wherein his victory for us was
shown, and his power over death, and efficacy to work in us appeared, and which
renders his death full of comfort to us, Romans 5. 34. 1 Pet. 3 2.

Doct. 6. Christ's resurrection came to pass by his own proper virtue and power.

It is clear in the Text; I take it up again; and I have power of taking it up
again. For this is the difference between Christ's resurrection, and that of
others; that they rise again by the power of another, to wit, of Christ, as
many, as are his: But Christ by his own power, as Lord of life and death, and
therefore has the disposing of both, as he sees good. Neither does it make any
thing against this truth, that it is often said, that God raised him again from
the dead; and the Spirit of God. For the works of the Trinity from without are
undivided, common to all the three Persons.

Reas. 1. Because what is thus attributed to God, is therefore also attributed
to the Son together with the Father, and Holy Spirit, and is not taken from
him, as is clear by our Text.

Reas. 2. When Christ is said to be raised by God, or the Spirit of God, then
properly his humane nature is considered, as raised by Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, though not always all three expressed; but now one, now another: But
when he is said to have raised himself, his divine nature and person is spoken
of and considered, as raising his assumed humane nature, together with the
Father, and the Spirit.

Reas. 3. Because by the Spirit and glory of God whereby Christ is said to be
raised; no other virtue or power can be understood, than that of the divine
nature, which was in Christ.

Use 1. Of Information to confirm our faith about the person of Christ. For he
that by his own power ^rose from death, can not be a bare man only; but must
of necessity be acknowledged to have been God also. For the raising of a dead
body, is no less divine a work, than the creation of a live body. He that
raised himself from the dead, at the same time while he was dead in one of his
natures, yet had life, and the fountain of life in his other nature; to wit,
the divine, at his command, whereby he did so great a work, as to raise his
other nature to life again. As Christ therefore by his death proved himself to
be true man; so also in and by his resurrection, he proved himself to be the
eternal and natural Son of God, and true God especially; not by office only,
and that most manifestly.

Use 2. Of Consolation to all such as are in Christ. For they are in him, who
has virtue and power to raise them again from the dead, and to give them
eternal life, John 6. 39, 40

Doct. 7. Christ's resurrection was for us, or to do us good.

This is hence gathered, because in the Text, the common end of laying down his
life, and taking it up again for all, is mentioned. For, for such as he laid
down his life, for such also he took it up again. Now the resurrection of
Christ turns to our good, in another way than his death does. For his death
has the account of satisfying and deserving for us: But his resurrection not
so, but it has the place and account of a samplar and efficient cause, and
some way of an efficacious and powerful applier and perfecter.

Reas. 1. Because Christ in his resurrection represented some way all the elect
of God, and by a virtuall containing had them all in himself, and brought them
all back from death.

Reas. 2. Because the same Spirit, that raised Christ again from the dead, by a
certain sort of communicating the same resurrection, quickened as well the
souls, as bodies of the faithful, that they may be made conform to the
likeness of his resurrection, Rom 8. 11.

Reas. 3. Because that same Spirit quickens us by the power and virtue of the
resurrection of Christ.

Reas. 4. Because the whole reparation of our nature will be after the image
and pattern of the resurrection of Christ, Romans 6. 5.

Use 1. Of Consolation, because in the resurrection of Christ, as brought to
pass for us, or for our good, we have our victory over Death, Devil, Sin, and
Hell, and all our Enemies, ready purchased and prepared for us. It is not
therefore left to us to fight, that we may overcome, but only in sincerity
that we may mind this, to lay hold on the victory already acquired by Christ
for us, and that in the same manner we may strive to keep it, prosecute it, and
more and more put ourselves in perfect possession of it by faith in Christ.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that by no means we suffer sin to reign in our mortal
bodies, but that we may spiritually imitate such as arise from the dead.

The eighteenth Lords day.
Mark 16. 19. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
HEre is explicated a singular act of Christ, after his resurrection: Where
mark, 1. The motion, wherein the act is designed. And 2. The thing brought to
pass by that motion. The motion is but the means: The thing done by the motion,
was its end. The motion was as it were the way: and the thing done by it, the
end of that way, and the rest and perfection, that was to be attained by it.
This motion was Christ's ascending into Heaven: The thing brought to pass by
it, was Christ's sitting down at the right hand of God. The motion then is
described from the term to which it was made, which was heaven; But the term
from which it was, is also understood, which was the earth. The thing done by
this motion, is also explained by its adjuncts; to wit, Christ's glory and
power, and his quiet and settled possession of these; all which are
metaphorically signified in these words; He sat down on the right hand of God.
For the placing on God's right hand, signifies a communication of divine glory
and power; and sitting on his right hand, denotates the quiet and settled
possession of this glory and power.

Doct. 1. Christ ceased to be upon earth by his bod^ly presence after the
fortieth day after his resurrection.

This is clearly enough signified in the Text; by these words, He was received
up into Heaven; that is, ^e ceased to be here upon earth. The time is here but
generally intimated, Act. 1. 3. We say, by his bodily presence; because by his
spiritual, and divine presence, by his Godhead and his Spirit, he is present
with his own in a gracious manner, according to his promise, Even unto the end
of the world, Mat. 28. 20. We call it also his bodily presence; rather than his
real presence, because real presence is more properly opposite to an imaginary,
or fained presence only, than to a divine and spiritual.

Reas. 1. Because it because not Christ to abide longer upon earth, when now he
had left off to be earthly, as he was in the state of his humility: Which
leaving off to be earthly, we understand not of the substance of his body, but
of the manner, quality, and suit or garb, as it were of his body, which now
from earthly or infirm, was turned to be heavenly and glorious.

Reas. 2. Because his bodily presence had not been for our good, but rather to
our hurt, for as much as the Spirit, the Comforter, his true Vicegerent here
upon earth, could not be poured out, and given, before Christ did ascend into
Heaven, Job. 16. 7.

Reas. 3. Because Christ had now done the work, which he had to do upon earth,
for glorifying his Father there; and therefore was now to return to that he had
before the world was made, and manifest it by exaltation of his humane nature,
as much as before he had hidden it, by laying it aside as it were, during the
days of his weakness, or humility, Ioh. 17. 4.

Use, Is of Refutation, against Papists, Ubiquitaries, and other false
Prophets, who designing some definite and determinate places upon earth, dare
say, behold, here Christ is bodily, and behold, there Christ is bodily,
according to that of Mat. 24. 23.

Doct. 2. Christ, when he left the earth, went up into the highest Heavens.

This is clear enough in the Text, compared with other Scriptures, where the
Heaven of glory and of bliss is called the highest Heaven, and the third
Heaven, which is all one.

Reas. 1. Because it is most fit, that his humane nature, which is now made
immortal and glorious, should be seized and possessed of a place, that was
convenient for it self, and its condition; and such was only the highest, or
third Heavens: the other two being subject to corruption, or to a change.

Reas. 2. As he opened that Heaven for us, which was shut upon us for our sins;
so it was expedient, that by his own proper ascension and going thither, he
should make this plain unto us.

Reas. 3. He ascended, that he might on our behalves also take possession of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and might raise us to certain hope, that thorough him,
we should come to the same place and condition.

Reas. 4. He ascended, that he might dispatch such other things, as yet
remained to be done for us. Now such were his intercession, and mediation at
the right hand of his Father, for us; his giving, and sending, and shedding
abroad of his Spirit, to supply his room, and to be the comforter of his;
lastly, the universal government of all things for our good; and the like.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against such as fain Christ's humane nature so to be in
Heaven, as that yet it is together and at the same time bodily upon earth. For
that he might ascend to heaven, it is clearly said, that he was received up
into Heaven; and therefore that he might ascend into Heaven, he left the earth.
For if the consequence be good, where unto the good Angel dictates; He is
arisen; therefore, he is not here; to wit, in the grave: Then no more doubt can
be made of this consequence; he is ascended into Heanen; therefore is not here
on earth.

Use 2. Of Direction in our Faith, and worshipping or adoration of Christ; to
wit, that we think not now carnally and in an earthly manner of Christ, but
worship him in spirit and in truth, as placed in highest glory, and divine
power in the Heavens.

Use 3. Of Admonition, that we may remove our minds and affections from things
earthly, and set them upon things heavenly, and that are above, where Christ
our treasure, sits at the right hand of the Father, that there, and with him
our conversation may be, Mat. 6 21. Col. 3. 1. Phil. 3. 20.

Doct. 3. Christ in Heaven has the possession of all highest glory that a
created nature can be capable of.

This is hence gathered, in that he is said to be seated on the right hand of
God; whereby is signified, that unto God himself he has the next place in
dignity, and so not only above all men, and their blessed spirits, but above
the glorious Angels themselves.

Reas. 1. Because Christ's humane nature, of which we here peculiarly speak,
came next up in dignity to God himself, by free grace, and personal union and
communion with the Godhead; and therefore it was most meet also, that in
pr^eminence of glory and dignity, he should be next unto God himself.

Reas. 2. Because Christ is the head of all Saints and blessed ones, both men
and Angels; from whom is derived all dignity and glory upon all such as are
gathered together in one body under him, as the Angels also are. It was
needful therefore, that as he received the Spirit of grace without measure;
that so also he should be adorned with glory and majesty above all other
creatures.

Reas. 3. Because both the grace and glory of the Church, tends to the glory of
Christ; as the glory of Christ tends to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.

Use, Is of Consolation, to all the faithful in Christ; because not only the
glory of the head redounds to the glory of all its members, but we have also a
sure promise concerning this, that as in this life we are partakers of the
sufferings and patience of Jesus Christ, so also in the life to come, we shall
be made partakers of his glory, Romans 8. 17.

Doct. 4. Christ together with his highest dignity, bath also highest power.

This the Text evidenceth, in as much as God's right hand signifies his power;
and sitting down on his right hand, signifies the highest communion and society
with God in this power, that can be.

Reas. 1. Because dignity and power might so have the same degrees. For dignity
separated from power, is no more but a dead title, and therefore seeing Christ
has highest dignity and glory, it follows also that he is endued with highest
power.

Reas. 2. Because Christ is constituted Lord, as well to correct and govern,
as to preserve and glorify his Church. He must therefore of necessity both have
the power of right, and the power of strength, fitting and competent for these
ends. For the Lord has both a power of right, and of might, to exercise and
put in execution all this, as well immediately, and by himself, as mediately,
and by instruments, or servants. And this is that power that Christ professes
was given unto him, in Heaven, and on earth, Mat. 28. 18. Now it is given to
Christ, and agrees to him most properly, as he is Mediator, or as man assumed
to the unity of one person with God, but not so properly as God; and therefore
it is said to agree to him, as he is the son of man, Ioh 5. 27.

Use, Is of Consolation. For though this divine power of Christ be terrible to
his enemies, yet to believers it brings firm hope, and affiance, and comfort;
because as Christ himself says, Ioh. ^0. 24. such an one has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.
And hither also tends, Romans 8. 34, 35. when there the Apostle proves, that
nothing can separate from the love of Christ; because he sits on the right hand
of God.

Doct. 5. Christ has the quiet and unmovable possession of this power

For in this sense it is, that he is said to sit on the right hand of God.

Reas. 1. Because he has overcome all his enemies virtually; and shall
actually in his own appointed time subdue them all fully, and bring them under
the yoke.

Reas. 2. Because there is nothing on earth, or under the earth, can in the
least trouble or molest this his possession.

Reas. 3. Because this state and condition of Christ is not only immortal and
free from all change by virtue of Covenant and divine Promise, but also of its
own nature, being now accomplished according to free Covenant; and such will
the happiness of the least Saint be.

Use, This also is of Consolation, which though it may strike terror and
amazement in the hearts of Christ's enemies, yet it raises and rouseth up the
dejected and drooping spirits of all such, as put their trust and confidence in
him; for he sits on the right hand of God in power and majesty, there making
intercession for us.

The nineteenth Lords day.
Mat. 25. from verse 31. to 39. Verse. 31 When the Son of man shall come in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of
his glory.

32 And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats.

33 And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

34 Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

35 For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

36 Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison,
and ye came unto me.

37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

38 When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?


IN this place the acts or procedure of the last day are expounded. The parts
are two; Christ's coming, and the end of his coming, which is the last
judgment. In this last judgment; 1. The preparation thereto is described. 2.
The execution of the sentence. In the preparation, Christ's majesty and glory,
in which he shall then appear, is c^iefly here set down; 1. From his train and
attendance that shall wait upon him; consisting chiefly of the glorious
Angels. 2. From his glorious Throne. 3. From the effect of this coming; to
wit, to the gathering of all mankind together, and separating of the good from
the bad. The sentence to be pronounced, is twofold; 1. Of salvation to the
good. 2. Of condemnation to the evil. The sentence of salvation is declared;
1. From its causes. 2. From its adjuncts. The principal cause is God's good
will, which is shown; 1. From the effect of that grace or favor, that is the
cause of our salvation, which is the blessing of God. 2. From the relatiou that
thence arises; which is that of a Father giving an inheritance, and of a Son's
receiving the same. 3. From the adjunct of time, that this salvation was not
then first appointed for them, but prepared for them from the beginning of the
world. The adjunct signs also, whereby this salvation is declared, are good
works; which by the Trope or borrowed manner of speaking, called Syne^doche of
the special put for the general, by the learned, are designed by the works of
mercy; and are amplified by that relation, which these works have to Christ
himself, whilst they are exercised toward his members. The sentence of
condemnation is quite contrary to the former, handled by the comparison and
proportion of like things. The execution of the sentence, is briefly set down
in the last verse of this Chapter.

Doct. 1. The universal or general judgment is most certainly to come to pass.

This judgment is called universal, that it may be distinguished from that
particular one, which in some sort is exercised on the greatest part of men
even in this life, upon every one in particular, when they pass out of this
life. For this comprehends all men together, and therefore is called universal.
It may be also called universal, or understood so, because in it upon all men's
and angels deeds, and matters generally without exception, sentence shall pass.
It is also called the last judgment, because after it no new judgment is to
be looked for; but the execution of that judgment only shall follow upon it.

Reas. 1. Because before that time the judgment of God toward men is not
completed and fully perfected; because in this life through God's forbearance
and long patience, evil men in joy many good things; and good men are
oppressed with many evils. From this consideration many of the very Heathens
themselves collected, that rewards and punishments were more justly and equally
to be distributed, where it should be ill with evil men, and not well at all;
and should go well with good men, and not ill at all. Which reason seems also
to be confirmed by our Lord himself, Luke 26. 15. and the Apostle Paus, 1 Cor.
15. 19. Now after this life, while the Soul remains separate from the body,
the judgment of God is not complete, nor fully accomplished, because it is not
passed upon the whole man in his full being, as he was in this life, while he
committed the things that were to be judged. Therefore another and fuller
judgment than that on the souls departed only, follows to be looked for,
which is this last judgment, and shall be certainly in its own time.

Reas. 2. It is most convenient and agreeable to Gods glory, that God in and by
Christ, in a most glorious manner should make manifest before all, as well
Angels as men, as well his mercy as his justice; that he might have the public
and solemn glory of both mercy and justice; and this is the thing, that at
that time is topass come in that universal and last judgment.

Reas 3. This belongs also to the glory of God, the joy of the faithful, and
just confusion of the unfaithful, that before their faces they may see the
promises, and threatenings of God almost perfectly and accurately fulfilled,
not only particularly on their own persons now in the body, as before death;
but universally upon all others, both men and Angels: Which shall then only
be, when this last and universal judgment shall be held.

Use 1. Of Information, that we take care to have our faith and hope solidly
confirmed and strongly rooted about this article; least we be any ways
troubled with profane blasphemies and mockings of Infidells and Heathens, who
first cast down and trample upon the profession of this article by their life
and manners; and then also by words and speeches fight and dispute against it:
Concerning whom we are admonished by the Apostle St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. etc.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that with all fear and trembling we watch over our
ways, as those that certainly mind and look for the day of this judgment, 1
Pet. 1. 17. 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12.

Doct. 2. Our Lord Jesus Christ will be Judge in this judgment.

Reas 1. Because it belongs to his Kingly office and power, whereby he was made
Lord and King; and had all judgment committed to him.

Reas. 2. Because Christ is he, from whom, and by whom the faithful have
salvation adjud^ed unto them, even in this life; and from whom also unbelievers
have death adjudged unto them. Now it is the same judgment, that in this life
both ways is begun, and in the last judgment shall be fully manifested and
perfected.

Reas. 3. Because at that time it is, that Christ should fully and actually
triumph over all enemies and opposite power, and crown all his own servants,
soldiers, and adherents. And this is most conveniently and gloriously done in
form of public and solemn judgment.

Use, Is of Consolation, chiefly to the faithful, because they shall have him
for their Judge, whom they received for their Redeemer, Justifier, Sanctifier,
and Intercessor, or Advocate; from whom therefore they may with all confidence
expect all good.

Doct. 3. Christ's glory at that time shall be incomparable.

It hence appears from the Text; that if the Angels so glorious shall then be
his Ministers of State and attendants; and his Throne with all the rest of that
procedure shall be so glorious, it mmst needs be, that Christ himself be
excellent in glory above all that we can think of.

Reas. 1. Because the exercise of this judgment belongs to the manifestation
of Christ's highest exaltation.

Reas. 2. Because the very end of his coming was to give glory to such as
sought God in him. It is fit then that Christ appear in greatest glory.

Reas. 3. The majesty of the supreme Judge of the world, and the terror and
confusion of his enemies, that they must be put to, require that he should come
clothed in the greatest glory.

Use, Of Consolation, to the faithful, against the crosses and contempts, they
are liable to in this world together with Christ; because as now they are
partakers of the cross of Christ, so then they shall be partakers of his glory.

Doct. 4. In this judgment the condition of the godly and ungodly shall be
quite unlike and opposite one to another.

This is taught in the Text; by the separation of the sheep from the goats; by
the right hand and the left; by ^ome ye blessed, and go ye cursed.

Reas. 1. Because there is a great unlikeness and opposition in the lives and
ways of the godly, and ungodly, while they are in this world.

Reas. 2. Because there is a great dissimilitude or opposition between the
promises that belong to the godly, and the threatenings that belong to the
ungodly.

Reas. 3. Because there is great disparity and opposition between the
manifestation of greatest mercy, and of greatest execution of justice.

Use, Of Admonition, that we separate our selves from ungodly men, as much, and
in such manner, as we can; that is, if we cannot separate in places, yet in
internal affections, as well as external conversation, we should be as unlike
unto them as can be in that wherein they are ungodly.

Doct. 5. The cause of any blessing to the godly, is the mercy of God; but the
cause of any ca^se to the ungodly, is their own sault.

This is clear in the Text, when the godly are called blessed of the Father,
But the ungodly, barely are called ye cursed, not of the Father, nor from the
Father, nor from God; because though it is God that curses them, yet the first
cause of this curse is in their sins.

Reas. 1. Because all good is from God, who is the greatest good, and chiefly
good in himself. But all evil of punishment arises from evil of fault; and
this evil of fault is from the creature it self, breaking the Law and Order
that God has set to it.

Reas. 2. Because the blessing of life is the mere free gift of God; but the
curse of death is the reward or wages of sin, Romans 6. 23.

Reas. 3. Preservation from the curse, which is by Gods favor, is necessary
for our blessing; but to incur the curse, there is nothing more needful, but
only to neglect or contemn that way, that leads unto the blessing.

Use, Of Direction, that we may always give God the glory in every good thing,
that we either have, or seek, or look for; and always blame our selves for any
evil that befalls us.

Doct. 6. The blessing of the godly consists in the communion that they shall
have with God in Christ; and the curse of the ungodly, in the separation of
them from such communion:

This is plain in the words, come ye blessed, and go ye cursed.

Reas. 1. Because this is the end, whereunto all the godly look; desiring
nothing more, than still to apprach nearer, and nearer unto God. The ungodly,
on the contrary, shun nothing more than God, and such things wherein God has
appointed to show and impart his gracious and singular presence.

Reas. 2. Because man's happiness not coming of man himself, is therefore to be
sought from without himself, and that from his union or conjunction with the
greatest good, and that is the cause and fountain of all good. Therefore of
necessity it consists in communion with God; and from deprivation of this
communion, greatest misery must needs follow.

Reas. 3. Because the perfectest act of our life, is that which is most closely
and intimately carried toward God; as all that we do well consists in this,
that therein we live unto God; and the privation of such acting, its want and
absence all misery must accompany.

Use, Of Direction, that even in this life we may wholly be taken up with this,
to seek communion with God, and shun and take heed of all separation from him.

Doct. 7. The certain signs and tokens of this blessing, are good works; and
of this curse, are evil works.

This is largely and clearly laid open in the Text.

Reas. 1. Because good works came from the same grace or favor of God, from
which the blessing it self comes upon them; and evil works joined with
obstinacy and impenitency, comes from that same malice, and malignancy, which
God has cursed and adjudged.

Reas. 2. Because God of his free grace has promised the blessing unto good
works; and of his unspotted justice has appointed the curse unto evil works.

Reas. 3. Because in good works there is a certain disposal and preparation of
the way to obtain the blessing; and in evil works, there is not only the
proportion of a way, but of deserving, or a mertitorious cause even unto the
curse.

Use, Of Admonition, that we have great care of our actions through every part
of our life, because according to them, men are either condemned or saved. For
such as the life is, such is the end.

The twentieth Lords day.
1 Cor. 6. 19. What, know you not that your body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own?
IN the words of the Text are contained a most powerful argument against
Fornication and the like sins; and it is taken from the contrary end, because
the end of Christian's bodies is quite opposite to this sin. And that end is
declared from the subject possessed, and possessor and indweller of it, the
Holy Ghost; The subject is again explained by a Metaphor of a Temple, because
namely our bodies are as it were houses consecrated to him. And that this
argument may be made the clearer and stronger, the Apostle ads, that so the
holy Ghost is the possessor of this Temple, or house, that he himself also is
the indweller of it. And both these relations that we have to the Holy Ghost,
are illustrated from their efficient cause; to wit, that they are of God; and
from their consequent effect and adjunct; to wit, faith and certain knowledge
of these relations between our bodies and the Holy Spirit, in these words; Know
ye not brethren, etc.

Doct 1. The Holy Ghost is true and coeternal God with the Father, and eternal
Son.

The Text does give many reasons for this Doctrine.

Reas. 1. Because to have one and the same spirit with God, is all one as to be
glewed or joined to God, verse. 17.

Reas. 2. Because a Temple is not lawfully consecrated to any but to God; much
less could it be lawful that a man in stead of, or for a Temple should be
consecrated to that which is not God. But here such a Temple which is most
sacred is said to be consecrated to the Holy Ghost.

Reas. 3. Because the Holy Ghost is so said to be in us, as that we become his
of right; and of duty; that is, God's rightful possession, as the scope of the
words clearly demonstrate.

Use 1. Of Information, for directing our faith arightly, not only unto the
Father, and Son, but also unto the Holy Ghost, as the same one and true God.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we diligently take heed to our selves, that we
neither contemn nor neglect any holy thing, that comes or is breathed from the
Holy Spirit; as the whole Scripture is said to have come from the inbreathing,
or inspiration of the Holy Spirit; and all the motions of godliness are only
attributed to the Holy Spirit, as to their Author. Likewise all the gifts of
grace are bred in us from and by this Spirit of grace. In these all therefore
we must take heed, that in no wise we resist the Holy Ghost, or wittingly, and
willingly sin against him.

Doct 2. The Holy Ghost himself is given unto the faithful. This appears in
the Text.

Reas. 1. In that our bodies are called the Temples of the Holy Ghost.

Reas. 2. In that he is said to be in us.

Reas. 3. In that we are said to have him, or to get him from God. Now the Holy
Ghost is said to be given unto us, when he has a singular relation unto us,
and that for our good; that is, for our sanctification, and salvation of our
souls; and moreover, because he powerfully works these things in us, that are
agreeable to his most holy nature, and which can no way be derived to us from
flesh and blood. And hence it is also, that the gifts of the Holy Ghost, are
called the Holy Ghost also, by that trope or borrowed kind of speech, whereby
the cause is put for the effect, which Scholars call a Metonymie.

Use 1. Of Exhortation, as well to thanksgiving to God, that gives so divine a
gift; as to religious prayers, and calling upon God's name, that he would keep
unto us, and more and more communicate to us this divine gift, Luk 11. 13.

Use 2 Of Admonition, to take heed of all such things, whereby the Holy Spirit
is said either to be grieved, or extinguished; that is, from the grievousness
of all such sin, as fights against the holiness of this divine Spirit, so that
he cannot delight to dwell in us, but wholly, or in great measure withdrawes
himself from us.

Doct. 3. The Holy Spirit is not communicated to our souls only, but to our
bodies also.

It is in the Text, when our bodies are also called the Temples of the Spirit.

Reas. 1. Because as Christ redeemed not our souls only, but the whole man;
so also the Holy Spirit ought to bring into subjection and possession the whole
man to God, and to Christ.

Reas. 2. Because many duties of a spiritual life must be performed by the body
also, and therefore the body ought to be subject to the Holy Spirit, and as a
vessel, or instrument, be wholly in his power.

Reas. 3. Because our bodies are made liable to sin, and by sin to death, from
which we must be freed by the Holy Spirit dwelling in us, Romans 8. 11.

Use 1. Of Admonition, that we suffer not sin to reign in our natural bodies;
that we offer not our members weapons of unrighteousness to sin, but weapons
of righteousness to God, Romans 6. 12, 13.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that we glorify God in our body, as it follows in the
Text, verse 20. For we ought to have that care of our body in order to things
spiritual, that is due to the Temple of God, as in the Text; and to an offering
to be offered up in the Temple of God, Romans 12. 1.

Doct. 4. The indwelling of this Spirit is a flat enemy to the (...) of sin in
us.

This is the consequence of the argument in the Text; to wit, that the Temple
of God cannot be prostituted to whoredom and other such sins, without
Sacrilege.

Reas. 1. Because there should be an agreement between the Temple, and him
whose temple it is, or to whom it is dedicated, as it is, 2 Cor. 6. 16. what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For by a like reason we may say;
What agreement has the temple of God with reigning sin?

Reas. 2. Because therefore the Holy Spirit dwells in believers, that he might
impart holiness to them; and as his nature, and name, so also his indwelling
and operation is an enemy to all ungodliness.

Reas. 3. Because if the Kingdom of sin should prevail in the Temple and
dwelling of the Holy Spirit, this would turn to the disgrace, and disho^ of the
Holy Spirit himself. And this is indeed the thing, that is done, when some
profane men blaspheme and mock at the name of God, and of the Holy Ghost,
because of the unworthy carriage of those, that make profession to be led by
this Holy Spirit.

Use 1. Of Reproof, against such as turn the Temple of the Holy Ghost into
(...) Den of Thieves, or into a Cage of unclean birds.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we give no place to sin either in our souls or
bodies, but as far as is possible, that we imitate Christ, who, as it is
written, Mat. 25. did cast out of the Temple of God, even buyers and sellers,
and the tables of money changers, and John 2 15. with a wl^ip drove out of the
Temple sheep and beeves.

Doct. 5. All the faithful ought: to have both faith and experience about this
indwelling of the Holy Spirit in them.

This is intimated in these words; Do ye not know brethren; that is ye ought
not to be ignorant of this, but to believe this, and (...) know it from your
own proper experience, or fe^ling.

Reas. 1. Because this is amongst the greatest benefits that belong to our
salvation.

Reas. 2. Because from this benefit depends the knowledge of all the rest that
God has freely given to us, 1 Cor. 2. 12. So that the same may here ^e said,
that is said of Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know ye not that Christ is in you, etc.
So here, Know ye not what the Holy Ghost is in you etc.

Use 1. Of Direction, that we try our selves in this point, and never rest, as
if it were well with us, until unto our comfort, we can perceive that the Holy
Spirit dwells in us.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that we study to have this knowledge lively and
powerfully, according to the intent of the Apostle here, who intimates to us,
that this knowledge, if it be such as it should be, cannot consist with
whoredom, or any such like impurity of life.

The one and twentieth Lords day.
Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Verse. 25, Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it.

26, That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word.

27, That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing: But that it should be holy and without blemish.


IT is the Apostle's purpose in this place to stir up men to the duty of love
to their wives. And he illustrates this duty and persuades it from the example
of Christ's love to his Church; and in the example, the love of Christ toward
his Church is declared from its effects; whereof the first is, that he laid
down his life for her. The second is, the end and effect of the former; to wit,
that by virtue of his death, he sanctified and purified the Church unto
himself. The third is, the effect and end of both the former, that he namely
makes her glorious. The fourth is, the conjunction and union that the Church
has with Christ; to wit, that she is his body, and of his flesh and bones,
verse 30. The manner of which union and its nature is shown to consist in a
mystery, and not in any carnal or bodily way, but in a most spiritual and
hidden way.

Doct. 1. The Church is the whole company and community of the elect.

This is hence gathered, because she is here described and designed by Christ's
spiritual love to her, as ought the love of an husband to be to his wife. Now
this love includes always in it self a differenceing of her beloved,
separating of her from all other, and so it is nothing else but an election or
choice made of her before others. This is to be understood of a company chosen
unto eternal life. Now this company is considered of, two manner of ways:
First, as election lies in the absolute and internal counsel of God. Secondly,
as it is described and manifested by its effect of calling, and the blessing
that follows on it. They that are chosen the first way they are members of the
Church only virtually, and potentially to be such in time; but such a power as
is determinate, and certainly to be brought forth into act in due time, by the
decrees of God. Therefore the elect not yet called, are not yet actually, and
in themselves formal members of the Church. The second way, as the act of
vocation and effect of election is there, it makes men actual and formal
members of the Church. Now that first effect of election internal, which is
proper to the elect, is effectual calling* which (...) a kind of external
election as it were made in time. Therefore the Church has her name rather
from this calling, than from justification, sanctification, or glorification,
unto which this accrues moreover, that by this means the company or community
of actual believers is fitly designed, seeing that none are ordinarily called
effectually, but such, as by actual faith answer that call.

Use, Is of Direction, how we may obtain to our selves the certainty of our
election; to wit, if we can be certain of our effectual calling; that is, be
sure by inward feeling and experience of our true faith and unfaigned
repentance, of their operations on, and in our hearts, and by the effects, that
thence follow.

Doct. 2. This Church is the body of Christ.

Reas. 1. It is called his body by way of proportion or similitude, not unto a
body politic, as is found in worldly Cities, or Commonwealths; but unto a
natural body, such as is that of man. Now it is called the body of Christ; for
its most near union that it has with Christ, as being as it were flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, as it is in the Text.

Reas. 2. Because of that dependence it has from Christ, as its head. For as
all sense and motion of a sensitive creature is derived from the head into
every particular member, so also all spiritual virtue is derived by influence
from Christ into his Church.

Reas. 3 Because of the union and communion that the faithful have amongst
themselevs in Christ, which is the communion of Saints; and the joints, whereby
these members are coupled together. The bonds also of this conjunction, are the
Spirit, Faith and Charity. By the spirit they are properly conjoined with God
in Christ, and also amongst themselves: but by Faith they are properly
conjoined to God in Christ only: and by Charity most properly, they are
conjoined amongst themselves.

Use 1. Of Consolation to all believers, because they are made partakers of so
great dignity, as to be assumed to the body of Christ; on which behalf, they
may also certainly expect all good things from Christ.

Use 2 Is of Admonition, that we dishonor not this most holy body of Christ
with our life and manners; but with all our care and diligence may go about
this, that our conversation may be such, as is worthy of them, that have so
near a conjunction with Christ and his most holy servants.

Doct. 3. The Church in that acception of the word, as she is mystically
considered, is one only, holy and universally, Catholic.

These things are understood of her mystical estate, because in her visible or
external estate, she is neither one, nor Catholic, nor altogether holy. These
things are thus gathered from the Text: she is one, because she makes but up
one body of Christ: neither has he more bodies but one: She is holy, because
she is said to be sanctified and purified by Christ, to wit, by separation from
the world, by pardon of her sins in justification; by renovation of our
inherent righteousness in sanctification of this life, and perfecting of it in
the life to come. She is lastly Universal or Catholic, because all the elect
or faithful of all Nations, and of all times, and places, make up but one and
the same mystical body of Christ.

Use 1. Is of Resutation, against Papists, who wrest all, that are proposed to
be believed and spiritually understood of Christ's mystical body, unto the
Popish state of their Roman visible Church, which is neither one, because not
now the same, that she was, when the Apostles wrote to her; neither holy,
because by their own confession many Popes, that is, heads of the Roman
Church, were most wicked beasts; nor is ^he Catholic, or Universal, because
it implies a contradiction, that one particular Church, as the Roman properly
is, should be Universal in any propriety of speech.

Use 2. Is of Consolation, to all believers; because in this very thing, that
they are actual believers, they are members of this Church, that is proposed
to us to be believed; and they are in the same condition, as to the main
business, in which the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, and all the Saints
were, that ever lived, or shall live hereafter, in any place, or time of the
world.

Doct. 4. Unto th^s Church all those benefits relate and belong, that Christ
has procured for men by his death.

It is gathered from hence; because Christ is said to have done all that he
did, out of love to his Church.

Reas. 1. Because it was the wise purpose and intention of God, gloriously by
Christ to communicate his grace unto certain men. For else the whole
dispensation of Christ's incarnation, life and death, had been of uncertain
success or event.

Reas. 2. Because Christ not only promerited this, but also brings it to pass,
and that to perfection, by his efficacy or power.

Use, Of Consolation, chiefly to all true believers. For whatsoever is said of
the whole Church in common, is extended unto each member of the same; because
the Church is nothing else, but a collection of believers, or believers
considered as gathered together, or conjoined in one body, or multitude.

The two and twentieth Lords day.
Phil. 3. 20, 21. Verse 20 For our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also
we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

21 Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself.


A Reason is given in these words, why believers should rather follow the true
Apostles, than false Teachers; and it is taken from the comparison of unlike
things. The unlike qualities, are a care for the things of the world, in false
Teachers; and a care for things heavenly in the true Apostles. This care of the
Apostle is illustrated by a double argument: 1. From the adjunct manner, which
is set out to us, by the similitude of Burgesses. 2. From the efficient cause
of this care, which is faith, and hope of the glory that is to come. This
glory, again is illustrated: 1. From its principal cause, which is Christ
Jesus. 2. From the subject of it, which is extended also to the body, and not
to the soul alone. 3. From the quality of the body, which is pointed out to
us, by a similitude with the body of Christ. 4. From the virtue and power of
that efficient cause aforesaid, for producing such an effect; which is no
other, than omnipotency; according to that mighty power whereby* etc.

Doct. 1. The resurrection of man's body is certainly to be.

This is taught in the Text; 1. In that a transmutation of our bodies is
determined on. 2. In that it is said, they shall be made conformable to the
body of Christ, which by its resurrection was raised unto glory. The
foundations or grounds of that article, are two; The power of God, and the
truth of the Scriptures, as Christ himself teaches in his answer to the
Sadduces, Ye err; to wit, about the resurrection, now knowing the Scriptures,
and the power of God. By the power of God, the raising of our bodies again, is
possible; it being as easy to God to do that, as at first to make all things
out of nothing; yea, as to make man out of the clay of the earth. For it is
easy to conceive, that the same efficient cause, can again join the same
principles, which once before he did conjoyn, and moreover made them all out of
nothing. As for the Scriptures, the truth and certainty of this resurrection is
expressly declared by its testimony.

Reas. 1. Because man was created for eternity, and therefore must be set free
from death, which assaults the whole race of man kind against its nature, that
so it may again attain to eternity.

Reas. 2. Because the soul cannot come to its perfect and complete glory, by
its reunion with the body; because it would be as it were maimed, as to such
faculties, the operations whereof it exercises by the body; and so in some
sort it should remain, as it were blind, deaf, dumb, etc.

Reas. 3. Because the equity of divine dispensation requires this, that those
bodies, which had their own share in the labors and works that belong unto
this life; should also have their share in such rewards, as belong unto the end
of this life.

Use, Is to establish our faith about this truth, which is one of the principal
articles of the Christian faith.

Doct. 2. The same bodies that we had, as to their essences and natures, shall
arise again; though not the same, as to their dispositions and qualities.

This is hence gathered, that in the Text our bodies are not only said that
they shall be transfigured, by which phrase we are to understand, that the
substance of our bodies shall remain the same, and that the outward figure or
fashion, or manner of its disposition and complexion shall only be changed:
But also that they are said that they shall be transfigured after the manner of
Christ's body. For Christ had the same flesh and bones, which he had before, and
this he made manifest unto his Disciples.

Reas 1. Because neither reward* nor punishment would have any place in the
body after its resurrection, unless the very same bodies were restored to men,
whereof they made use here upon earth before, either for doing evil, or doing
good.

Reas. 2. Because otherwise after the resurrection the party should not remain
the same man, determinately this man, that man, or that he was before.

Reas. 3. Because it is as easy to God to glorify the same bodily substance
that he had before, as any other.

Use, Of Resutation against such Heretics, who having almost blended their own
dogmatical fictions and phancies with the true Doctrine, would also have our
bodies after the resurrection not to be the same, but new ones, even as to
their substance.

Doct. 3. Perfection, glory, and eternal happiness shall be given to
believers, after that in the resurrection they shall be clothed with their
bodies again.

It is in the Text. This glory is partly in the soul, and partly in the body;
but in both there shall be a removal of all imperfection, and a communication
of all perfection, which shall be thought fit for every one to receive. In the
soul shall be the fruition of God, whereby all desire of desirable things shall
be in a certain eminent way satisfied. There shall be also an abundantly heaped
perfection of all gifts and virtues, as is in the blessed Angels. This glory
shall also so stream forth unto the bodies, that they shall be like unto
heavenly bodies; which is the point chiefly expounded in the Text: Our body
shall be made conformable, etc.

Reas. 1. Because it is God's purpose singularly to glorify himself in that
supernatural blessedness that is to be given unto us.

Reas. 2. Because Christ already glorified, is not only the efficient cause,
but the pattern of our glory. We shall not therefore have only such a
likeness to Christ; as is between any effect and its cause, according to that
maxim; as the cause is, such is the effect: But also that proportion which is
between the pattern and its pourtraict.

Reas. 3. In order of dignity, by the bountiful appointment of God, believers
shall next after Christ have their place together with the blessed Angels.

Use, Of Direction, that we may often set before our eyes in our meditation,
the greatness of this glory, unto which we are called, that so we may both
stir up thankfulness in our selves to God, and a certain holy contempt and
neglect of all things in this world.

Doct. 4. This resurrection of our bodies from the dead, and the glorification
of them, shall be by the most powerful operation of Christ.

From these words; According to that mighty power of working, he should
transform, etc. And this agrees to Christ, as he is one and the self same God
with the Father.

Reas. 1. Because it is the work of that supereminent greatness of power, that
is proper unto God, (...). 1. 19.

Reas. 2. Because that most wonderful quickening of our bodies, should come
from the living, and alive-making God, who is the fountain and source of all
life. Therefore in the same manner it is not attributed only to the Father,
but also to the Son, and Holy Spirit, Romans 8. 11.

This agrees also to Christ, as he is Mediator, but still as united unto God
essentially; also as he submits himself together with the humane nature in one
person, to be mediator, Ioh. 5. 26. and 6. 40.

Reas. 1. Because it belongs to the Mediatory office of Christ, not only that
by his merit, he should procure life eternal to us; but also by his powerful
working actually bring the same to pass.

Reas. 2. Because Christ as Mediator is the head of his Church, from whom is
derived and communicated to us the Spirit of life, whereby as well our souls,
as our bodies are quickened; our souls especially in this life, and our bodies
in the day of the resurrection.

Reas. 3. Because Christ as Mediator, and as the Son of man (but as united
pesonally in the Godhead, in the Son of God) shall judge the world, Ioh. 5. 27.
Now this belongs to the power of the Judge, that he can bring before himself,
and make the parties to be judged, to appear.

Use, Of Direction, that by all means we do this, as in our prayers, so in our
meditations and other our spiritual exercises; to wit, that we may behold this
supereminent power, and greatness of Christ's might, as the Apostle wishes to
the Ephesians, and to us, as one of the greatest gifts of God, Ephesians. 1. 17,
18, 19, 20. For by this means, 1. Our faith and confidence in Christ is
established. 2. We will be forearmed against all terrors of this world, and of
Hell it self. 3. With all cherefulnesse we shall recommend our souls to Christ
in well-doing, because he is able to perform all that he has promised, all
that we seek of him, and above all that can come into our thoughts.

Doct. 5. We should so look for this glory to come, in this present life, as
that we lead in some sort an heavenly life ^ven here upon earth.

This is it, which is said in the beginning of the Text; We behave our selves
as Burgesses, or Citizens of Heaven.

Reas. 1. Because where our treasure, or chief good is, there will our hearts
be also; and where the ^cart is, there will the whole man be. if therefore we
have our treasure and chief good in Heaven, our heart will be in Heaven also;
and our conversation will be heavenly.

Reas. 2. Because all these worldly things, whereabout men are busied, and most
are drowned in, can never come in competition with the bliss of Heaven,
neither as to their worth, nor as to their durance, nor by any love-worthy
quality.

Reas. 3. Because to this we are called, that denying our selves, and leaving
the world; we may seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and glory.

Reas. 4. Because while we believe and hope in Christ, and have the eyes of our
mind set upon him, as our Captain and pattern of our salvation, we must be
changed into his likeness and image, 1 Ioh. 3. 3. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

Use 1. Of Direction, for discerning of our condition, whether we have any such
faith and hope, or no.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, to stir up and rouse our minds to a more earnest and
diligent study and care of all godliness.

The three and twentieth Lords day.
Romans 3. 24, 25. Verse 24 Being justified freely by his grace through the
r^demption that is in Jesus Christ.

25* Whom God ^ath ^et forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood*
to declare his right^ousnesse for the r^mission of sins that are past,
through the (...) of God.


THe Apostle had before proved, that all mankind was under most grievous guilt
of sin, and therefore had need of justification, that they might be saved*
which justification also he had sh^wn that it could not be had from any (...),
no^ from the Law; which he had set down as the conclusion of his discourse^ in
the 20* verse of this Chapter* From then^e he also (...) (...) further, (...)
justification is of necessity to be (...) in that way of the Gospel, which is
proposed in Christ Jesus. The whole dispute may be summed up in this
Syllogism* Men are either justified by Nature, or by Law, or by the Gospel:
But neither by Nature, nor by the Law; and therefore of necessity by the
Gospel. The Proposition is presupposed and tacitly understood, as manifest in
it self. The Assumption is proved in the first part of the Epistle, unto the
21. verse of this Chapter. The Conclusion is proposed and illustrated in that
21. verse to the end of that Chapter, and afterward. The words in our Text set
down, contain a description of this Gospell-justification* And it is described,
1. From its principal and highest cause, God; Whom God appointed. 2. From the
manner of this cause, which consists not in comm^tative justice, that gives
like for like, or so much for so much; nor yet from distributive justice, which
looks at the worth of men, and deals with them in a proportionable manner; but
in mere and pure grace, or free favor; in these words, we are justified freely
of his free grace, or free favor* where a singular emphasis or force of speech
is laid on this part of the description, by this doubling or repetion, freely,
and of his fr^e favor. 3. It is is described from its impulsive, or
meritorious cause, which becomes also in some sort the formal cause of our
^ustification; to wit, our redemption ma^e by Jesus Christ. 4. From its
instrumental cause; which is faith; by* faith in his blood. 5. From its final
cause; which is the manifestation of the justice and mercy of God; for showing
of his justice, etc.

Doct. 1. It is God that justifies us.

He is said to justify us, not in that he in^useth righteousness unto us, or
makes us fit to do things that are just; which is the error of Papists,
placing justification first in the infusion of the habits of faith, hope, and
charity; and next in the good works that comes from those habits; with which
they mix a certain sort of remission of sins: But therefore he is said to
justify us, because by his judicial sentence he absolves us from the guilt of
all sin, and accepts or accounts of us, as fully just and righteous for eternal
life, by the righteousness of Christ, which he gives us. This appears from
hence, that this justification is used in Scripture to be opposed unto a
charging with crimes, and unto condemnation; Romans 8. 33. And this is done of
God, as it were by these degrees. 1. In his eternal counsel and decree,
because from eternity he intended to justify us. 2. In our head Christ rising
again from the dead, we were virtually justified, and in some sort actually; as
in Adam sinning all his posterity were virtually condemned to death by the Law,
and in some sort actually, because in some sort actual sinners. 3. He justifies
us fullier actually and formally in our selves, and not only in our head; when
by his Spirit, and our faith the work of his Spirit, he applies Christ unto us,
to our justification. 4. And further yet, he justifies us actually and formally
to our sense and feeling, when by our own reflex knowledge, and examination of
our estate, he gives us to perceive this application of Christ made, and so to
have peace and ^oy in him.

Reas. 1. Because ou^ sins from which we ought to be justified, are done
against the majesty of God, 1* Sam* 2. 25. And none can forgive an offense done
against another, or an injury done to another, in a proper way of speaking.

Reas. 2. Because the guiit of sin depends on the obligation of the Law, and of
divine justice and truth: And therefore cannot be taken away but by him that is
above the Law, and knows what is agreeable to his own truth and meaning, in
the first making of it.

Reas. 3. Because by justification we are received into the favor of God, and
life eternal, and God himself (in some sort) is given unto us: all which can no
otherwise be done, but by God himself alone.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against Papists, who set down manners and means of
justification, from humane tradition, and their own authority, unto ^retched
men; as if it were in their power to justi^ie men after what way they please,
when it is God ^lone that justifies, and that therefore prescribes ^he manner
and means of justification only.

Use 2. Of Consolation, as it is set down, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing
to our charge, it is God that justifi^th? And verse 31. If God be for us, who
can be against ^s?

Doct. 2. This justification is mere, pure, and infinite grace, or favor.

So in the Text; freely, his free favor. The grace of God in justification
appears as it were by these degrees. 1. In that God pursues not his right
against us and our sins, according to that rigor that his Law might have been
taken in, and his revenging justice might have extended its self to; but left
place for some reconciliation. 2. In that being himself the party offended; yet
he himself of his own good will both invented, appointed or ordered, and
revealed both the manner and means of this reconciliation. 3. In that he spared
not his only begotten Son, for procuring of this reconciliation. 4. That
without any merits or worth of ours, he ingrafts us into his Son and our Lord
Jesus Christ, and so makes us partakers of that reconciliation which is in him.
This was altogether necessary, that our justification might be of free favor.

Reas. 1. Because it was impossible for the laws and the righteousness thereof
to justify sinners, Romans 8. verse. 1*

Reas. 2. Because in the justification of a sinner is remission or pardon of
^in; and all pardon is of free ^avour*

Reas. 3. Because in justification is a free Donation of righteousness, and of
life eternal, which to sinners, cannot be done, but with especial grace and
favor. The satisfaction made by Christ for us, withstands not the freeness of
this favor of justification; because it was of free favor and grace, that
Christ himself was given us, and by calling appointed to this satisfaction for
us; and of his own freegrace also accepted of that calling.

Use 1. Is of Refutation, against Papists and many others; who will have our
justification to depend upon our Works; which yet every where, by the Apostle
are opposed to this free grace in our justification.

Use 2. Is of Consolation to believers, and repenters against all these
shakings of mind, which they feel, or can feel from the unworthiness of
themselves, that their own consciences tell them of; because our whole
justification hangs on the free favor, or grace of God, and not upon our worth
or merits.

Use 3. Is of Exhortation: 1. That we always flee to the Free Grace of God, as
to the only garrison of our souls. 2. That from admiration of this grace of
God, we always study to be thankful to God.

Doct. 3. The obedience of Jesus Christ imputed unto us, or given us, and so
accounted ours, justifies or makes us righte^ and is the foundation of all our
righteousness.

It is in the Text, By the Redemption made by Jesus Christ. 1. For he that is
justified by the Redemption (...) other, as by paying a ransom: that price is
conceived as it were to be paid for him who is redeemed. ^. If Christ be the
pacification in our justification, when we please God, as it is in the Text,
then we please him for something, which Christ has performed for our good. 3.
If Faith justifies, as it has relation to Christ, and the shedding of his
blood, then there is something in his blood thus shed, or in his obedience unto
death, by virtue whereof we are justified.

Now the obedience of Christ in respect of our justification, has 1. the place
of a meriting cause, which obtains it for us, because it was the means that
Gods justice required to be performed to him, before his grace could justify
us. 2* It has the place of the formal cause, in as much as it is so accepted
and taken for ours, being given us by free-gift, and so made ours indeed, as
that we are looked on by God, as truly clothed with it: when he pronounces the
sentence of our justification: whence that phrase of the Apostle is, Not having
mine own righteousness, but that which is Christ's, Phil. 3. 9.

Reas. 1. Is, because this is most agreeable both to the justice and mercy of
God, jointly: For if our justification had stood in the bare remission of sin,
without the imputation of a sufficient righteousness, or obedience for
satisfaction to justice, then only Gods mercy and favor had had place in this
business, no regard being had of the justice of God, that satisfaction might
be made.

Reas. 2. Because if we had been pronounced just without any imputation of a
satisfying righteousness, or obedience performed, then there could have been no
just ground of such a sentence; to wit, that he should be pronounced just,
which was no way just, neither by his own inherent justice or righteousness;
nor yet by another justification freely given him.

Rea. 3. Because by this means, we have in some manner a divine righteousness,
or the righteousness of God himself; to wit, that which Christ, who is God,
performed for us (not the essential righteousness of God, as Soliander dreamed)
as God-man in one person; on which therefore we may rely, and with the greater
confidence appear before God, and for it hope for all divine and good things at
the hands of God.

Reas. 4. Because in this manner we the more own our salvation as wrought by
Christ.

Use 1. Is of Refutation against Papists, Anabaptists, Remonstrants or
Arminians, and almost all Sects and Sectarians, who all agree in this error,
that our justification depends upon our works, and is not to be sought by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness to us, or accounting his obedience ours.

Use 2. Is of Exhortation, unto due thankfulness toward Christ, by whose
Redemption or ransoming of us, we are justified, and set free from sin and
death, the wages of sin; and adjudged unto life and glory, above what any mere
creatures righteousness could ever have deserved.

Doct. 4. The obedience of Jesus Christ is powerful for justifying of us, by
being accepted and laid hold on by our Faith. It is in the Text. Through Faith
in his Blood.

Reas* 1. The very nature and duty of Faith is to rely on Christ, or on the
favor and mercy of God in Christ, for pardon of sins.

Reas. 2. Because by Faith, we are united unto Christ, and ingrafted into him,
that so we may be partakers of all the blessings, that in him are prepared for
men.

Reas. 3. Because Faith receives, lays hold on, and embraces all the promises
of God, and the things in them contained, offered, or proposed; amongst which
pardon of sins, and justification in Christ has a chief place.

The Use is of Direction, that it may be our only care in the business of our
justification, to direct our Faith and confidence toward Christ, and to stir
up and confirm it more and more, that we may thence have firm and abundant
comfort.

The twenty fourth Lords day.
James 2. 22. Seeft thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was
faith made perfect?
IN these words is contained the conclusion of that disputation, which James
had against such as vant of Faith, that is, destitute of good-works: For the
Apostle concludes, that such Faith is of no worth unto justification: And this
conclusion is often repeated, as verse. 14, 17. and 20. 22. and 24. under sundry
forms of words; but to one and the same sense. Now this Conclusion which the
Apostle proves, is not that good-works are any part, or cause of our
justification before God, as Papists take it; nor yet (as many of our own
think) that our works justify us before men, however that contain a truth in
it; but this is the conclusion, that justifying faith is such, that it works,
and puts forth its operation by good-works.

And it is proved 1. from a comparison of likes* from verse. 15. to the 18. 2.
By another comparison of likes, to wit, of such a fruitless faith in men, and
devils, verse. 19. 3. from the example and pattern of that faith that was in
Abraham, verse. 21. of all which the conclusion is set down in this 22. verse. In
which two things are determined, 1. That true and justifying faith is fruitful
of good works. 2. That good works are the end and perfection of faith; for
faith is said to cooperate with good works, because together with the command
of God, it furnishes its strength and force of working, for producing of good
works: And that works are called the perfection of faith; it is not so to be
understood, as if they were the internal and formal perfection of faith; as the
form is the formal and essential perfection of every thing: But in that they
contain and show the external perfection of faith, in as much as they flow from
it, and as every effect contains in it self some perfection of its course; to
wit, as it partakes of the force and virtue that comes from the internal
perfection of the cause.

Doct. 1. Our good works are no ways the cause of our justification, but the
effects and fruits of a man justified.

It is gathered from the Text, for as much as works are the effects of faith:
And faith and justification according to the nature of relatives, are at once
or together in nature. A true believer and a justified man are the same thing.
If therefore good works are the effects of a believer, then are they the
effects of one justified also. And that works justify us not, is apparent from
four reasons.

Reas. 1. Because believers are not now under the Covenant of works, and
therefore cannot be justified by works* but are all condemned by them; if we
stand to them in that point, because none of them come up to what the Law
requires, and so are sinful and imperfect.

Reas. 2. Because all our good works are debts* and therefore they can never
properly merit or deserve pardon.

Reas. 3. Because the good works we do, came not from our own strength, but
from the grace of God.

Reas. 4. Because our best good works are in themselves imperfect, and defiled
with many uncleanness.

Object. 1. Our good works are perfect, as they come from the Holy Spirit,
whose works are all perfect.

Ans. 1. If in respect of us they be imperfect, they cannot as ours be of force
to our justification, though in some other respect they may be perfect.

2. That perfection which they have in reference to the Holy Spirit, does not
redound properly unto our meriting or deserving by them, because the holy Ghost
is no ways united unto us, into one person, which is the only ground, why the
works of Christ had a divine merit and worth in them; namely, because they were
divine works, as being his, that was, as man personally united unto the
Godhead and person of the Son, so as they made but one person. The Holy
Spirit, then though he be the principal cause of our good works, yet this is in
its own manner, as an external efficient, as having no personal union with the
party working.

Object. 2. Our reward is given according to our works.

Ans. That reward is not of our merit, but of God's free grace and favor. For
there is a reward of servants and a reward of sons; the reward of servants
looks not to the person, but to the merit, or desert of the work; but the
reward of sons look^ at the person chiefly* and so is given of grace and good
will to the person of the worker, more than to the merit of the work. For the
Father in his Son crowns that with reward, which in it self deserves no such
thing for the most part: Otherwise he were unjust not to reward it so in
servants likewise.

Use, Of Admonition, that we never glory in our selves or our own works before
God, but always acknowledge, when we have done all that we can; that we are
but unprofitable servants, as our Lord himself teaches us to do; and that we
depend wholly on the grace of God* putting no trust in our own works.

Doct 2. Good works by a necessary coherence follow true faith.

It is gathered from this, that faith is to work together in and with good
works, and by good works to be brought to its end. Now good works are necessary
to a believer: 1. By necessity of precept, because God from that right and
power he had to do so, was pleased to command us them. 2. By necessity of means
without which we cannot attain the end: And that 1. In respect of God, or his
glory, as the end, because without them we cannot attain to the enjoyment of
God, nor to glorify him, as we should and must for that attainment. 2. In
respect of the Church and others without the Church, whose edification without
good works we cannot attain: and good men are edified by good works, as by
examples, more and more; and to others a hoping light is as it were held out,
whereby they may discern their right way. Let your light so shine before men,
etc. 3. In respect of our own salvation, because good works are necessary to
salvation though not as meritorious causes, yet as dispositions,
qualifications, and ways, that must be had and insisted in, because our
election and calling is to them, and by them our salvation, and these other are
made surer to our consciences. For in them consists that way of a new
obedience, and Gospel thankfulness, which only leads unto life; also as
holiness not only internal, but also external, is such an inseparable
disposition or qualification from such as are to be saved, as that without it,
none shall ever see God to his comfort, or happiness. 3. They are necessary by
necessity of the end; because election, redemption, vocation, tend and look to
this end, that we may live to God, and to Christ, in all holiness and
righteousness: And a necessity as well of thankfulness as of covenant lies
upon us, that with all our vigor and with all our strength, we endeavor to
attain unto this end. 4. Good works are necessary by a certain sort of natural
necessity. For just as good fruits come of a good tree, and sweet waters come
from a sweet fountain, by a like manner and necessity, good works come from
true faith. Or as our vital operations and motions do always accompany natural
life; so also spiritual life, which is from faith, whereby the just man lives,
puts forth it self always in good works, as the proper operations and acts of
a spiritual life. It may sometimes happen, that as in one in a swound scarce
any matter or operation does appear, though yet the ^fe it self remain; so also
by some extraordinary ^entation, for some time the seed of faith may remain in
the heart of this, or that man, the fruits whereof can hardly be discovered.
But this is 1. As much against the nature of faith, and of a faithful man, as
sickness is against health and life. 2. It is an extraordinary case* by which
we must not judge of the ordinary operations and fruits of faith, nor of its
nature, or the necessity of good works. 3. In such a case both the degree of
faith it self is deminished, and the comfort of it ceases for that time. 4.
Although in such a case such fruits of faith appears not, as are required to
our comfort^ yet it is hardly ever so overwhelmed, but that it has some
operation, at least in that fight, which then the Spirit has against the flesh.

Use 1. Of Reproof, against such men's most vain presumption, as brag of a
sort of faith of their own, that is separated from all care of good works.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that with such considerations we stir up our minds to
greater zeal and cheerfulness in every good work.

The five and twentieth Lords day.
Romans 4. 11. And be received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of the faith, which he had yet being uncircumcis^d* That he might
be the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also.
THe Apostle in this place treats of the justificatification of Abraham which
he so ascribes to him, that in him he sets down a pattern of justification to
life* as well in respect of uncircumcised Gentiles, as of Jews themselves. For
this end the Apostle observes, and proposes to be observed, that faith was
reputed to Abraham unto righteousness, while he was yet uncircumcised, or in
the foreskin. Against which Doctrine, because it might be objected, that then
circumcision was of no use to him: The Apostle answers by a probation in this
verse, and denies the consequence; and gives a reason of this his denial
thence, because there was another end and use of that Sacrament. For he was not
therefore circumcised, that by circumcision he might be justified, but that by
circumcision, as by a seal and sign he might have his righteousness, that was
before imputed to him, the better confirmed. We have then in these words a
description of a Sacrament of the Covenant of grace. 1. From its general
notion; that it is a sign. 2. From its differencing notion, in which it is
described by the use and end of this sign. The end is designed. 1. From its
manner of signifying; being not only called a sign, but a seal. 2. From the
object, or thing signified, which is the righteousness of faith, and the
receiving thereof.

Doct. 1. The proper end and use of a Sacrament is, that it may confirm our
faith.

This is hence collected; because Circumcision is here called a seal of faith,
or of the righteousness of faith: For a seal, when it is set to Deeds, has
this proper use, that it ratifies and confirms them; that is declares them
solemnly to be sealed.

Reas. 1. Because since Sacraments are fitly and conveniently referred to faith
and to grace, they ought of necessity to tend either to the first begetting of
grace, or to the confirmation of it. And the first is performed by the Holy
Spirit in our first calling, by the preaching of the Gospel; and the
Sacraments are not instruments of our first call; therefore they tend not to
the first breeding of faith in us, but to the confirming and strengthening of
it more and more in us, after it is first begotten in us.

Reas. 2. Because often faith is begotten, though Sacraments be wanting, if
they be not despised: But in any ordinary way, it is never so confirmed and
strengthened, as it is when Sacraments are joined with the Word.

Reas. 3. Because Sacraments properly belong not but to such as have faith
already, and so can have no other use, but to confirm such parties faith, and
to advance by it all other graces in them.

Use, Of Direction, what we ought to look to properly in the use of Sacraments;
to wit, that by such holy Ordinances of God we may be more and more built up in
our most holy faith.

Doct. 2. The Sacraments do no other way confirm our faith, or advance our
salvation, then by way of sign and seal.

This is hence collected, in that the Apostle gives unto them this only way of
operating in this place. Which that we may better understand, it is to be taken
notice of, that a sign is either natural, or by institution or appointment; and
that Sacraments are signs by appointment. Now in signs by appointment, the
author appointing is always to be looked to, and the end of his appointing.
For seeing any appointment is as a mean, it has an essential relation and
dependence as well to the efficient, by which it is directed, as to the end
whereunto it is directed. The author and appointer of a Sacrament is God alone,
because no creature can appoint one, seeing none can perform that which in a
Sacrament is signed and sealed, nor ^ind God to perform it for them. The end of
a Sacrament in general, is to help our infirmity, and a Sacrament helps it in a
three fold manner.

Reas. 1. In respect of our understanding, whereunto they are notifying or
knowledge-begetting signs, or as it were clear mirrours, wherein by the
intermediate Ministry of our external senses we may behold the mysteries of God.

Reas. 2. In respect of our memory, whereunto they are admonishing signs, and
as it were made perpetual remembrances or memorandums, by their orderly
reiteration and renovation.

Reas. 3. In respect of our will, faith, and affiance, whereunto they are
sealing signs, or most certain seals and pledges.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against Papists, who will have the Sacraments to work
righteousness and grace in us, as physical instruments, by the work done.

Use 2. Of Direction, in the use of them, that our chief care may be, by these
means to lay hold on, and more and more to apply to our selves all these
spiritual things, which by the Sacraments are signed and sealed unto us.

Doct. 3. The things which in the Sacraments are signified and sealed unto us,
are in one word all the blessings of the New Covenant.

This is gathered from hence, in that the righteousness of faith is said to be
sealed by the Sacrament of Circumcision. Now that righteousness by the trope
Synecdoche, signifies all the blessings of the New Covenant, as appears from
verse 9. where the imputation of this righteousness is called the declaration
of blessedness* Now the same that is signified in one Sacrament, is also
signified in another, as to the substance of the matter; though the manner be
diverse; and so some benefits are more expressly signified in one Sacrament than
in another.

Reas. 1. Because a Sacrament is after the fall a seal of the New Covenant, not
as to this, or that part of it, but of the whole. For no Covenant, or Charter,
though sometimes it may have many seals, uses to be confirmed as to one part of
it by one seal, and to another part of it by another seal; but by all and every
seal the whole is confirmed.

Reas. 2. Because Christ from whom every blessing flows, is exhibited to us
in every Sacrament. For as the Sacraments in the Old Testament, looked at
Christ, as shadows do at their bodies; so also, and that much more clearly in
the New Testament, we are both baptized into Christ, and have communion with
him in his body and blood, in his Supper. And when Christ is exhibited, there
all the blessings that are prepared for us in Christ, are together with him
exhibited to us.

Reas. 3. Because the blessings of life and salvation cannot be separated from
one another; as for example, effectual Vocation, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, Consolation* and eternal Glorification. When therefore one of
these blessings is directly represented, indirectly also, and by consequence
all the rest are signified and sealed.

Use 1. Of Information; 1. That we may learn rightly to distinguish between
complete Sacraments, and other Sacramental signs. For other signs and
ceremonies, that do not signify and seal the blessings of the New Covenant, as
they are such; though they are sacred signs, yet are they not presently
Sacraments, to speak properly; that is, they are not of that nature and rank
with Baptism and the Supper. That we have in great esteem Christ's most holy
Sacraments, because in them we go about no less, than all that belongs to our
eternal happiness.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we never separate what God has joined together in
the use of the Sacraments, which uses to be done by such, as seek only for
remission of sins, but not for sanctification and preservation from sin; and
that because they have not determined with themselves to amend their lives.

Doct. 4. By the Sacraments these blessings are not only signed generally, but
also particularly to all that partake of them with true faith.

This is hence gathered, in that A^raham particular ly is said to have received
the seal of his own righteousness in particular.

Reas. 1. Because the Sacraments are not so proposed to us, that they may seal
on this condi^ion, that we have faith; but they alwaves presuppose faith
al^eady to be in us; and so then they are offered to confirm, and do singularly
confirm it.

Reas. 2. Because to every one in particular, and by name they are exhibited
for their confirmation; and not in common only, as the Word is preached
publicly.

Reas. 3. Because the manner of administration, and the Sacramental actions
that belong unto them, as washing in Baptism, taking, eating, drinking in the
Lord's Supper, consist in a particular application of the signs; and therefore
also they signify a particular sealing of the things signified, unto particular
persons.

Use 1. Is of Comfort, against scruples and doubts wherewith our minds are
sometimes troubled. Because in the Sacraments duly administered to such as have
right, God as it were from Heaven stretches out his own hand, and holds forth
in it his grace, and all the spiritual blessings of the Covenant, alike unto
every one of us (thus participating) in our own proper and singular persons
particularly.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we neglect not the Sacraments, but diligently both
prepare and fit our selves for them, and then seek after them, and receive
them; because to neglect them, were to neglect our own proper and singular
consolation in particular.

Use 3. Of Direction, how we may rightly use the Sacraments; to wit, ^o as in a
singular manner, we seek our edification and advancement in this, that we see
Christ there offering and giving his grace to us by name, and in particular,
and accordingly, thus sealing to us in particular our salvation.

The six and seven and twentieth Lords day.
Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
HEre is expounded the command of Christ, which being now about to ascend into
Heaven, he left unto his Apostles. It contains two principal duties. 1. The
preaching and publishing of that Doctrine taught by Christ. 2. The
administration of the Sacraments by him appointed. For in this place by
Baptism (according to that usual borrowing of speech, called Synecdoche, that
puts sometimes one sort for the whole kind, and sometimes contrarily) the other
Sacrament of the Supper is understood; but here Baptism is rather named than
the other: 1. Because it is the first Sacrament, and that of initiation, and
receiving solemnly into the Church, on which the other for this cause does
depend. 2. Because it chiefly belonged unto the Apostles office, by themselves,
or by others to see this Sacrament rightly administered, who were rather sent to
plant, and gather or build Churches from their first beginnings, than to feed,
govern, and further build, or advance them, after they were first planted. And
Baptism belongs particularly to the first ingrafting into Christ, and to
plan^ation; and the Supper unto feeding, and growth after planting. Now
Baptism is expounded in this place^ 1. From its object, or parties to be
baptized* Baptizing them: that is, such as are already trained up* in Christ's
Doctrine, or ^ade his (...) or ^lars, as the Greek word signifies, (...), make
them my ^chollars, or Disciples. 2. From the ^orme, or manner of doing it; to
wit, in the name of the Father* Son, and Holy Ghost. By which form or model
are designed: 1. The efficient causes, by whose authority Baptism* is
exercised, and made effectual; and that is by the name, or authority and power
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. ^. The union of the baptized, that they are to
have with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in the participation of all their
graces of justification, sanctification, adoption, etc. that from the Father,
in the Son, and by the Spirit, are derived unto all the heirs of eternal
salvation; and in the profession and practice of all the outward Ordinances and
means, that Christ taught them, whereby to attain to those inward gra^es, and
to keep, and advance them, by the same Spirit in the Son and from the Father.

Doct. 1. Baptism is the Sacrament of our ingrafting, and initiation or first
reception into Christ.

This is hence gathered, in that all that are already taught Christ's Doctrine,
and made his Scholars professedly, are the^ presently to be haptized, that so
they may be registered as it were amongst the domestics or householders of
Christ.

Reas. 1. This appears in that baptism came in the place of Circumcision; and
Circumcision was the Sacrament of first admition amongst the people of God.

Reas. 2. In Baptism is represented the death of fin, and mortifying of the
old man; a washing and cleansing from sin; and bringing of a man from death to
life: All which do most properly denote our first vocation and therefore also
Baptism is called by Scripture it self, the Sacrament of regeneration, or
washing of regeneration.

Reas. 3. Because by our Baptism our first solem^ reception into Christ's
Family, and Kingdom is represented; and therefore also we are said to be
baptized into Christ; by this therefore Baptism is distinguished from the
Lord's Supper, because however it seal the same blessings, as to the main
business that the other does, yet it does it not after the same manner, but
Baptism denotates their beginning, and the Supper their progress and
advancement.

Use, Of Direction, how we should make constant and perpetual use of our
Baptism; to wit, if we take occasion often to meditate on it, and the graces
of God sealed in it on God's part, and our return of universal obedience sealed
too on our part* and of the favor God did us, thus solemnly to receive us into
Covenant with him, and into his Church, the true confederates of God, or number
of them that are saved by Christ; and if from this faith and belief, thus
sealed and continued, we more and more study to take care in all things to walk
worthy of this condition, and to glorify God in Christ, as becomes, and as he
requires of us.

Doct. 2. In Baptism by washing of water, our adoption, ^ustification* and
salvation is sealed to us.

This is hence collected, in that our union in the form of Baptism is
designed to be with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost* for sealing our communion
in those benefits, which flow from this union. And we are properly adopted by
the Father, justified by the Son, and sanctified by the Holy Spirit.

Reas. 1. Because these three are directly necessary for us, that we may have
true entrance into the Kingdom of God. For 1. We must be accepted of as God's
children, that he may be our Father; which is by adoption. 2. We must be freed
from the guilt of sin, by which we are separated from God; and this is done by
justification. 3. We must be cleansed and purged from the remainders and
corruptions of sin, whereby men are made unfit to enjoy God; and this is done
by sanctification.

Reas. 2. Because the washing with water in Baptism designeth and some way
respects our cleansing as well from the guilt, as corruption of sin,
whereby we were made strangers to the estate of the Sons of God, that thence it
may appear, that now by grace we are adopted, justified, and sanctified.
Neither by any other visible sign could these things so conveniently have been
shadowed out, as by the washing of water; because both of its own nature it
has a principal fitness to cleanse, and amongst all Nations it is ea^ie to be
had at hand, and then also it had been before sanctified under the Old
Testament for such uses.

Use 1. Of Information, how greatly we ought to esteem our Baptism, wherein so
great benefits or blessings spiritual, were first sealed unto us.

Use 2. Of Direction, that upon occasion of seeing Baptism administered at any
time, we both with all devo^t meditation on our own Baptism, lift up our minds
unto the lively apprehensions of these blessings, of our adoption,
^ustification, and sanctification, namely; and withal think upon what is due
to God from us, for so great benefits, and what we engaged in and by our
baptism, to perform in all manner of holy, thankful and Christian obedience.

Doct. 3. Those saving blessings, which are signified in Baptism, do not
properly depend on the washing of water, as to their real efficacies; but on
the operation of the Father, Son and holy Spirit.

This is hence gathered, because by these words of the institution, our hearts
as it were are commanded to be lifted up, that we may look for all the grace
and efficacy of this Sacrament out of heaven, from Father, Son and holy Ghost.

Reas. 1. Because the Sacramental signs are no causes of grace, neither
principal, nor instrumental, by any virtue or efficacy that is either inherent,
or adherent in themselves; that is, are no physical causes (as the phrase is
used and received in the Schools about this point) but only moral, and in a
moral way put forth any virtue they have; to wit, in as much as they seal only
that, which God the Father, in the Son, and by the Spirit works in us.

Reas. 2. Because our ^ustification and adoption, which consists in the
remission of ^ins, and accepting of us into favor, are moral effects of their
own nature, and not physical, and therefore cannot by any means be otherwise
produced than morally.

Reas. 3. Because it can no way be conceived, how these external elements of
the Sacraments should physically work upon the soul to the production of
spiritual effects, seeing themselves are but corporal, and therefore can only
work physically upon the body. Indeed in holy Scriptures such spiritual effects
use to be attributed unto such signs, as well in the Old, as in the New
Testament; but this is only in the moral sense aforesaid, and by trope or
borrowed speech, because of the union, or relation of likeness that is between
signs, and things signified by them; from which union, or relation of likeness
(grounded partly on the analogy between the things themselves; and partly, but
chiefly on the divine institution) there arises, in common manner of speaking,
almost such a mutual and interchangeable giving or communicating of the
attributes, or qualities of each of these to the other, as is found in Christ
between his human and divine nature, because of the hypostatical, or personal
union between them: Though otherwise there be no other union here, but of
likeness and proportion between the sign, and things signified, or sealed,
when the signs are rightly used; which performance or making present of the
graces signified, depend wholly on the truth of God's institution and promise;
and that in a moral way, as was said before, not properly physical; though this
Sacramental union was devised by School Divines, or mistaken and imagined
physical, for maintaining their corporal presence of Christ's body, in
propriety of words, or their monster of Transubstantiation. And all forsooth,
because the things that are proper to the signs, are sometimes attributed to
the things signified; and countrarily, the properties of the things signified,
are attributed to the signs: The true reasons, and manner whereof we have
sufficiently explained.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against Papists, who in some sort turn the Sacraments
into Idols, while not by ^rope or borrowed speech (which is usual, as we have
declared) but in propriety of words, they give unto the the signs, and
external elements, such things as are proper unto God.

Use 2. Of Direction* that in the use of the ^acraments, we lift up always our
hearts, and by faith and devout desires look for and seek from God such divine
blessings, as are represented by the outward signs.

Doct. 4. All and only such are to be baptized as are the Disciples or
Scholars of Christ; that is, that are of his family before, and as it were his
householders, and therefore fit to be solemnly declared and enrolled for ^uch.

This is hence gathered, because the Apostles are here commanded first to
gather Disciples or Scholars unto Christ out of all Nations; and then to
baptize them, after they were made such.

Reas 1. Because the Saraments are appendices of the Word, so that they are
often understood under it, in Scriptures; to wit, when the Gospel and word of
the Kingdom are only mentioned; because they are appendants and connexed to
it: And hence it is also, that if the Sacraments be separated from the Word,
they are of no value. Where therefore the Word is not received, the Sacraments
cannot be received.

Reas. 2. Because the Sacraments are both privileges, and marks or badges of
the Church; and therefore they belong not but to such as are members of the
Church.

Reas. 3 Because a Sacrament cannot be a sealing sign, but unto such as have
some grant to be sealed. But who so are no ways pa^takers of Christ, the^e
have no grant, or promise made to them, that can, or ought to be sealed unto
them.

A Question here arises about Infants; Whether they are to be baptized, or
not, seeing they cannot be taught, or instructed about faith?

I Answer, That the Children, or Infants of believers ought to be Baptized,
because while they are yet Infants, as to the external privileges of the
Covenant with God, they are accounted both persons and parties of, or belonging
to their parents; and therefore they are of the family of Christ, or of the
number of his Disciples. For if the Covenant made with Abraham be the same for
substance; by which we are saved, and belongs as much to us, and to our
children, as it did to Abraham, and his posterity; then not only we, but our
children also ought to be partakers of the seal of this Covenant. But the first
is true, as appears by Romans 4. and other places; and therefore the latter
also is true. Furthermore, it makes to this purpose, that the grace of this
Covenant after Christ's coming, is no way more straitened, or made narrow, than
it was before his coming; but in many sorts made wider, larger, an^ more
extended. What is objected about faith, which is required of such, as are to be
baptized, it (...) no more the Baptism of Infants, than of old it (...) the
Circumcision of them, which required faith (...) well as baptism, because it
was by its institution (...) seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11* As
therefore in Circumcision, distinct knowledge, (...) faith, and profession of
it, were not necessary for (...) fants; but the state of faith, and of its
profession where^n (by means of their parents profession they were born, did
suffice; so it is also in (...)

Use 1. Of Confutation, against Anabaptists.

Use 2. Of Comfort, in respect of this great favor done us by God, even from
our Infancy, whereby he deems not to receive our selves, but also our children.

The eight and nine twentieth Lords days.
1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the comunion of the
body of Christ?
THe Apostle in the beginning of the eighth Chapter exhorted Christians that
they would abstain from the unclean feasts of the Gentiles. In these words of
the Text, after a digression, whereby he had prevented some objections, he
brings an argument from comparison of likes, whereby he proves, that
communication or partaking with Gentiles in their Idolatrous feasts, cannot be
exercised without communion with the Idols themselves. The comparing argument
proposed for illustrating and proving of this, is the Lord's Supper, wherein we
have communion with Christ. The argument then comes to this: If in partaking of
the Lord's Supper we have communion with Christ, then also in partaking of the
feasts of Idols, we have communion with the Idols: But the first is true; and
therefore the latter likewise. The Assumption is set down and explained in our
Text; and it is explained by the parts of the Lord's Supper, or feast; which
are bread and wine. The use of these is shown, 1. From the things which they
serve to signify, as things like unto themselves, and subjects or objects which
they signify. 2. From the manner of signifying; that they do not barely
signify, or represent only; but also ratify and seal a communion in, or
partaking of the things signified. 3. From the reason, or cause whence this
relation and connection between the signs and things signified, does arise;
which is the blessing of the signs, or by using of them, according as Christ
did appoint.

Doct. 1. The Lord's Supper is a Sacrament of the New Testament, whereby our
nourishment and growth in Christ, is sealed unto us.

This is hence gathered, in that bread and wine were the external signs
appointed by Christ in this Sacrament, which are the chief means of bodily
nourishment, as not only experience, but also the Holy Ghost teaches us,
Psalm* 10* Now, not bread alone, not yet wine alone is used, but both together
partly that so the mystery of our spiritual nourishment might be better
explained, by such a distribution of the whole into its parts; and partly, that
the sufficiency of our nourishment might be thereby declared; to wit, that we
need to seek nothing for it one of Christ.

Reas. 1. Because as we have the principle of grace and spiritual life in
Christ; so also we ought to look for all progress and advancement in Christ by
faith. And as the first is signified in Baptism; so this last is most fitly
declared in the Lord's Supper. And this is it properly wherein the Supper
differs from Baptism.

Reas. 2. Because for our often infirmities and falls, it was needful to us,
that we had some Sacrament, for the frequent renewing of our confirmation, as
indeed our faith stands in need of such renovation, and corroboration. But
Baptism is not to be renewed, because it is enough once to be born again, as it
was once to be born. Most conveniently therefore the Supper was instituted,
often by us to celebrated, that in faith and all grace we might glow more and
more, and be confirmed and strengthened therein.

Reas. 3. Because we receive from God all the increases of grace, so is it fit,
that by public profession we acknowledge this, to the glory of his name, and
stirring up of our thankfulness to him; unto which use the holy Supper does
most fitly serve us.

Reas. 4. Because that communion, which is between the members of the Church,
as belonging to the same family, and as they eat all of the same spiritual food
at the same table of their own and the same Master and Lord, cannot be fi^lier
declared, than by such a sacred and solemn spiritual feast, or banquet.

Use 1. Of Comfort, that we may be refreshed because that in this manner, both
by Word, and Sacrament or seal, we have this confirmed unto us, that all that
is necessary to our nourishment, growth and advancement in grace, for attaining
of spiritual perfection, is prepared for us in Christ, and is to be by him
derived unto us.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that we may diligently bestow all care and industry,
that we may really and in operation attain this nourishment, growth and
advancement in grace, which in this Sacrament rightly used, is exhibited unto
us.

Doct. 2. This nourishment, which in Christ we receive, it by the working of
fath.

This is hence gathered, in that we are said in the Text to have communion with
the flesh and blood of Christ, which yet are not bodily present with us, but
are only spiritually partaken of by faith, as is apparent by other places.

Reas. 1. Because by faith it is that we have union with Christ.

Reas. 2. Because by faith in Christ, we draw as it were, and suck unto us all
grace and spiritual life.

Reas. 3. Because as the principle of our spiritual life is faith, so from the
further intention and extention of this faith, depends our nourishment and
growth in the same life. For all spiritual endowments and riches are not only
vigorous, and grow cold, according as our faith is vigorous, and grows cold.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against such as will have Christ to be given us in the
Sacrament by the outward work only bodily, and by the mouth to be received,
whether we have faith, or not.

Use 2. Of Direction, that in the use of the Lord's Supper, we take great care
to stir up our faith, because unto nourishment and growth, is not only
required the habit and disposition of faith, but also the actual exercise of
it, in so much that all, even believers and faithful, are not worthy receivers
of this Supper, unless they rouse up the faith that they have, and exercise it
according as the exigent of that time and business does require.

Doct. 3. For this spiritual nourishment in the Supper it is not required, that
the bread and wine be substantially changed into the body and blood of Christ;
nor that Christ be bodily present, in, with, and under the bread and wine; but
only that they be changed (...) to relation, and application or use; and that
Christ be spiritually present only to such as partake in faith.

This is hence gathered, in that bread and wine are said to remain here in the
Supper; and our communion with Christ, is in a sort said to be such, as
Idolaters have with their Idols; which stands in relation only. Therefore
Transubstantiation of Papists and Consubstantiation of Lutherans fight.

Reas. 1. With the nature of Sacraments in general, whose nature consist in a
relative union, or likeness, as has been explained; not in a bodily succession
of the one in the others place, or a substantial change of the one into the
other; nor yet in a bodily conjunction or presence of the one with, in, and
under the other.

Reas. 2. With the analogy of this to the other Sacrament of Baptism, wherein
neither Transubstantiation, nor Consustantiation uses to be made, nor is
dreamed of to be made.

Reas. 3. With all the Sacramental phrases, or manners of speaking, used
through all the Scriptures.

Reas. 4. With the humane nature of Christ, which, with its essential
properties safely can neither be every where, nor yet in so innumerable places,
at once, as the Supper of the Lord uses to be given at one time.

Reas. 5. With the state and condition of the glorified body of Christ, which
suffers not that the flesh and blood of Christ, should be divided or sundred,
broken, devoured and chawed by the teeth, concocted and digested by the
stomach, etc. handled in other such manner.

Reas. 6. With the revealed will of God, by which it is certain, that Christ
remains bodily in the Heavens, and shall do so, until he come again to judge
the (...) and the dead.

Use ^. Of (...), against the errors and mad (...) of such, as defend such
monstrous Doctrines without any shame, as they were at first hatched and
received without any ground.

Use 2. Of Direction, that in the use of this Supper we (...) of no gross and
carnal thoughts into our minds, as if the spiritual eating of, and feeding
upon (...) daily in the Word preached, were not the (...) altogether as to the
substance, with this in the (...): For they differ only in this, that the
(...) eating differs only in the manner, or external adjunct of sealing, or
obsignative exhibition, or ratification, from the others that are merely
spiritual, and without this outward obsignation, in the Word preached, though
it has often the inward, and substantial obsignation by the Spirit, for which
only the other was instituted.

Doct. 4. The only (...) of this operative presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, is that blessing, whereby we bless, (...), or set apart to such an
holy use, the bread and wine, according to Christ's appointment, who cannot but
be (...) with him own Ordinance, by his Spirit and operation, (...) (...) his
promise* when it is used, as he appointed

This is taught in the Text; The cup of blessing, which we bless etc. This
blessing contains in it self, 1. The Institution recited and explained in
celebration of the upper, as the ground of the whole action, and of the benefit
and blessing, that is to follow on it. 2. A thanks giving for Christ, and for
this his appointment, unto the Father, through him, and by the Spirit, that in
this Ordinance we are more and more made partakers of Christ and his benefits.
3. A petition, wherereby the grace of God is sought, for directing and keeping
us in the right use of it, and making this Ordinance powerful unto all the
ends, for which it was appointad by him: And this is properly the consecrating
of the signs, or outward elements.

Reas. 1. Because by this blessing, bodily things are separated from a common
use, and are set apart to an holy, and so are consecrated, and sanctified.

Reas. 2. Because by these acts both the will of God by his institution, and
our will or consent in this business, sanctified by our prayers, come both
together and to one, for procuring spiritual power and operation in the forms
or use of these signs.

Reas. 3. Because Christ himself did this, and commanded that we should do the
same, that we doing so, may look for the spiritual blessing from him.

Use 1. Of Resutation against those kind of enchantments, or sorceries, that
the Papists have put in place of this blessing or consecration.

Use 2. Of Direction* that in the celebration of this Supper, we may always
have Christ's institution before our eyes with thanksgiving, and seeking of
grace or favor, that we may approve our selves in the right use of it; because
from these comes all the blessing, and power of the Sacrament.

The thirtieth Lords day.
1 Cor. 11. 28, 29. Verse 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread, and drink of that cup.

29 For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.


THe Apostle in this part of his Epistle corrects many abuses, which had got
some strength in the Church of Corinth; amongst which was the profanation of
the Lord's Supper; and of the correction of it, this is the conclusion, wherein
he expounds the duty of believers in receiving the Lords Supper. This duty may
be referred to two heads; whereof the 1. Is concerning the action it self,
whereby the faithful are made partakers of this mystery by eating and
drinking. 2. Is about the manner of this action, which is specified to us in
the word (...). And this manner is again contained in three acts, whereof the
1. is that which is set in the last place, that every communicant discern the
Lord's body. 2. Is, that he try himself. 3. Is, that he furnish himself with
such a disposition, as is worthy of so great a mystery. And these three acts
are set down in these three words; discerning the Lord's body; let a man
examine himself; and he that eats (...) drinks unworthily.

Doct. 1. All our work, that is ours only in the Lord's Supper, is to eat and
to drink the body and blood of Christ.

It is gathered from these words; Let him eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup; and not discerning the Lord's body.

Reas. 1. Because this is the Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment in and by
Christ.

Reas. 2. Because in the very institution of this Sacrament no other thing is
prescribed, but that we should take, eat, and drink; to wit, as the signs with
our bodies, so the body and blood of Christ spiritually or by faith, to the
nourishment of our souls.

Reas. 3. Because nothing else is represented in the external signs and
actions, but this nourishment on Christ, which by the institution of Christ, is
in this Sacrament used.

Use, Of Refutation, against Papists, What the difference is between the Supper
and the Popish Mass: because Papists have taken away the Sacrament that was
instituted by Christ, and have set up in its place the Sacrifice of the Mass,
that was devised by men. And this is the difference between a Sacrament and a
Sacrifice, that the formal reason of a Sacrifice consists in this, that in it
men offer something to God; and God receives something from men: But the formal
reason of a Sacrament is in this, that God offers something to men by visible
signs, and men receive it from God, on the conditions and manner that he
offers it. In this Supper God offers Christ unto us for our spiritual
nourishment; and we receive Christ as the food of our souls, by eating and
drinking of him by faith. Hence the popish Mass is a mere stranger to Christ's
institution, while they make its principal use to be a Sacrifice for the quick
and the dead; and while they officiate their private Masses, wherein the people
neither eat nor drink; while in the public Masses, they take away the cup from
the people, so that though they eat in some sort, yet they drink in no manner;
while they hold up the Host, or Sacrifice; that is, the consecrated bread and
wine, rather to be adored and worshipped, than to be eaten, or drunk; while
lastly, they do all this in an unknown tongue, so that the people cannot
understand, either what, or how they should eat, or drink.

Doct. 2. That we may rightly partake in the Lords Supper, it is chiefly
required, that we rightly discern the Lords body.

By this discerning of the Lords body, is understood an act of the
understanding, whereby we observe the difference between this bread, thus
consecrated to be a sign, and exhibitive seal of the Lords body (that is of
all his benefits and graces) to our faith, and common bread: Or it is that
judgment of our mind, whereby we have a right apprehension and pronounce right
sentence concerning this whole mystery, or business. The want of this
discerning is that which is reproved here by the Apostle.

Reas. 1. Because without judgment and prudence agreeable to the thing
undertaken, nothing can be rightly, or perfectly, done or performed.

Reas. 2 Because in the Sacraments, where the external appearances are bodily
and gross, and yet a spiritual mystery or secret (as to sense) lies hid in
them, there is need of spiritual heed and judgment, that we may rightly pierce
and dive into that spiritual secret it self.

Reas. 3. Because the want of this discerning, brings with it a profanation of
this holy feast, as appears by the example of the Corinthians. For who so
discern not what it is about which they are busied, can never fit themselves
so, as to behave themselves arightly in handling of such a business.

Use, Is both of Direction and Exhortation together, that every one earnestly
set his mind and judgment arightly to discern, before he come to the table of
the Lord; what it is, that is there done; and what it is that himself should
there do. Now the special points, that ought by all communicants to be
discerned, are these. 1. The occasion and necessity that there was, that Christ
should be broken and given for us, and to us, which was no other but the
deepest guilt of our sin, and heaviest punishment due to it; and the misery
that to us would thence have followed. 2. The proper cause and reason of this
donation, which was the infinite mercy of God toward us. 3. The manner in
which Christ was given for us; which was both in body and soul to the
sufferance of death [though they were the soul and body of God personally] that
by this his obedience we might be both freed from death, and the consequent of
its misery; and made partakers of all the blessings of grace, and glory, and
happiness, which were in him prepared for us; and he had deserved to us. 4. The
means by which Christ is thus applied unto us, and made ours; as in this
Sacrament, externally by the signs of eating of bread, and drinking of wine,
and internally, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, and our faith stirred up by
him, to rely upon Christ for life, and nourishment and growth unto life
eternal, and all the blessings aforesaid.

Doct. 3. The second duty required unto a right communicating, or partaking of
this Sacrament, is that we seriously examine or try our selves.

The object of the former duty was the Supper it self, instituted of God. The
object of this is our selves, wherein by a reflex act we behold and consider
our selves, that we may understand how our disposition and condition agrees, or
disagrees with the nature and use of this institution. And this inquiry should
be made with greatest care and diligence, as the word used for it, does
sufficiently express; wherein is properly expressed the Goldsmiths pains in
diligently trying of silver and gold, that he may know true coin from false.

Reas. 1. Because it would be in vain to discern the Lords body, unless we
discern aright also, how our selves agree with, or disagree from the Lords
body, and whether we have such requisites, as necessarily we must, for the
saving participation of his body. For in the Sacrament there is a mutual
relation between the gift offered, and our receiving of it; nor does it bestead
us at all, to know of what sort, and how precious the gift is, unless we know
also that our selves are such, as to whom this gift does belong.

Reas. 2. Because great is the deceit of man's heart, whereby men use to deceive
themselves, while they think that all is right, although it be nothing so. It
is needful therefore, that we diligently examine our own hearts, least we be
deceived with a false faith, and rest in a phancie and vain imagination instead
thereof.

Reas. 3. Because it is not enough to our comfort, that we be sometimes well
disposed to partake of these good blessings of God, unless we also discern
this disposition to be in us. For our comfort depends not only on the
presence, or having of grace; but also on our inward feeling, and perceiving
that we have it: Which perceiving that we may attain to, it is needful that we
seriously examine our selves, and know what is in us.

Use, Of Exhortation, that we may have a care of this duty, and deal not too
gently with our selves, nor slightly; but bring all to a very punctual and
rigorous trial. Now the special points that we ought to examine in our selves,
are these: 1. Whether we have knowledge and understanding of the things that
belong to the institution of the Supper; that is, whether we rightly discern
the Lords body, as has been taught in the precedent Doctrine. 2. Whether we
have a true acknowledgement and repentance for our sins, from the guilt whereof
we would be disburthened; i. e. the pardon whereof we seek to be sealed unto us
in the use of this Sacrament. 3. Whether we have that faith, whereby we flee
only to Christ, that we may be freed from (...) sins. 4. Whether we be so far
in charity, and love with our Neighbor, as that we carry no spite, hatred,
malice, or revenge to his person, but can pray heartily for him to God, for his
forgiveness (in case he be froward to convenient and fitting means of
reconciliation) as for our selves, though we may not outwardly testify our
forgiveness of him in such case, where Ecclesiastical procedure cannot be had
for fear of hardening him in his sin, or exposing our selves and these
mysteries to dirision; or because some other hinderance will not suffer us, as
remote absence of the parties, and others the like; and can where occasion
offers, yea, are desirous to do him really all the good that we can.

Doct. 4. The third duty for right communicating, is that we have the
disposition, that is worthy and fitting for so great a mystery.

It is gathered from these words; He that eats or drinks unworthily. Now the
worthiness that is here required, is not the worth of quantity, or of merit;
but of quality, or uprightness in the business; and of suitableness, as when
St. John Baptist says, Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance; he understands
not fruits that deserve repentance to be given us; but are agreeable to true
repentance; that is, true fruits of true repentance, and suitable to the nature
of it.

Reas. 1. Because these mysteries cannot be unworthily used, but that the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ must needs withal be unworthily affronted, as it were
by contempt. And hence it is, that unworthy partakers are said to eat and drink
judgment unto themselves; to wit, from God's wrath, who by this most unworthy
ignomony put upon his Son, is provoked.

Reas. 2. Because no noble form is introduced ordinarily into matter, nor
fitly disposed and prepared before; so the grace and comfort of this Sacrament,
uses not to be received but by such, as are suitably disposed and prepared for
it; so that who so comes unworthily, does of necessity go unfruitful from this
Sacrament, as to any solid fruits thereof.

Reas. 3. Because unfitness and unpreparation makes this most holy Ordinance
become an occasion unto many of greater hardening in their sins. For as the
preaching of the Gospel is to some a savor of death unto death, not of its
own nature, but by their perverse dispositions; so also this Sacrament unto
unworthy communicants, is not the cup of blessing, but occasion of a curse. Now
the specialties that are required unto this disposition, are these: 1. A right
and pure intention, whereby we look at all and only such ends in partaking of
the Supper, as God looked at, in the appointing of it, and giving of it to us.
2. A good conscience, whereby we have a sure and firm purpose and resolution of
obeying God in all things, commanded by him; and of shunning all sins, in
obedience unto him. 3. An awful reverence flowing from the right discerning of
the Lords body. 4. Humility, which flows from a right examination of our
selves, whereby we cannot but perceive our own unworthiness. 5. A great
desire to the spiritual good things, which are offered us in this Sacrament. 6.
Thankfulness to God for the goods bestowed and imparted to us. 7. Charity
toward our brethren, who are together with us partakers of these blessings in
Christ; as in the former Doctrine were further declared.

Doct. 5. Whosoever neglect openly these duties, are not to be admitted unto the
Lord's Supper.

The one and thirtieth Lords day.
Mat. 16. 19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven:
And whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven: whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.
IN these words is contained an explication of that promise, which Christ in
the last preceding verse had made to Peter, of building his Church upon the
Rock, and of the strength of that building, which the gates or power of Hell
should not overcome. Now the building of his Church is signified by the
instrumental cause thereof; that is, the Ministry of the Gospel. The strength
or firmness of this building is shown in the firmness it has from Heaven,
which is its principal cause. And the building of the Church by the Ministry is
Metaphorically explained, by the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, because the
giving of the keys to bear, is the sign of power given over that House, or
Town unto which they belong; therefore Christ most fitly designed the power of
the Ministry, in such things as belong unto the Kingdom of Heaven by this
simile. The confirmation or strength of this Heavenly building is explained
from things compared in likeness; to wit, between the administration of men
about these keys; and the approbation thereof, and ratification by God. This
parity or likeness is explained in two parts, according to the two uses that
keys use to serve for, of (...) and binding; and of opening and loosing.

Doct. 1. Christ appointed in his Church a certain order ^r rank of Ministers,
for the building of her up, and keeping ^er in repair or strength.

He appointed a Ministry, not a Magistry, mastership or Lordly power; because
he ordained not that any in the Church should do any thing from or of his own
authority, or according to his own pleasure; but only from and by the
authority of Christ himself, who is the only King, Lord, and Lawgiver in his
Church. He appointed a certain order.

Reas. 1. Because God is the God of order, and not of confusion, which ought to
be far from his House.

Reas. 2. Because no other but the Lord of the Church had power to ordain any
such thing; or make it effectual for its ends.

Reas. 3. Because thus it became Christ to show himself faithful in the House
of God, as Moses was, Heb 3.

He appointed this order for the building of his Church, or keeping her in
repair, or strengthening of her.

Reas. 1. Because he would deal with men in a man-like and moral manner, as was
suitable to their nature. And this servantship or Ministry is a moral means of
building up and confirming the faithful.

Reas. 2. Because believers imperfections and diverse tentations, require such
means, whereby they may be established and ordained in the faith.

Reas. 3. Because he would so put forth his powerful working by such earthen
vessels, and weak means, for the greater praise end illustration of his grace.

Use, Of Information, that we understand how to esteem the Ministry of the
Gospel; to wit, as a most holy and saving Ordinance of Christ ought to be
esteemed.

Doct. 2. To this Ministry is adjoined a ministerial, or servant-like power, in
things that belong to the Kingdom of Heaven.

This is collected from giving of the keys. For although by a key is sometimes
designed supreme, or Lordlike power and command, as Rev. 1. 18. yet sometimes
also a Ministerial power only, as Isa. 22. 22. And that it is so understood
here is clear, in that Christ alone is King of his Church, and commander,
endowed with supreme power. And by this he is distinguished from the Apostles
themselves, Mat. 18. 19, 20. as also by this, that the Apostles every where
profess themselves the Ministers of Christ.

Reas. 1. Because every order, rank, or degree instituted of God, has some
suitable power adjoined to it. As therefore a commanding or an imperial power
is adjoined unto Empire or the State; so a ministerial power is adjoined unto
Ministers.

Reas. 2. Because the building and keeping in repair, and strengthening and
advancing the Church, in which the end of this Ministry consists, cannot be
procured by men, but by such a power.

Reas. 3. Because the Kingdom of Heaven is of that nature, that it can be
subject to no imperial or commanding power of sinful man, but to him only
that is infallible, and imperable, God and man, Christ Jesus; and to a
Ministerial or servant-like power of sinful men only.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against Papists, who give an imperial and commanding
power to Peter, and to the Popes of Rome: which also they would fain pick out
of this place. But the power here spoken of, is equally given, or joined to all
the Ministers of the Word, and not to Peter alone, as they would have it. For,
1. Peter here represented the persons of all the Apostles, and of all Ministers
of the Word, their successors; and in some kind of the whole Church. For as
Christ thus proposed the question to them all, and had the answer given by
Peter by the approbation and consent of them all, as that to which they
adhered, and allowed as well as he, and therefore might be said to have been
made in the name of all, he being the senior, and so often the speaker for all;
so also in this promise instead of them all, Christ directs his speech to
Peter. 2. This same power is solemnly given unto all the Apostles, and to their
successors, Ioh. 20. 23. 3. Unto every true Church this power is in some kind
extended.

Use 2. Of Direction as well of Ministers, that they attempt nothing but from
the command of Christ, as his Ministers; as of others, that they so look at
Ministers, as they keep not still their eye upon their persons, and look no
further; but that they lift up their eyes to Christ, whose Ministers they are,
and love and honor them for his sake, and the employment he has laid upon
them, wherein, and as far as they carry themselves sutably to both.

Doct. 3. This power is properly exercised in binding and loosing, or in
shutting and opening; that is, in retaining, or remitting of sins.

Reas. 1. Because the whole consolation and edification of the Church chiefly
consists in the remission of sins given and granted unto believers, which is
also set out and illustrated by retaining of sins, or denial of remission,
which is denounced to unbelievers in the Church.

Reas* 2. Because all other duties that belong unto the Ministry depend on
these, and may conveniently be reduced into them, either as means, effects,
adjuncts, and the like.

Reas. 3. Because in these the excellency and worth of the Ministry of the
Gospel do singularly appear; because that chief work of forgiving sins, which
properly and absolutely agrees only to God, is in some sort communicated to
the Ministers of Christ, or made common to them with God; to wit, because the
denunciation, testification, declaration, and certification of forgiveness of
sins, belongs unto the Ministers of Christ, by their office; and that in two
ways; to wit, either in the preaching of the Word, or in the exercise of
Discipline.

Use 1. Of Information, about the excellency and worth of the Ministry of the
Gospel, that it may not be disgraced by Ministers themselves, nor condemned,
or spoken against by others.

Use 2. Of Comfort to believers, because the whole Ministry of the Gospel
labors for this, that believers may be ascertained of the forgiveness of their
sins.

The thirty third Lords day.
Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22. Verse 20 But ye have not so learned Christ:

21 If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth
is in Jesus.

22. That ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:


THe Apostle is here taken up in that most weighty exhoration, whereby he began
at the entry of this Chapter to stir up Christians to that conversation,
which agrees unto their calling unto Christianity. And this exhortation he
began verse 17. to illustrate from a comparison of unlike things. And the
parties that are compared, are Christians, and other people: The quality
wherein they are compared, is their manner and way of living. The unlikeness in
this quality, is either in the principles and causes of living, or in their
effects. As to their principles, Heathens are said to have all their faculties
corrupted; and as to the faith, all their actions and motions are deformed. On
the contrary, all the faculties of a Christian are renewed, and the motions of
them holy and honest. The reddition or second part of this comparison, which
belongs to Christians, is contained in these five verses, wherein the unlike
condition of Christians and unbelievers is explained: 1. From its external
cause, which is the Doctrine and Discipline of the Gospel, verses 20, 21. 2.
From the internal causes, which is conversion and sanctification. This again
consists of two parts: 1. The mortification and laying off of the old man. 2.
Its vivification and putting on of the new man; that is, renovation of the
whole man, each part is illustrated by its description, which are from their
effects. The effects of the old man are corruptions and errors, verse 22. Of
the new man, righteousness and holiness, v. 23, 24.

Doct. 1. There is a great unlikenesse of condition and life between men
regenerated and unregenerated.

This is gathered from the scope of the Text, and these words; the old man, and
the new man, as if a man were not the same man after regeneration, that he was
before. Hither belong all these comparisons which through most of the Proverbs
of Solomon are made between the godly and ungodly. It is pointed at also every
where in the New Testament, and also in the Old, by the difference between
light and darkness, and between a quick man and a dead, and between one that
being defiled with all sort of uncleanness, like the Sow that wallowes in the
mire, and one that is washed and cleansed.

Reas. 1. Because they have a diverse nature; believers being made partakers of
the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and unbelievers are scarcely to be said to have
a man's nature in a moral consideration. Hither belongs it, that the Apostle
every where teaches that believers are led and governed by the Spirit of God,
to walk thereafter; and that unbelievers are led by their own flesh.

Reas. 2. Because as the internal principle of operations is quite unlike; so
also the outward rule of all their conversation is quite contrary; the
regenerate ordering his whole life after the will of God revealed in his Word;
the unregenerate after his own suggestions, and corrupt imaginations, or
worldly opinions.

Reas. 3. Because the end to which they tend, is unlike and contrary; the
regenerate breathing after God and Heaven, as he is called to the hope of
eternal life; the unregenerate seeking himself, and this present world. Hither
belongs it, that the unregenerate are said to be of this world; but the
regenerate Citizens of Heaven it self, Phil. 3. 20. and often elsewhere.

Use 1. Of Reproof. of such as will be thought, and think themselves perhaps
true believers and regenerate, when yet in their whole conversation scarce any
thing can be marked, which is not common to them, and unregenerate persons.

Use 2. Of Comfort, for the godly, that lead a life worthy of Christian
profession, but are sometimes from infirmity troubled, because most with whom
they live, or have to do, become strange to them; and make it plain that they
are offended some way with the strictness of their conversation; which offense
arises properly from this unlikenesse of conversation, whereby the corrupt
walking of others according to the fashions of the world, are tacitly reproved,
Ephesians. 5. Now this unlikenesse ought to be our greatest comfort, as it is a
sign of our regeration.

Use 3. Of Exhortation, that by change of our life and conversation, we may
more and more study to show unto others, and confirm unto our selves this
grace of our regeneration, whereunto we are called in Christ.

Doct. 2. The cause of this unlikenesse of regenerate from unregen^rate, is the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

It is in the Text clear enough.

Reas. 1. Because the Doctrine of the Gospel teaches us to deny all
ungodliness, and worldliness, and to live holily, (...). 2. 12.

Reas. 2. Because the mighty and powerful operation of the Holy Spirit is
present with the preaching of the Gospel, for producing this change in man;
for which cause it is called the Ministry of the Spirit, and the Law of the
Spirit of life, and the Arm of God.

Reas. 3. Because the proper power of faith is to cleanse the hearts of those
that it is in, Act^ 5. 9. and to make us from our hearts to harken to the
Doctrine unto which we were delivered, R^m 6. 17.

Use, Of Admonition. that we beware least by hearing in vain the preaching of
the Gospel, without this fruit of conversion and change of life, we
perniciously deceive our selves.

Doct. 3. One part of this conversion made by the Gospel, is mortification of
all our corrupt dispositions and customs.

It is gathered from verse 22. where by the old man, all the corrupt
dispositions are understood, because they possessing all the parts and
faculties of the man from our birth, and that with dominion and power over us
to keep us still under them, do therefore carry the name of the old man justly,
and that for these reasons. 1. Because they thus possessed us from the
beginning of our conception. 2. Because they ought by Christians to be esteemed
as things old, and useless, and to be put off, and laid away: And that,

Reas. 1. Because the end of Christ's death, and the Gospel it self, is to
dissolve the works of the Devil, ^oh. 3. 8. And these inordinate dispositions
and customs are amongst the first and chief works of the Devil.

Reas. 2* Because by these we were separated from God; and the Gospel calls us
and draws us to God again; and therefore to lay these aside.

Reas. 3. Because life and obedience cannot have place in such, as these lusts
and customs have power in; and the Gospel calls us to a spiritual life, and a
new obedience.

Use 1. Of R^proof* of such, as would have themselves thought regenerate, when
yet they are the servants of such carnal lusts.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, that we manfully set our selves not only to repress
such lusts, but quite also to root them out. Now the old man is mortified, 1.
By that firm and constant purpose of changing our life, which is effectually
begun in our first repentance, and daily ought to be renewed, and extended to
all new emergencies. 2. By the virtue of Christ's death applied to us by faith,
whence our old man is said to be crucified with Christ; and it may be rightly
added, with the same nails, that Christ was crucified with. For Christ was
fastened unto the Cross, partly because of the guilt of our sins; partly out of
the love of the Father to us, that we might be saved: partly out of Christ's*
own love to us, whereby he was willing to lay down his life for us. And by the
earnest meditation of these things, the power of sin is most diminished in us.
3. By the power of the Holy Spirit, to whom we ough^ to give up our selves, in
the use of all the means ordained of God, whereby he uses to put forth his
powerful working.

Doct. 4. The other part of this conversion, is vivification, or renewing of
the inward man.

By the inward, new, or renewed man, are understood the new dispositions, that
are agreeable unto the will of God: They are called the man, as these other
dispositions were, because they should be diffused over the whole man, as they
were. And they are called the new man partly in respect to order, because they
follow the other; partly in respect of their excellency, because they are so
much better than the other, as new things are to old, out-worn, and decayed
things; in which respect, many things of greater excellency than others are
called new, in comparison to the other. And this new man is said both to be
repaired, and to be put on, because as these inward dispositions in the spirit
of our mind are acquired, they are the renewing of the man, and the innerman,
verse 23. and the same is said to be put on as a garment, as both outwardly and
inwardly it has full hold of us, and wrappes us wholly up in it self, so that
it contains not oney imputed righteousness, but together also that of
inherence, which consists in the actions of a new obedience.

Reas. 1. This new man must be put on, because it is according to God, or the
image of God, as it is in the Text. For it is our duty in our whole life to
live unto God, and to aspire to be like to the image of God, according to which
we were created, and whereunto we are now again called.

Reas. 2. Because in this new man, or in this image of God our spiritual
perfection consists, and so are almost the chief parts of our glorification.

Reas. 3. Because as by this image we please God, who delights in his own
image; so by the same alone we are made fit, and apt to glorify God as we
ought.

Reas. 4. Because we cannot be freed from the corruption and perverseness of
the old man, but by virtue of this new man, as darkness is not removed out of
this or that place but by letting in of light.

Use, That with all care and by all means sanctified of God for this end, we
may more and more labor to put on this new man. Now he is put on. 1. By virue
of that effectual desire and purpose we have to please God in our first
repentance. 2. By virtue of Christ's resurection applied to us by faith. 3. By
virtue of the Holy Spirit given us in the word of Christ, and in his Sacraments.

Doct. 5. The old man brings us errors and coruptions; and the new man brings
forth righteousness and true holiness, verses 22, 23.

The old man corrupts 1. The understanding with all secret errors. 2. The
other faculties, by all sorts of lusts and concupiscences. 3. The life and
conversation, by all sort of misleadings from the right way. In all these there
is corruption properly so called, because there is want of such a life and
perfection, as should not be wanting; and a perturbation of that order that
belongs to the state of perfection. Now that the new man produces the works
of righteousness and holiness, appears by these reasons.

Reas. 1. Because he observes the rule of righteousness, which is the Law of
God.

Reas. 2. Because he belongs to our spiritual perfection, wherein we resemble
the divine nature, according to our proportion which is our holiness.

Reas. 3. Because he brings always forth kindly fruits, or like unto himself,
seeking both his own conservation and improvement from the common conspiration
of all our inclinations.

Use, Of Exhortation, that with the same care and zeal we may labor for the
mortification of the old man and vivification of the new, wherewith we desire
to shun corruption and death, and to attain unto an holy and blessed
perfection.

The thirty fourth Lords day.
Exodus 20. 1, 2, 3. Ver. 1 And God spoke all these words, saying,

2 I am the LORD thy God, which brought thee out out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage.

3 Thou shall have no other gods before me.


IN these words are contained the preface of the Moral Law, and the first
precept thereof. In the preface is contained the definition, division, and
confirmation of the Law: The difinition is pointed at by circumstances, which
are as it were the specificative or differencing notions of it, whereby this
Law is distinguished from all others: Whereof the 1. is, that God himself spoke
it, or immediately by himself pronounced the words of this Law. 2. That then he
spoke it; that is, after such a singular preparation of the people, as never
was used in the giving of any other Law. The division of it is contained in
these words; that God is said to have spoken all the words of it; that is, of
both the Tables, or all the t^n words; where respect to the whole, and to its
parts is plainly pointed at. The confirmation, or persuasion used to confirm
it, is verse 2. where a most strong argument is brought to induce to obedience
suitable to this Law; and it is twofold, 1. In general from the Covenant; I am
thy God. 2. From a special benefit bestowed upon them by virtue of that
Covenant. The first precept it self, is verse 3. whereby is enjoined us, that
we have Jehovah for our God; or Jehovah alone: So that in it two points are
together enjoined us. 1. That we acknowledge Jehovah to be the true God, and
none else. 2. That with all religious honor and worship, we worship him, and
that with all our heart, etc. For that is to have Jehovah for our God; and not
to be understood speculatively only, but practically, effectively, and really.

Doct 1. This Law of God contained in the decalogue, or ten words (that is
brief sentences) is the most perfect rule for directing of the life of man.

This is gathered from the definition, which we said; before was pointed out in
two circumstances; because it has not only God for its author, but is also
given with singular majesty in the perfectest manner, as after extraordinary
preparation: That we may understand all perfection that can be desired in any
Law, is to be found in this.

Reas. 1. Because it prescribes all the duties of man, whether they look at God
himself directly, as in the first Table; or our neighbor, as in the second.

Reas. 2. Because in all those duties, it not only requires the works
themselves, but also the most perfect way of working them; to wit, that they
come from the whole heart, and from the bottom of the heart; that is, from the
entire strength of the whole man, and with perfect purity and sincerity; and
that they be directed to the glory of God.

Reas. 3. Because it contains in it self a delineation or draught of that
perfection, whereunto man in his first or innocent nature was created,
according to the image of God. And therefore also it is called the Law of
Nature, because that rule of life, which was written in the heart of man,
according to its primitive and pure nature, is in this Law explained.

Reas. 4 Because it belongs not only to one Nation, as the Judicial Law did;
nor unto some certain time only, as the Ceremonial Law did; but it is the
Common Law of all Nations, Times, and Persons.

Use 1. Of Information, that we esteem this Law of God as we ought; that is,
that we think no otherwise of it, than as of the will of God omnipotent, and
as of that will of his, which most intimately belongs to us, as the only rule
of our life; and as of such a rule, as has no defect, but is both perfect in
it self, and requires all perfection in us.

Use 2. Of Admoni^ion, that with all reverence we give heed unto this Law, and
beware of all neglect and contempt of it, as we would shun death.

Doct. 2. The Moral Law is divided into diverse words, or precepts.

It is gathered from this, in that God is said to have spoken all these words.
They are called words, because they are short; and as it were spoken summarily,
or in one word. The chief division of them is into two Tables; the next into
ten Precepts, or Commands.

Reas. 1. That we might the more easily understand the will of God, by parts
delivered; which wholly together, and at once declared as it were in heaps, we
could not so well understand. For the parts in a distribution, or division,
make much for the declaration and illustration of any whole.

Reas. 2. That by this means our memory may be helped; because naturally our
memory is strengthened from the order of the parts amongst themselves.

Reas. 3. That in every part and act of our conversation, we may have light of
singular direction, from some part of this Law.

Use, Of Admonition, that we neglect nor contemn no word of this Law; because
they are all parts of one and the same Law, and have the same sanction of
authority; so that who so stumbles against any one, is guilty of them all, Iam.
2. 10.

Doct. 3. Whatsoever is commanded in any part of the Law, we are bound for may
causes to perform the same to God.

This is gathered from that confirmation of the Law; I am Jehovah, etc.

Reas. 1. Because God commands us nothing, he may not with very good right
require from us, as well by reason of his absolute power and dominion, as of
our dependence on him, by which we require to be supplied and upheld by him in
all things.

Reas. 2. Because he requires nothing from us, the observance whereof he did
not deserve at (...) hands before, as well by spiritual benefits and blessings,
as temporal and bodily, in regard whereof, out of thankfulness we owe him all
obedience, as is plain in the Text; I brought thee out of the Land, etc.

Reas. 3. Because God is ready to reward our obedience most abundantly in every
point.

Use, Of Direction, that by often meditation of the manifold obligations,
whereby we are bound to perform our obedience to God, we may more and more
stir up our minds to a care of observing him in all things.

Doct. 4. Every command of the Law, requires the whole obedience of the whole
man.

That is, as well inward as outward; of the heart, as of the mouth, and hand or
work: Thou shall have no other, etc. Make not unto ^hy self etc. Are forms of
speaking, whereby formally such an universal obedience is required.

Reas. 1. Because God the giver of this Law, ought to be glorified with
obedience of the whole man, as well of soul as of body, and of both these
parts of man.

Reas. 2. Because this is the excellent perfection of the Law of God, whereby
it goes beyond all humane Laws, in that it subjects unto it self the heart,
and the reins, and the most inward retirement of of men, as God himself alone,
who is the author of this Law, knows what is in man.

Reas. 3. Because this Law is the rule of spiritual life, and so ought to
pierce even to our spirits themselves.

Use 1. Of Information, that for the right understanding of this Law, we look
not only to such things, or think that they only are contained under the Law,
as in express words are there contained; but all such things also, as belongs
to such an head of obedience, whether they be outward or inward. For in every
command, as is certain by the sum of entire and whole obedience, the words
are to be taken not according to the bare letter, but in a modification of
diverse tropes, or borrowed sorts of speaking, as agree to the perfection of
such a Law of nature. The trope of Synecdoche that puts the special for the
general to be understood by it, is here frequent; as when abstinence from some
one vice by name, is put for the whole obedience, whereby we not only abstain
from all faults of that kind; but also are bound to the performance of the
contrary affirmative good; and when some action is put for all of its kind and
of affinity of nature with it. The trope also of Me^onymie is every where in
these commands, whereby all the adjuncts are understood under the name of their
objects; the effects in their causes, and contrarily; with which is complicated
the trope of Metaphor some way; so as all the decalogue is Metaleptick, or to
be understood by Transsumption. And these rules must of necessity be understood
in the explication of every precept, as our Savior's exposition of them, and
other Scriptures make clear.

Use 2. Of Admonition, that we rest not, nor please our selves in obedience of
any sort done to the Law; but that we may aspire to the entire and perfect
observance of it, and ever acknowledge just matter of our humbling in this,
that we are so far from that perfection, that it requires.

Doct. 5. The first and greatest command is that, which contains our duty to
God.

Hence is it that it is both put in the first place, and has also the express
testimony of Christ, Mat. 22. 28.

Reas. 1. Because God himself being the object of this duty, from him a sort of
nobleness and dignity is derived unto the duty it self.

Reas. 2. Because more and greater things are contained in our duty to God,
than either can or may be used in duties to man; as is clear by that form, With
^he whole mind, and the whole heart, etc.

Reas. 3. Because this duty is the foundation and principle of all others, in
as much as in God, and for God only, we ought to perform all other duties; and
so the duties of the second Table are thus virtually contained in the first
Commandment.

Use Is of Direction, that our first and chief care may be taken up in those
duties, that belong to God.

Doct. 6. The principal duty to God is, that we have him only for our God.

And to have God for our God, is in general to give God that honor, which is
due unto his excellent Majesty: And to this are required.

1. That we seek the true knowledge of him, with all care, as he has revealed
himself in his word; because we cannot honor him rightly, whose nature and
will we are ignorant of: John 4. 12. Romans 10 14.

2. That from a most humble reverence, we subject our selves unto him, because
the honor that we give to God, as to our God, is the honor of a Creature
toward its Creator, of a Son toward his Father; of a Servant toward his
Master, and that such a Master as has power of life and death over us; not of
the body only, but of the soul, or that which is eternal.

3. That we believe all, and rest in them, by true faith, which he witnesses
and proposes unto us; because otherwise we cannot give him the glory of his
omnis^ience, truth, etc.

4. That with certain hope we look for all that he has promised; because also
we cannot give him the honor of the truth of his promises, unless with belief
of them, we be so affected with them, as to desire and hope for the
accomplishment of them.

5. That with greatest love we cleave to him, as the chief good; because as the
quidditative notion of God, does its self denotate the Fountain and Author,
and so the possessor of all highest and most perfect goodness; so the honor
due to God, contains in it that affection, that is raised up by the meditation
and apprehension of the chief good; which is pure and perfect love.

6. That we express all these duties, and exercise them by a devout hearing of
his Word, and calling upon his name, with the like exercise of divine worship;
because we can neither powerfully be affected about the honor of God, without
such operations, wherein such affections are put forth: neither is the honor
we owe to God, contained within the bounds of individual disposition or
affection; Nor lastly, can a lively affection of honoring God be cherished or
kept in our minds, without such means, whereby it is as well begotten in us, as
preserved and improved.

Use 1. Is of Reproof, against such as think they have God for their God, and
keep this command well enough, if they deny not God with their mouths, though
they never rouse up themselves to give God this honor before spoken of: Of
which sort of men are all such, as 1. deny not themselves, that they may be
wholly subject to God and his will. 2. All such as rest in their ignorance. 3.
Such as endeavor not to build up themselves in true Faith, Hope, and Love. 4.
Such as contemn or neglect the exercise of Piety, public or private; of all
these it may truly be affirmed, that while they endeavor not thus to give God
his due honor, they have him not really for their God.

Use Is of Exhortation, that by such considerations we stir up our selves to a
greater care of Piety, unless we would be like such, as are without God in
this world, and so can look for no other than to be separated from God in the
world to come.

Doct. 7. Who so gives this honor, or any part of it, to any other than God,
they set up a false God to themselves, and so are Idolaters.

It is gathered from this; Ye shall have no other God. That is; give not this
honor to another, that is not true God by nature or essence: For against this
command men sin three manner of ways, 1. If we give not this honor to God 2*
If we give it to another, that is not God. 3. If we fight or dispute against
God, or this honor of his: Who so sin against God in the first way, they are
profane; in the second, they are Idolaters; in the third, they are enemies to
God.

Use 1. Is of Refutation, against Papists, who give a great part of this honor
to creatures

Use 2. Of condemnation against such as have their minds so fastened to worldly
things, that it may be truly said of them, that they have their affiance, hope
and love chiefly placed in them: concerning whom the Apostle warns us, that
they have their belly for their god, and their substance, riches and the like.

The thirty fifth Lords days.
Exodus 20. 4, 5, 6. Verse 4. Thou shall not make to thee any graven image, or
the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or
that is in the water under the earth.

5 Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor worship them, nor serve them;
for I the Lord am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

6 And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.


WE have here the second Command, and the sanctification of it. It concerns
the means of worshipping God. It is expressed by Negation and Distribution of
means, and description of the use, that is wont to be exercised about such
means: The Distribution is taken from the places of the means, Heaven, Earth,
Waters. The Description is from the Adjunct of Adoration, or bowing down to
them. The Sanction consists in a threatening and promise, the nature and
ratifying power whereof is expounded from the nature of God, I am Jehovah, thy
strong God. This command is distinguished from the former, in that there
essential and natural worship of God was commanded; but here accidental and of
free institution. And this instituted worship, as to the Negative part is
declared Synecdochically by an image; because by the abuse of images, this
worship of God uses most to be violated.

Doct. 1. In such way, and by such means God is only to be worshipped, as he
has commanded himself to be worshipped by his word.

This is gathered from this Precept, in that by image is to be condemned all
will worship, brought in by men; so that no other is approved, but that which
himself has prescribed. This Doctrine seems also to be clear in these words;
Thou shall not make unto thy self: that is, at thine own pleasure, and as thou
likest best, thou shall bring no worship to God. For although this phrase has
sometimes the sense, thou shall not make any thing, so as to have it for thy
self alone; yet both the short and comprehensive manner of speech in the
Decalogue, and the matter it self that is here handled, persuade us; that it
should be here taken in the former sense. This Doctrine is expressed, Exodus 23.
33. Deuteronomy. 12. last verse.

Reas. 1. Because God alone knows what is acceptable to him, and suitable to his
nature and will.

Reas. 2. Because the whole blessing and fruit of our worship that we owe to
God, depends on him: and it is not for us to prescribe to God, by what means he
should work on us, or we bless him.

Reas. 3. Because worship not commanded, has not the nature of obedience in
it. But it is Gods will and it belongs to his honor, that by obeying we
worship him, and by worshipping we obey him.

Reas. 4. Because such is the vanity and futility of men's imaginations in
things divine, that if it had been left to us, to choose unto our selves the
means of divine worship, it would have been turned all into traditions and vain
observations; as experience witnesses, that the Devil by this way has led
away men into empty superstitions, almost through all the world.

Use 1. Is of Refutation against Papists, who have defiled all parts of
Divine-worship, with their Willworship, traditions of men's devising, and their
own ordinance.

Use 2. Is of Direction, that in worshipping God, we have a precise regard of
Gods own holy Ordinances in the ministry of the Word, Sacraments, and
Discipline; and on the other part, that we despise all humane devises, with how
soever fair color and pretense they may be commended to us.

Doct. 2. God is not to be worshipped, at, or before an Image.

For otherwise Images in this place are not absolutely forbidden, because
there is a civil, lawful, use of some Images; but only the use of Images in
Gods worship: Neither are such Images only forbidden in Gods worship, as are
of counterfeit Gods, as Papists will have it; but also of the true God, Deuteronomy. 4
1^. Where Moses opposes the voice of the true God, which the people had heard
in the Mount, unto all Images of the same God, and not of other counterfeit
gods. This was also said expressly to have been signified in the sin of the
Israelites, about the Image that they made, Exodus 22. verse 6. that they would
make a Calf for an Image, or representation of Jehovah: The distinction
therefore between an Image and an Idol, in which, and by the which Image God
is served, has no ground neither in writing, nor right reason, nor in common
use of words. The grievousnesse of this sin every where appears, that in
scripture it is commonly called Idolatry: For such as worship the true God at
or before an Image, they do not altogether and professedly forsake the true
God; and therefore do not commit that principal and essential Idolatry; yet are
they guilty of secondary Idolatry, and that which is such indirectly, and by
participation.

Reas. 1. Because in some sort, they make unto themselves another God besides
the true God; to wit, such an one as will be represented by an Image, and
worshipped there by us.

Reas. 2. Because they not only diminish that glory which they ought to give
unto God, but they also refer a part of it either expressly, or implyedly unto
the image, which is due unto God alone.

Reas. 3. Because also they honor in some sort with Divine honor the Authors
of Images, while they grant them the power or authority of instituting divine
worship, which belongs to God alone: and by that means also* they are said to
worship the Devil himself, because he is the principal author of Image
worship. Hence it is that scripture uses to call this grievous sin by some
special phrases; as when in the sanction of this commandment, it is called a
hating of God, and in other places, treachery or perfidiousness, adultery and
violation of the wedlock-covenant. Hence also it is, that so heavy a punishment
is denounced against this sin, as is in the threatening laid down in this
commandment, whereby it is said, that God will visit this iniquity on the Sons,
Nephews and their Children again unto the the third and fourth generation.

Use 1. Is of Refutation against the Idolatry of Papists, who as they commit
Idolatry against the first commandment, in praying to Angels and Saints
departed, and the like; so here they commit secondary Idolatry, 1. In that they
make Images of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; which is expressly
forbidden. 2. In that they honor with divine worship these and other Images.
3. In that they make the worship it self Idolatrous, which they would offer to
God, while by the intervention of an Image they thrust it upon God, against his
own revealed will. And this amongst others, gives just and necessary cause to
all the godly of making separation from the Church and worship of Papists:
Because such a worship is abominable to God, and ought to be in abomination
and detestation with all the godly.

Use 2. Is of Exhortation, as well for thanksgiving to God, that he has
delivered us from such Idolatry, as unto care and caution, that we communicate
in no manner with such Idolatrous ordinances.

Doct. 3. Such Images are diligently to be shunned of us.

It is gathered from the manner of setting forth the command, whereby with such
care and so precisely all and every sort of Images are forbidden: And this is
it that the^ Apostle John means in 1 Epistle* chap. and last verse^

Reas. 1. Because such Images belong to that greatest abomination, to wit, of
Idolatry; from which all the godly ought to keep themselves very far.

Reas. 2. Because there is great danger in these humane inventions, least they
should insensibly allure us unto an apostasy or defection from God; as is
evident by the words of this precept, Thou shall not bow thy self, neither
worship, etc.

Reas. 3. Because by this means we should reprove Idolaters, and as much as in
us lies, call them back from their Idolatry.

Use Is of Direction, that we always have a care to be precise in this kind,
that so we may preserve unto our selves the worship of God pure and undefiled:
Neither then are any Images of God to be admitted, nor any other Images for
holy use, nor any thing of our devising, that has analogy or proportion to an
Image, as are all symbolike, or signifying ceremonies in divine worship
introduced by men: And the instructing of rude and ignorant people hereby, is
but of vain pretense, because Images are teachers of lies, Hab. 2. 9. Ier. 10
18.

The thirty six and seventh Lords day.
On Exodus 20. 7. Verse 7 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
THe third command is here proposed, and its Sanction or Confirmation. The
Command is concerning the manner of worshipping God, or the right use of such
things, as have a special relation to God and his worship: For by the name of
Jehovah, all is understood, whereby God is made known to us, or discernable, as
a man is by his name. By taking of Gods name into our mouths, is understood
then, the use of all such things; because things use to be taken up so
commonly, that they may be applied unto use. And by in vain, or vainly, is
understood all pravity of this use, by a Synecdoche of the special put for the
more general kind; and that because a vain using of sacred and holy* things,
is a grievous abuse of them, though there may be others that are more grievous,
as when not only without their just and true end and fruit, they are used, or
for no settled end, that is, rashly, or in vain; but also setledly and
purposely, they turn and wrest them about to some wicked and impious uses. So
then, by taking Gods name in vain, all abuse of sacred things is understood.
The Sanction of this precept is by its threatening; which is generally of all
misery. This misery is explicated by its proper causes; that is, the
prosecution of that guilt, which follows the breach of this Command, God will
not leave him or hold him guiltless, etc. For as the blessedness of a man is
declared by the taking away of the guilt of sins, Romans 4. 6. 7. So also man's
misery is declared by prosecution of the same guilt.

Doct. 1* We ought with all religion, or devotion to be conversant about such
things*, as belong unto Gods worship, both as to the things themselves, and as
to the manner of handling them.

It is clear enough in the words themselves; Take not the name of the Lord thy
God in vain.

Reas. 1. Because this manner of handling things, belongs some way to the form
of the action, and of our duty: and it more inwardly belongs to our duties*
that we rightly direct our actions, as to the point of their form than of their
matter and object; though a care must be had of both, and that with a devotion
of the same kind.

Reas. 2. Because in such things the name of God is as it were committed and
recommended to our trust, that it may appear with what devotion and respect we
will use the same.

Reas. 3. Because that name of God has so much worth and excellency in it,
that it is with little or no less wickedness used with contempt or sight,
than when it is altogether neglected. Now the religious manner of using Gods
name, consists chiefly in these things: First, in the sincerity of our
intentions, whereby we are to look at the very end in the use of it, and
worship of God, unto which of ^s own nature, and by Gods appointment it tends
and was ordained. 2. In the reverence wherewith we use it, which is to be such,
as thereby we may show, that we are careful to preserve and keep up the honor
of God, and of his worship, in good esteem, and save it from all contempt,
slight, dishonor, and reproach. 3. In our zeal, whereby we endeavor with all
earnestness of mind to glorify God in the use of these things, and so
advance our own salvation. These and the like ways are pointed out to us in
the very forbidding the using of them vainly.

Reas. 1. Because that is used rashly and vainly, which is not used to its own
end; therefore to exclude this vanity, sincerity about our intention must first
be used.

Reas. 2. Because that is counted but vain and empty, which is but light and
slightly handled, as if it were a thing of no weight or importance, therefore
the forbidding to use vainly, commands us by the same means to use it, with
reverence, earnestness and gravity.

Reas. 3. Because a thing is used in vain, when it attains not to its end,
uses and fruit it was ordained for; therefore for the taking away of this
vanity also a diligent endeavor is required, of reaping and receiving the just
fruits of such ordinances; thus is done by zeal.

Use 1. Is of Reformation, against Papists, who in many things look only to
the work done, and neglect the manner of doing, and disposition of the d^er.

Use 2. Is of reproof, of all carnal and irreligious manners of men in the use
of Gods worship, and sacred things; when as they go about them, either after a
wonted fashion of their own, or out of custom rather than from conscience,
and a knowing, and feeling resentment of duties; and have in them, for the most
part, other ends set down and proposed to themselves, than such as God
appointed, and they ought only to intend; or they are lightly touched with
them, and therefore but slightly busied in them, as if they were matters of
sport, or highway pastimes; or lastly, these are so old in the good duties
they do, though they look not like men in sport, that yet they look as such,
that never either looked for, nor had any great care of reaping any great
benefit from the things they did.

Use 3. Is of Exhortation, that we may more and more stir up in our selves, and
in our minds and consciences, this religious care.

Doct. 2. This religious care ought singularly to be had in the use of Oaths,
and such things as are of the like nature thereto.

It is gathered from hence, because the name of God in a special manner is
taken up into our mouths, in Oaths, Vows, Promises, Covenants and the like; and
a reverence of Gods dreadful name is especially here commended unto us.

Reas. 1. Because in every Oath, there is a certain calling upon the name of
God, in a special sort.

Reas. 2. Because God is not barely and only called upon, as in other
businesses, to help us; but as a witness, judge and an avenger, if we speak
not and think not truth, and do not right.

Reas. 3. Because in an Oath we bind our selves not only to man, or our party
on earth, but also unto God, and for the most part of our own accord; and where
otherways we needed not put our souls under the wrath and curse of God, and
his fearful ^engeance, if we should deceive.

Reas. 4* Because as it were, we here interpose God and his name for our
Surety; all which respects require a singular religious care of the use of Gods
name in such a behalf.

Use Of Condemnation against such as are given to ^ash Oaths, or to
superstitious, blasphemous and profane ones.

Doct. 3. It is a most grievous sin, and such as God will ^n a singular man^er
avenge, to abuse Gods name in this manner.

This is gathered from the sanction, adjoined to the precept: God will not
leave him unpunished, etc. And this sanction is grounded on two Reasons,

Reas. 1. Because this sin amongst men is accounted venial, and is daily
committed without any punishment.

Reas 2. Because it is our natural corruption, little or nothing to regard the
dispositions of our minds in worshipping God; which yet God chiefly looks at.

Now the grievousnesse of the sin, appears in this; 1. That God is in this,
as it were, mocked: 2. That Gods worship is turned as it were, into a
stage play. 3. That an occasion hereby is given of contemning and blaspheming
of Gods name: And amongst the punishments, wherewith God follows this sin, that
spiritual revenge is most horrid, whereby he so deserts such men, that things
which of their own nature are a savor of life unto life, become unto them a
savor of death unto death; which also by the very order of nature follows upon
this kind of sin.

Use Of Admonition is, that we take heed of such sort of sins; and these are
not to play and make a sport with passages of holy Scripture; or to make use of
them to charms, or enchantments, and witchcraft: without any reverence or
gravity, to toss them to and fro like Tennis-bals, in common discourse, and
purposes; lastly, to be exercised in any part of Gods worship, merely for a
shift, and for the fashion, and for the custom that is in use.

Doct. 4. That for the fear or horror of such a sin, we ought not altogether
to abstain from Oaths, as things in themselves and absolutely unlawful.

For in some cases, times and matters, we are bound unto them by the
affirmative or commanding part of this Precept.

The thirty eighth Lords day.
On Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11. Verse 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy:

9. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work:

10. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the LORD thy Gods in it thou shall
not do any work: thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:

11 For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh day, Wherefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath day
and hallowed it.


THis fourth command, which is about the time of more solemn worship, is,
explicated 1. generally, verse. 8. Remember, etc. 2. special, verse. 9, 10. that
this is the seventh, or one of seven; whereunto is adjoined the duty about
keeping this day. This duty consists of two parts, to wit, of rest, and of the
Sanctification of that rest: the rest is a ceasing from all our works; and is
illustrated from its causes, by a distribuition; neither thou, nor thy son,
etc. The sanctifying of this rest is consecrating, or holy application of it to
Gods worship. And this sentence is not only proposed, but also confirmed, and
that with a double reason; whereof 1. Is taken from a tacit comparison of the
greater. God has promised us six days for our works; and therefore by very
good right and reason, he may challenge the seventh to himself, to be
consecrated to his worship. ^. Reason is taken from the exemplar cause, because
God by his own example of resting on the seventh day, went before us, as it
were to give us a copy to follow. 3, Reason is from the efficient, that is,
Gods institution or appointment which consists of two parts; sanctifying of
it, and blessing it. The sanctifying of it, was the separating of this day from
a worldly use to an holy. The blessing of it, was the promise to bless them,
that rightly bless this day.

Doct. 1. Certain times are both privately and publicly to be appointed and
set apart for more solemn worship.

This is understood in the command by that Synecdoche, that names the special
for the general. Those times in general are due unto public worship which are
most agreeable to the societies, in which we live. And to the private exercises
of godliness, by night order; some part of the morning, and of the evening time
is due; and this is always the practice of the Prophets and Apostles approved
in Scripture, and proposed unto us, as an example to be followed.

Reas. 1. Because we ought to have this care, that we orderly and decently
worship God; which cannot be without setting apart such a certain time.

2. Because our vanities, and straglingnes of mind and forgetfulness about
spiritual duties requires of us the help of such an ordinance, as this.

3. Because these appointed times keep us from many sins, while in our thoughts
we are either preparing our selves for these exercises, or else keep still the
fresh remembrance and power of them in our memories.

Use, is of Reproof, against their negligence, who though they profess
themselves to be worshippers of God, yet can scarce find any time, to give God
the worship that is due to him

Doct. 2. That one day of seven be holily observed, is of moral and perpetual
duty; as with us, the Lords Day.

Reas. 1. Because this is expressly commanded in this moral law, as spoken
immediately by God himself, together with the other commands, and written by his
own finger on tables of stone, as they were; which things were only proper to
the moral law.

Reas. 2. Because it was thus ordained from the beginning of the Creation.

Reas. 3. Because it is never less necessary, that some seventh day be
observed, than it was at the first institution. And that the Lords day, or
first of the week, or seventh is now by Divine authority appointed to us, that
it be holily kept, appears:

1. From the ground and reason of the change, because as God from the
beginning, appointed the seventh day of the week, or septenary circuit of days
for his rest from Creating of things: So Christ appointed the first of the
week, or of the seventh days of ordinary recourse, because on that day he
rested from his penal and afflictious labors of his humiliation, or emptying
himself, whereby he restored and created the world, as it were new again, unto
a better condition than it had lost.

2. By the frequent apparitions of Christ in the convention of his Disciples on
this day.

3. From the sending and shedding abroad of the Holy Ghost, on this day.

4. By the practice of the Apostles.

5. By Apostolic constitution, 1 Cor 16.

6 From the very title and name of the Lords day, that it has in the New
Testament

7. From the rigorous observation of this day in the Primitive Church, by
occasion whereof they were accounted worshippers of the sun; because this first
day of the week was by Heathens attributed to the Planet of the Sun, as the
rest were to the rest of the Planets.

Use Is of Exhortation* that out of conscience toward God, and obedience to
this command, we have a care of observing the Lords day.

Doct. 3. One part of our duty is that on the Lords day, we cease from all our
own works.

It is gathered from the Text; In six days shall thou do all thy work; but on
the seventh day thou shall do no work. etc. That is, no work that is thme. Now
that work is said to be our work, which neither directly belongs to the worship
of God, nor yet is otherways imposed upon us by any necessity from God; but is
chosen by our selves for some humane, or worldly end. Now such are 1. All our
common and mer^enary works. 2 All things, that call away our mind from that
intention that is required unto the worship of God on that day, though
otherways they be not servile. Yet such things are not forbidden, as either
belong unto common honesty, or are of a very urgent and not of a made necessity
of our own. The reason of this rest is, that we may be at convenient leisure
for divine worship: For worldly businesses do in diverse ways withstand this
more solemn worship of God.

Reas. 1. Because the very external acts of both are for the most part such, as
that they cannot consist or stand together at one time.

Reas. 2. Because the mind being distracted with such worldly business,
cannot compose or settle it self in good order to perform solemn worship to
God, as it ought.

Reas. 3. Because the taste, and savor, and power of holy exercises is
impaired, and dulled at least, or blunted by mixture of such things with them,
which in comparison should be but vile to them.

Use Is of Reproof, of such as easily break the rest of this day, either by
their ordinary and vulgar occupations; or with merchandises, or with sports or
plays, or with troublesome and long feastings on it, etc.

Doct. 4. The other part of our duty on the Lords day, is to sanctify this our
rest; that is, to apply the leisure that we have, to Gods worship, as well
publicly as privately.

Duties of this kind are first, a preparing of our minds to Gods solemn
worship. Secondly, Hearing of his Word. Thirdly, Solemn prayers. Fourthly,
Partaking of the Sacraments. Fifthly, Works of Charity. Sixthly, Meditation and
conference about holy things. Seventhly, A religious considering of the works
of God, of Creation and Providence, and even of such as occasionally we then
hear or see, though they be otherwise worldly.

Reas. 1. Because in such duties, we make profession of Religion, and of that
honor, that is due unto God; which therefore is to him honorable, and
accepted.

Reas. 2. Because by this means, we build up our selves, and advance our
communion that we have with God: For seeing that by worldly occupations through
the six days of the week, our mind is somewhat pressed toward the earth, it
was by a most wise purpose and counsel of God ordained, that every seventh day
at least again they should be lifted up to heaven, and sent up thitherwards by
all such means, that they might be restored to their former step or degree,
from which they had been declining: And seeing we contract also some
filthynesse from such worldly businesses, on the Lords day they should be wiped
off, and we cleansed from them by the exercises of sanctification. And seeing
many occasions fall on the other days, which bring their own difficulties and
tentations with them; on this day we ought to be well furnished and armed, so
that it ought to be our day of spiritual mustering or weapon showing; and a
day of lustration. A cleansing our selves from all filthinesses before
contracted; and a day of our ascending into heaven, in as far as our Faith and
Charity, with other heavenly gifts, on this day should be singularly kindled in
our hearts.

Reas. 3. Because by this means also we build up one another in the practice of
our Religion, so that he who hears the preaching of the word, though he learn
nothing himself, yet he teaches others some good thing, even in this, that he
hears, and thereby presses that he both should do so and other too: So hereby
he teaches others, that God is to be solemnly worshipped, and his word with
reverence to be heard.

Use 1. Is of Admonition, that we beware of the neglect of these duties, which
can not consist with any vigor either of religion to God, or of love and care
of our own salvation: Or lastly, of love and christian affection toward the
Church, and our neighbors.

Use 2. Is of Direction, that according to this rule we judge of the duties,
which on this day we perform about Gods worship: For all of them in common
should rise up so high as to a sanctifying of this day; and this sanctifying
again of the day, depends on our sanctifying of the name of God, and our
advancing of our own salvation: Unless therefore we seek such fruits in our
consciences, we have therein just cause of great humiliation; but if we feel
them in any degree, we have as great reason to give the Lord as great thanks
for it.

Doct. 5. It is the duty of every Christian, that not only themselves
sanctify that day, but also that they make all such to do it, as far as in
them lies, that are under their power.

This is hence collected, because this commandment is in a singular manner
directed to such as are over others, Magistrates, Parents, Masters, etc.
Neither thou, nor thy son.

Reas. 1. Because such servile works, as are forbidden on that day, are for the
most part made to be done by command of Fathers to Children, Masters to
Servants, Magistrates to Subjects: So that though they be performed by others,
yet the works are theirs, at whose command they are done.

Reas. 2. Because the sanctifying of this day was ordained as well for the
cause and use of Sons and Servants, as of Parents and Masters.

Reas. 3. Because it is the duty of all Superiors, to further the salvation,
as much as they can, of all that are under them; and to procure by them and
from them that honor to God, that is due to him from them.

Use, 1. Is of Reproof, against that most unworthy carelessness of men, who as
they are not diligent enough themselves in doing their own duty on this behalf,
so they think that they are free from all charge of children and servants about
this matter.

Use 2. Is of Direction, to Inferiors, that are under others power. 1. That
herein they willingly obey their Superiors, when they call them to serve God.
2. Yea, that they be thankful toward them for this cause. 3. That such as
have the liberty should choose out such Superiors to be under, as from whom
they may look for this help.

Doct. 6. For keeping of this duty, we must have a special remembrancer,
Remember that ye keep holy. etc.

Reas. 1. Because this command is not written naturally on our hearts, as the
other; but it was a command of institution rather than of natural light.

Reas. 2. Because the command concerns not all days and hours; but one
special time, therefore we may the more easily forget.

Reas. 3. Because the many businesses of this life, do easily turn away our
minds from this duty, unless with care and some diligence we set our selves to
the contrary.

Reas. 4. Because that we may rightly and conveniently sanctify this day, we
had need beforehand to think of the same, and set our worldly business in such
order, that they be no hinderance to us in that day, to sanctify it arightly;
and so also on other days be busied about them, that when that day comes we
may be disposed and ready with freedom of mind and cheerfulness to lay them
aside, and betake our selves to, and go about the solemn worship of God, with
our whole minds.

Use, Is of Reproof, against the laziness and carelessness of many, who are so
far from an holy remembering of this day, that they remember it rather to
this end, that they may bestow it on their private pleasures, or other
businesses of their own; on which they cannot have the leisure to bestow any
other day. For if they must run abroad a little, or some sport and easy journey
must be made, or some trouble-feast to be held, before any day else, they choose
the Lord's Day for these; as if otherwise that day should be lost to them, as
an idle day, if it were only bestowed on Gods solemn worship. Others there
be, that do not so much as remember the day of the week, unless by the Bell
they be put in rememberance of it.

The thirty nineth Lords day.
Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother: That thy days may be long
upon the land which the LORD thy God gives thee.
IN the fifth command of the Decalogue that duty is handled, which is due to
our Neighbor, in regard of his rank, degree, or quality, that he is of: And it
is expounded by the Synecdoche, that denominates one special for all the kind;
which is honor: For honor is a principal part of this duty, and also an
impulsive cause unto other parts of it. For by honor is understood a just and
right esteem, and respect of worth (what ever it be) which appears in our
Neighbor, whether he be our Superior, or our inferior, or our equal. Yet (as
we said) it has its special denomination from that special respect, which we
owe unto them, in whom some singular and eminent excellency appears. Whence it
is also, that the degree of our Neighbor, in regard whereof, honor is to be
given him, is by like Synecdoche signified to us, by the titles of Father, and
Mother, in whom nature it self, however very corrupt, yet does evidently
acknowledge, a rank and degree of dignity, whereunto honor is due. The
sanction of this command is in a promise of long life, because the continuation
of our life, and of all our quietness thereof, depends on the preservation of
the societies of mankind; whereof the first, and source of all the rest almost,
is between parents and children; and this also is the true reason, why this
command has the first place in the second Table.

Doct. 1. All men whatsoever are in some sort or other to be honored by us.

It is hence gathered, in that all precepts of the second Table regard our
Neighbor, whatever he be, according to Mat. 22. where the sum of this Table
is made, Thou shall love the Neighbor, etc. Though therefore this honor is
referred by name to Father and Mother, as its chief objects; yet in some sort
it is to be extended unto every Neighbor; that is, unto all mankind.

Reas. 1. Because none is found so base and vile, but that he has something in
him, that ought to be esteemed by us, and much valued. For if nothing else
could be remarked in one, yet the very common nature of man has that worth and
dignity in it, as unto it regard should* be had, and the party not altogether
contemined, or accounted less of than indeed he deserves; and in such respect
some honor is contained.

Reas. 2. Seeing all men are either our Superiors, or Inferiors, or our
equals; religion, charity, and natute it self in a sort, leads us thither, that
we should honor all Superiors, because they are superior to us, as Parents;
as by the very phrase of this command appears, where all Superiors are called
Fathers and Mothers, and by a like reason, all Inferiors should be respected
by us like sons; and equals, as brothers or sisters.

Reas. 3. Because such honor makes much for advancing of love, and mutual
duties of all kinds. For all do the more willingly perform their duties, when
they see themselves and what they do, to be had in some respect.

Use, Of Reproof, against that barbarous pride, which so possesses the minds
of many, that they can find but very few, that they think worthy of any honor
from them. Whether are such to be from hence excepted, as make some such poor
show of respect toward others, by their Puppit and Moris-like behaviors, as
signs of the honor forsooth, that they do you; but they go no further* unto
any reality. For the honor here commanded ought to have sound roots in our
hearts, and to bring forth some found fruits, and not only colors, and pre^
and lying shows.

Doct. 2. A special honor is due to our Superiors, and that according to the
nature and quality wherein they are superior to us.

This is contained in naming of Father and Mother specially to be honored, in
the general duty of honor due to all.

Reas. 1. Justice requires that to every one his due be given; and Superiors
have a special worth and excellency, unto which a special esteem, and respect
of honor is due.

Reas. 2. Religion commands that we acknowledge that special manner of Gods
image, which appears in every supereminence of dignity; whence it is also, that
all such respect toward Superiors, is called piety, partly because by piety,
or religion toward God it is in special manner commanded; partly also, because
it has some likeness of that piety and worship, that is due unto God.

Reas. 3. Charity and thankfulness persuade the same also, as from Superiors
to Inferiors some good thing ordinarily uses to descend, if it were but from
the rank and order; by reason whereof a special sort of honor is due to them,
even from such, as in their own proper persons perhaps receive no particular
good from them.

Reas. 4. Because, even for the society of mankind, nature teaches us to
honor them that deserve well of others, though we should receive no profit by
them.

Use 1. Of Admonition, that we take heed of such barbarous and uncivil
manners, whereby respect toward Superiors is taken away.

Use 2. Of Direction, that we always give reverence to such, as in authority
or power are superior, as to the Fathers of the Country, the Fathers of our
bodies, the Fathers of families, Fathers in Christ, and the like.

Doct. 3. Superiors owe a kind of honor to their Inferiors, suitable to
their place.

This is hence gathered, in that Father and Mother are put here by a
Synecdoche. 1. For all Superiors. 2. For all Neighbors, as has been said. So
men are commanded to honor their wives, 1 Pet. 3. 7. The meaning is, that so
they ought to behave themselves toward their Inferiors, that their Inferiors
may cheerfully acknowledge that degree of dignity they have over them, and show
the same.

Reas. 1. Because this is but that general and universal justice, whereby every
one is bound to render to another his due.

Reas. 2. Because humility inclines all godly men, that as far as
conveniently may be, they condescend to Inferiors, and as it were lift them up
rather to themselves, than stand too much upon their own title, or superiority.

Reas 3. Because that esteem and respect which descends from the superior to
the inferior has much more weight than that which ascends from the inferior to
the superior, and therefore makes more for preserving of the safety of mankind
in its right order.

Use 1. That Superiors uphold with their dignity, that resemblance of God,
which they ought to carry before there inferiors.

2. That they have a care of going before them in a right way and by a good
example.

3. That they always use all their wisdom, authority, and power, that they
have, to the procuring of the good of them that are under them*

Doct. 4. This mutual honoring of each other makes much for the prolonging,
and making our lives the more pleasant in this world, and improving of our hope
about the life eternal.

This is clear from the promise that is subjoyned to the precept.

Reas. 1. Because the conformation of humane society tends derectly to the
conservation of the life and livelihood of each one in particular.

Reas. 2. Because sins that are committed against parents, by whom we received
this life are most sutably punished by the loss of this life, and of the
comforts thereof; and there is a like reason sins against such, as are placed
in stead of parents.

Use. Is of Exhortation, That by this and the like considerations we stir up
our selves to a general care of the performance of this duty.

The fortieth Lords day.
Exodus 20. 13. Thou shall not kill.
IN this sixth command of the Decalogue Moses treats of the person and life of
man, and this is the reason, why this command is placed before the other two
following, in which only are ^andled, only the adjuncts of these. For the
person and life are of greater importance, than the things that belongs to the
person. Therefore care was first ^o be had of this, and then of these. The
command is proposed negatively, without the rest that follow, when yet the
praecedent were proposed affirmatively. The reason is, because in things
belonging to the fifth precept, privation is more used than contrariety; that
is, it is more commendable not to give the honor to such as it is due, than to
load them with manifest injuries, and reproaches. But in these commands nothing
is more usual, than that unto the duties commanded, we run into the quite
contrary faults as to hurt our neighbors life or his livelihood in his goods,
or to bear a false testimony against him, or to desire any thing inordinately,
that is his. It was therefore very suitable that in the fifth commandment the
perfect duty opposite unto the privation of honor should affirmatively be
commanded us; but in the rest it was more necessary that we should be recalled
from the contrary faults, and sins by a negative prohibition. Now the life,
for which provision is made in this command, is both bodily and spiritual; and
both these ought to be considered not only in their esteem and existence, but
also in all their accessarie qualities, that makes for their comfort and
convenience.

Doct. 1. Out of conscience to God and his law, we ought to abstain from all
such things, as tend to the hurt of our neighbors bodily life.

This is gathered from the words of this command; because while murder or
killing is forbidden all causes also, and effectual occasions thereof are
forbidden.

Reas. 1. Because man is made after the image of God, and so any unjust
violence done to the person or life of man, makes against the honor of God,
Genesis 9. 6. etc.

Reas. 2. Because God alone is the father of spirits, and the Lord of our life.
He does therefore an injury to God who unjustly hurts his brothers life, and
arrogates to himself that power which belongs properly to no other but to God
alone.

Reas. 3. Because this is the greatest wrong that can be done to a man, as to
this life, to deprive him of life, in which all other injuries are privatively
contained.

Use 1. Is of Admonition That we diligently keep our selves not only from
effusion of blood, in which consists the height of this injury; but also from
all cruelty, and from all both words and deeds, whereby man's life, or the
comforts and conveniences of his life, may be hurt, or impaired.

Use. 2. Is of Admonition also that by like reason and conscience we keep our
selves from all those inward dispositions and affections, whereby men use to be
led and provoked to hurt their neighbor unjustly; as are. 1. Anger. 2. Hatred,
which is as it were a vehement anger now strengthened and rooted in the mind,
whence it is, that men wish great evils to such as they hate and that
constantly; form which affection endeavor fallows; and from endeavor the act
it self of hurting. 3. Envy, whereby men so repine at others good estates that
they wish them worse, or some evil. 4 Desire of revenge, whereby men use to
render evil for evil, and that as it is evil. For although the desire of
restitution of what is taken away, or of satisfaction for wrong, or of
chastisement, or punishment, against such or such an one, that has offended,
be honest sometimes and laudable; to wit, because and when some evil in these
and the like, is wished to the party, not as evil, but as it tends to his good,
and so as it may be good for him: Yet desire of revenge, whereby we desire some
evil to another, as it is, and may be evil to him only, without any
reference to his good, can never be either honest, laudable, nor lawful.

Doct. 2. But most of all we ought to keep our selves from such things, whereby
the life of the soul of our brother is (...).

This is gathered from the words of the Text, because of all other this is the
deadl^est sort of killing a man; of which also the Scripture admonishes us in
the same phrase, whereby bodily killing is forbidden, I will require his blood
at thy hands. Ezekiel. 36. Yet this difference there is between bodily and
spiritual killing, that no man can be spiritually killed, or murdered by
violence and mere force, as bodily many are.

Reas. 1. Because the spiritual life of a man is his preciousest possession,
far surmounting his bodily life.

Reas 2. Because the hurting of this life, belongs to the hurt of his eternal
state and condition.

Reas. 3. Because the depriving of this life draws with it the deprivation of
all the true comfort of the bodily life also.

Reas. 4. Because in hurting this life, Gods glory is directly wronged, by
reason that this life cannot be hurt, but by the sin as well of him that hurts
it, as him that is hurt; though bodily life may be taken away without the sin
of him whose it is.

Use, Of Admonition, that with great care and conscience we keep our selves
from all things whereby this life of the soul is hurt; as, 1. From Heretical
Doctrines. ^. From evil and corrupt counsels* ^. From scandalous and
pernicious examples. 4. From all neglect of such duties, as we owe unto our
Neighbor, in order to this eternal salvation.

Doct. 3. It is our duty not only ^o abstain from all such things, as the life
of our Neighbor bodily or spiritual is hurt by* but also carefully to do all
such things whereby he may be fu^red in either life, and it may be made more
lively and comfortable to him.

It is hence gathered, that as no command is altogether negative, but contains
always and commands the contrary duties to the sins forbidden, so is it also
in this sixth Commandment.

Reas. 1 Because there is a certain communion of nature and life bodily
amongst all the posterity of Adam as they do all come of one and the same
blood. There is likewise a like communion of spiritual life amongst many, as to
the act and exercise it self; and amongst all, as to the hope and possibility.

Reas 2. Because religion sets up a sort of society amongst men, and as it
were, a spiritual or City o^ Commonwealth; wherein every one is bound to
procure the common good, and advance it as much as he can.

Reas 3 Because God in such duties is glorified, and according to the power and
occasion given us, there arises to us, a calling, and a divine allowance,
whereby we are in special manner to perform this duty.

Use. Of Exhortation to all sorts of duties, whereby the life of our Neighbor
may be cherished; as, ^. To a care of peace and love. 2. To patience. 3. To
courtesy. 4. To pity, mercy, and bounty. 5. To spiritual alms of
Instruction, Exhortation, Admonition, Consolation, as occasion shall require.
Hither also are such sins to be referred, as we commit against our own
lives, as drunkenness, surfeit, the evils of whoredoms, and uncleanness, and
the like; and contrarily, those duties, whereby we ought to procure and further
our own comfort both of life and health, as also of body and soul*

The forty first Lords day.
Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
IN this seventh Commandment are handled such duties as belong to the begetting
and propagating of humane life. For these have place next after such as belong
to preservation of life, which were ranked in the sixth Commandment, which
takes care for continuing the life of this and that party in particular; but
this seventh Commandment, of all men in general. By name then one special
impurity and dishonesty is only forbidden; but by the usual Synecdoche* or
comprehensive sort of speech, all others of that kind are understood, whether
disordered actions like unto this, or whether such as tend either of their own
nature, or of the intention of the doer, to the furtherance of such impure acts.

Doct. 1. We ought out of conscience toward God to keep our selves from all
impurity and unchastity.

Reas. 1. Because sins of this kind bring disorder into such things as belong
to the propagation of man's life, and so tend some way to the corrupting of
mankind.

Reas. 2. Because from such sins a sort of most inward uncleanness follows
in the person or body of man; whence it is, that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 18.
distinguishes this sin from all others, in that others are without the body,
this in and against the body it self; though there be some other sins that seem
to be in and against the body, as drunkenness, surfeit, etc. yet they neither
so inwardly arise from the body, nor so directly affect it, and primarily, as
these lustful dishonesties.

Reas. 3. Because from this kind of uncleanness follows that dishonouring of
our own bodies, the contrary whereof is naturally due to them, and to our
persons, as appears, ^ These. 4. 4.

Reas. 4. Because these impurities in a special manner withstand inward
holiness, as appears both from that place of the Thessalonians, where holiness
is conjoined with the honor of the body in opposition to this uncleanness;
and from that to the Corinthians, where our bodies by these faults, are said of
temples of the Holy Ghost, and of members of Christ, to become the members of
an Harlot.

Use, Of Admonition, that with the greater care and conscience we shun all
such uncleanness, which ought so much the more to be called to mind by us, as
the depravednesse of man's nature uses most to appear in these kind of sins,
because they are most common, most prevalenr; and keep strongest dominion in
him, possessing the whole man, in whom they are, and that most deeply, and with
a kind of violence and force. Hence it is, that in Scripture they are called a
burning, because they burn up all in their way, and by little and little
consume the whole man, as fire does the thing that it burns; more especially
we ought to keep our selves, 1. From that lust which is properly called carnal,
that we be not subject to, or obey the affections and dispositions of it. 2.
From all outward conversation, whereby such lust is cherished and furthered in
our selves, or in others; as are, 1. Such thoughts, as with pleasure and
delight are taken up and used about unchaste matters. 2. Wanton apparel and
behavior, or which savor of wantonness, or cherish it. 3. Filthy and unclean
communication, either in common discourses, or songs. 4. Unclean company, and
wanton representations, as are commonly in Stage Plays and interludes,
pictures, and rooms hung with such, etc. 5. All occasions and provocations to
lust, as idleness, drunkenness, surfeiting, and the like. 6. Most of all the
acts themselves, of unchastnesse in whordome, adultery, fornication, and the
like.

Doct. 2. By virtue of this command we are bound to study all cleanness of
soul and body, that belongs unto procreation.

This is commanded in the same words, that the contrary faults are forbidden
by, according to the constant use of speech in the decalogue.

Reas. 1. Because this cleannese is a part of our inward sanctification.

Reas 2. Because from this part of our sanctification a special sort of honor
arises, 1 These. 4. 4. While our bodies are not made drudges for the fulfilling
the base and vile affections of the flesh, but are applied unto nobler uses.

Reas* 3. Because this purity is needful, that we may be fit to worship God,
as we should. For carnal impurity where it prevails and gets the dominion, it
not only presses down and burdens the mind, so that it cannot raise up it
self unto spiritual thoughts and affections, but also it infecteth with
contagion, and pollutes those very thoughts and endeavors, whereby we seek
after and breath for spiritual life.

Use, Of Admonition, that we indulge not, nor allow the inclinations of our
corrupt natures in these things, nor suffer our selves to be carried away with
the evil manners and examples of the vulgar sort, who in this kind, are more
beasts often, than Christians; but let us always be thinking, how we may keep
our selves clean, as well from these lusts of the flesh, as from other sins:
This cleanness is maintained by modesty and temperance. Modesty is herein
kept, if neither by words, nor by gestures, nor by any other such way, we
uncover as it were without reverence, what nature tells us should be covered
and hid, and be ashamed of the uncovering. Temperance or sobriety consists in
the keeping a moderation or measure in the pleasures of the flesh or body,
especially in meat and drink. The cleanness or chastity, as to the diversity
of manner, is divided into chastity of single life, and chastity of marriage For
marriage is appointed now since the fall, by God, to be a means of keeping this
cleanness or chastity, in things that belongs to the generation of mankind.
We ought therefore to have a care, 1. That we so marry as that it be in such
cleanness; that is, with such a person, in such a manner, for such an end,
that from a good conscience it may be said, that the contract or bargain was
made in the Lord, and in his fear. 2. That it be used and exercised in this
cleanness; that is, that neither the end of it may be broken, nor it self be
drawn beyond the bounds of modesty and temperance; nor that it be any way from
a remedy of sin and lust, turned into a cover for uncleanness and wantonness.

The forty second Lords day.
Exodus 20. 15. Thou shall not steal.
IN this eighth Commandment men's possessions are handled as things that come
under the name of their outward goods, and commodities. For thus God would show
what a care he has of us, in that not only by his Law he has provided for
the safety of our life, and chastity, and honor of our persons, but also for
our possessions and external goods. He would also hereby admonish us how
confidently we may trust all that is ours to him; where by his eternal Law he
would have us secured about these lesser matters. There is in this Commandment
ordained and presupposed a propriety to every particular man in his own goods,
by reason whereof its truly said, his is mine, and that is ^hine For though at
the beginning of the creation all things were in a manner common; yet
afterward by lawful seizure and possession of this, or that, a division of
things ensued, the unjust breach of which division is condemned in this
commandment, with all such things as make for it, or lead to it. For as in a
feast some dish is set down in common and is no more this guests, than that's;
yet when any guest has taken to himself a portion or share of it, then that is
more his own, than any others, so that it cannot by any other be taken from
him without uncivility; so were all the commodities of this life at the first
set out in common to all; but when one took to himself a certain portion of
them, another could not by violence take it from him without sin. Now by name
theft only is forbidden, because it is one of the grossest and manifestest
sins of this kind; because in theft to every one is apparent the breach of
that right which every one has to his own commodity, and so the unjustice and
the wrong is clear: Yet together with it also, according to the perpetual use
of speech in all the other Commandments, all the degrees, and causes,
principles, and occasions or provocations to it, are forbidden.

Doct. 1. We must keep our selves out of cons^ience toward God, from all
unjust hurting of our Neighbor, in point of his possession* or outward goods.

Reas. 1. Because otherwise we sin against God and that after diverse manners:
1. That dispensation of his providence, whereby he has made division of such
things amongst men, is disturbed against his revealed will. 2. The dominion of
God himself, which he exercises in the dispensing of such things as seems best
to himself, seems this way to be contemned. 3. We invade as it were this
sovereignty and dominion of God, while at our pleasure we will make ours
whatsoever we list.

Reas. 2. Because we do our neighbor gross and manifest injury, while we take
by force to our selves, what belongs to him, and so take away from his his
goods.

Reas. 3. Because in this manner, charity is directly broken, while instead of
that good, which we both ought to wish, and procure to our neighbor; we do him
real evil, in depriving him of his own goods.

Reas 4. Because from such sins follow strifes, hatred and the disturbance of
all society.

Use Is of Admonition, that we not only shun that which is commonly called
theft, but also all those sins, which in Scripture are referred to theft; as
their common head; As 1. the too great love of riches. 2. The desire of our own
profit with our neighbors loss. 3. All unjustice of bargains and commerce,
how ever it may be done with color of right. 4. All using or appropriating to
our selves that which is another without its masters consent, whether this be
done by force, or by deceit and circumvention.

Doct. 2. With the same religion or conscience that we ought to abstain from
theft, we ought to s^t ou^selves to this on the contrary, that we may seek our
neighbors good, and further it in his outward goods.

It is gathered from the likeness of reason, that is between the sins*
forbidden, and the duties commanded, that are contrary to the same.

Reas. 1. Because by this means we make our selves instruments of Gods bounty
and good providence, whereby it is his pleasure, that all be provided for in
things necessary to this life.

Reas. 2. Because it is the exercise of our charity toward our neighbor.

Reas. 3. Because it belongs also some way to justice, in as much as we ought
to behave our selves as members of the same society, and every one has right
to such duties from others, as far as conveniently they can be by them
performed.

Reas. 4. Because our Lord admonishes us, that we make unto our selves,
friends from the use of this communion; and so further others by our good
example, and our selves by their good desires and prayers for us, in the way to
salvation.

Use Is of Direction, that we set our selves with all care, that according to
this duty of humanity, we further the profits of others, as our occasion and
power shall require.

Hence 1. we ought to purchase nothing to our selves, but by honest means, and
just titles of right: For whatsoever is otherwise purchased or acquired, turns
always to the wronging of another. 2. Every one should betake himself to some
honest exercise of life, which is in its self lawful, suitable to our selves,
and profitable to others, and such as live at ease: For who so live disorderly,
as stout beggars, with him in the Gospel, who having full Bags and Barns, sings
a requiem to their souls; saying, Soul take thine ease* thou have much laid up;
these as in other things, so they sin in this, that they take not upon them
such a condition of like, whereby they may do good unto others. 3. Diligence
is to be used in our calling, without which we cannot keep the things we have,
much less increase them; that we may spare something from them, and lay it out
unto the common good of others. 4. Frugality and moderation in our expenses
about our selves ought to be used, least the fountain should be drawn dry,
whence such streams should flow, for helping and refreshing others. 5. Bounty
and mercy ought to be exercised, in communicating our goods unto others,
especially persons that are to be pitied; and of these, chiefly such as are of
the household of faith: For in this duty is most of all exercised, and most
manifestly that virtue that is most contrary to theft; because as in theft we
take unjustly to our selves, what is not our own; so in liberality and alms, we
justly take from our selves what is our own, and freely bestow it on another.

The forty third Lords day.
On Exodus 20. 18. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
IN this Commandment, is handled the testimony of one given on the behalf of
another, for getting of belief or trust of them. This then is also amongst the
things that belong to our neighbors: For it either tends to his good, or to
his hurt, as the belief that is given to this testimony, may either do him good
or do him harm. God in this Commandment therefore shows us, that we ought not
only, not to hurt our neighbor, in his honor, or life, or chastity* or
goods; but also that no effectual occasion of harm should be given him, either
by words, or by a witnessing, though he should not thereby be immediately hurt,
but either by the coming between of his own, or some other bodies credit or
endavour. The general sin that is here forbidden, is called a false witnessing;
that is, whenever by our credit, authority, or testimony, we confirm that as
truth, which we know to be false, which is the very nature and definition of a
lie.

Doct. 1. Every lie with whatsoever pretense it may be excused, as it is a
witnessing of falsehood, it is a sin.

Reas. 1 Because it contains an in^ury to our neighbor, who from the very law
of nature, has this right, that he may challenge of us, that we say nothing to
him, as true as that is not true; no more than we would thrust upon him a piece
of false coin, for true or current gold or silver, which yet is but a
counterfeit.

Reas. 2. Because there is a base and dishonest disorder in the false witness,
that lies while his tongue and speech disagree quite from his mind; and it is
as if the Interpreter of some Princes should speak things quite contrary to
those, that he got in commission from his Prince to declare.

Reas. 3. Because the inconveniences that are brought forth and furthered in
the world by lies are very grievous and heavy; because by them all trust, in
which lies the very knot and foundation of humane society, is troubled in every
kind; and there is no evil that in any other sort is done to any, but both
may and uses also to be brought about by lies; so as by lies sin is committed
against the honor, the life, the chastity, and the outward goods of men, as
also against his religion, so that all the foregoing Commandments, by breaking
of this Commandment by lies, may also be some way broken.

Reas. 4 Because by a lie the nature of the Devil himself is in a special
manner followed, and as it were put on like a garment, Ioh 8. 44. You are of
your Father the Devil, and the lusts o^ your Father you will do. He was a
Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth because there is no
truth in him. When he speaks a ly, he speaks his own; for he is a lier, and
the Father of it.

The Use is of Admonition, that out of conscience toward God, we keep our
selves from all lying, whether it be that of a pernicious lie, or an officious
lie, or a merry lie: Whether it be spoken of our selves, as in our vaunting and
dissimulations, or of others, as in calumnies, slanders, backbitings,
flatteries, soothings, etc But these lies are chiefly to be shunned, as use to
be committed in public judgments, and matter of great weight and importance. 1
Because with how much more advisedness a man lies, by so much his sin is the
greater. 2. Because by how much the greater the danger is, that another is
brought into by the lie, by so much the sin is the heavier. 3 By how much the
greater obligations come together, binding us to speak truth: by so much the
sin is multiplied.

And that we may abstain from lying, we must abstain from such things as make
way for lying; as are rash suspicions, and too great easiness to believe and
receive false reports; and a talkative and twatling nature, which by many uses
so to be exercised, as without that consideration, whereby they should always
put a difference between truth and falseshood, and the like.

Doct. 2. We ought to love truth, and according as occasion serves, further and
advance it.

This is gathered from the words of the Commandment, because veracity, whereby
we both love truth, and according to occasion, witness the same, is that
virtue here commanded; and is contrary to that sin that is here condemned, in
bearing falsewitnesse: So that speculative truth is not properly here treated
of, neither that which is true generally; but only moral truth, that is, such
as belongs to men's manners and consciences; and that is such a truth of our
words, as that they agree with our mind, and our mind also with the thing it
self, as far as we are bound to know, or profess that we know. And this
veracity is to be followed and highly to be prised for these reasons.

Reas. 1. Because it is not the least part of that Image of God, that we ought
to show; because in a special manner God is, and is called the God of truth,
Psalm. 31. 6. and his word the word of truth, and truth it self: so that truth
has a peculiar agreement with the nature and perfection of God: Whence also it
is, that God, though in other commands has sometimes used a kind of
exception, and as it were dispensed with it for a time, as in the matter of
Theft, with the Israelites (for he made that to be no theft, by a special
explication of that command, which otherwise had been theft) and of some
marriages both before and under the Law, which by extraordinary approving of
them he made lawful; yet in this command about speaking truth, he never
granted any explication or dispensation, because from the very nature of the
thing it self, it has more of Gods Image in it, and of divine and immutable
justice; yea, which is more, God has absolutely forbidden us, that we lie not,
although for his cause, much less for our own, or for any mortal man's.

Reas. 2. Because this veracity is a special perfection of man, while it
excludes these deviations and crookednesses of men's minds, whereby they are
perverted unto a custom of lying, and subjected unto the base affections
either of fear, or fraud, or the like: Hence also from the very light of
nature, it is a singular honor to any, if they be lovers of truth, and stick
fast to it, and are constant both in defending and furthering of the same.

Reas. 3. This is also the foundation of all civil society and conversation;
so that it being taken away, men would become rather Wolves and Foxes to one
another, than men.

Reas. 4 By the exercise hereof and the love of it, our minds are the better
disposed for embracing that truth, which leads to our salvation.

The Use is of Direction, that in our conversation with men, we follow after
this truth, for though it be not required, either that we know all that is
true, nor yet that at all times we speak all, that we know to be true; yet
against the truth at no time, in no place, for no party whatsoever, no not for
God himself (as has been said) we ever witness any thing: Moreover we are
always bound to give witness unto the truth, and to confirm it, when either
religion or conscience toward God, or justice and charity toward our
neighbor shall require this duty from us.

The forty fourth Lords day.
Exodus 20. 17. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors (...), thou shall not covet
thy neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.
IN this last commandment is handled, the estate and condition of our Neighbor
in common, as appears by these last words; or (...) is (...) neighbors: For
as in the first Commandment of the first Table, that duty is commanded, whereon
all other duties lie and depend; so also in this last Commandment of the last
Table, that duty is handled, on which all others, that relate to our neighbor
do depend. About this state of our neighbor in common, coveteousness is
forbidden; by which neither is understood the natural faculty of coveting or
desiring, which is of it self good and lawful, and not to be ranked in the
place of things forbidden: Nor yet every concupiscence or lust is here to be
understood; because such acts of filthy lust, as have the consent of the will
joined with them, for the accomplishing the acts of sin, if occasion were
given, are prohibited in the other Commandments, according to their kinds,
whereunto they belong, as Christ himself teaches of a man inordinately lusting
after a woman: which while he calls adultery, he shows that it is forbidden in
the seventh Commandment: Nor yet is understood that innate, and inbred lust in
us, which is original sin, and the ^inder to all actual sin; because that is
no more forbidden in any one Commandment, than the contrary original
righteousness and innocence is commanded in the whole Law, but as this
primitive righteousness is commanded us in all the Law throughout; so the
contrary original sin, lust or inclination and propensity to evil, in general,
is forbidden in the whole Law, and not in any one commandment: Here then is
properly understood, that coveteousness, which is a disorderly desire or
longing after any thing, that is our neighbors, though we do not fully consent
thereto, and though we never desire to accomplish the same by unlawful means.

Doct. 1. The first motions, wherein we are touched with an inordinate desire,
are to be holden ^or sins, that are to be shunned.

It is gathered from the words of the Commanment; because that first lusting
after any thing, that is our neighbors, is expressly condemned; and all other
inordinate motions are of the same kind.

Reas. 1 Because such motions are contrary to the perfection of Gods Image,
which we are every where bound to keep entire in our selves, as much as is
possible.

Reas. 2. Because such motions are contrary to charity, whereby we ought to
love God with our whole hearts, and our Neighbor as our selves* For if this
charity were perfect in us, no place would be left in us for such motions of
affections either against God, or against our Neighbor.

Reas. 3. Because in such motions there is a certain beginning of a consent to
evil, though it be not full and perfect; which appears from that hidden
liking and delight, that uses to accompany such motions, until seriously they
be repressed.

Use 1. Of Refutation, against Papists, who hold not such first motions for
sins, and so do not acknowledge the spiritual depth of sin; and by the same
means in great part take away the power of repentance and spiritual
humiliation.

Use 2. Of Admonition. that with all diligence we keep our hearts, that however
we cannot be altogether free from such motions, yet as much as may be, we may
keep our selves from them; and that for two causes: 1. Because they have
something of sinfulness in them, and tend also to the promotion of heavier
sins. 2. Because in some sort they defile our mind and make it less fit for
excercising and preserving holy motions.

Doct. 2. Every one ought to be content with that portion and condition that
God has measur^d out unto him

This is hence gathered; because contentment with our own, is the duty
directly contrary to desiring what is another.

Reas. 1. Because we ought to rest in Gods dispensation, as in our Fathers good
providence, who knows best what is good for us.

Reas. 2. Because this contentment makes much for the quietness of our mind,
and so for the happiness of our life.

Reas. 3. Because the want of this content argues our too great love of the
world, and of our selves; and it comes from a perverse affection, that we are
not content with our lot*

Use 1. Of Reproof, against such, as do, or think nothing else almost, than how
they may compass such or such a worldly thing, that they have not; so that
their whole life is nothing else but a continual exercise of avarice and
ambition.

Use 2 Of Exhortation, that we may more and more strive unto this contentment
of mind, which is the companion of true piety, as is said; Godliness is great
gain, with a mind contented with its own condition. For we brought nothing
with us into this world, nor can we take any thing out of it with us; but
having fo^d and raiment, let us there ^ith be content. But such as will be rich
fall into tentation, and into a s^are, and many lusts or covetousnesses, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7.

Doct. 3. We ought to desire our Neighbors good as well as our own.

This is hence gathered; that here is forbidden the coveting of that, which is
our Neighbors; whence follows, that we ought not only to leave to him such
things as are his; but also, which is more, desire heartily that he may keep
and enjoy his own to his own content, not that we should have them, or desire
them. So that as the love of God above all things else is commanded in the
first Commandment, so this love of our Neighbor, as of our selves, seems
chiefly to be commanded, and as it were summed up in this last Commandment.

Reas. 1. Because love to our Neighbor ought to follow from our love to God;
and God may be as well honored by the things he gives to our Neighbor, as the
things that he gives to us.

Reas. 2. Because however it be more natural to wish well to our selves, yet it
is more divine and perfect to wish well to others in such external things.

Reas. 3. Because by wishing well to others, we wish well to ourselves, in as
much as by the exercise of this duty, we further our own salvation

Use, Of ^eproof, against the common frailty of us all. For from this, as from
the Commandment of a loving God above all things, it follows that none can
perfectly keep this moral Law, in this life; to wit, if we understand such
perfection as consists in complete obedience. For otherwise in all believers is
found such a perfection, or integrity and sincerity, as is opposed unto
fainednesse and dissimulation; and such as is opposed unto halting or
lamenesse, by which some duties seem to be looked after, but not all; and such
a perfection also as is opposed to lukewarmnesse. For all believers both
worship God sincerely, and desire to keep all his Commandments, and pant after
a complete obedience also: Yet the Law is not for this proposed to us in vain,
though we be unable to keep it fully. For hence we understand, 1. What is our
duty. 2. What are the defects under which we lie. 3. What we may require of
God; to wit, that we may be freed from guilt, and renewed to a performance of
duties. 4. That we have a mark set us, whereat we may aim in all our
endeavors. 5. That we may in part take notice of the perfection of that life
which we shall enjoy in another world.

The forty fifth Lords day.
On Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with (...) prayer and supplication in the
Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication f^r all
Saints.
THe Apostle after explication of our spiritual armor, which every Christian
ought to furnish himself with, adds exhortations to prayers, by which this
spiritual armor is taken up, put on, strengthened, made sure, and of proof,
and is increased. In the Exhortation it self several things are expounded as
the Duty of praying* which duty is declared, 1. By a distribution, with all
prayer and supplication; 2. From the adj^nct of time, always, or at all times.
3. From the ob^ect, unto whose good these prayers are to serve; to wit not
only for our selves, but for all Saints 4. From the efficient cause, by the
Holy Ghost. 5. From its singular manner that must accompany it, which consists
in watching and in perseverance.

Doct. 1. Prayer is amongst those p^incipal duties, which ought to be had a
care of by us.

It is hence gathered from the Text; because the Apostle so carefully urges it.

Reas 1 Because it gives very great glory to God; for God in all our prayers is
acknowledged the principle and fountain of all our good.

Reas. 2. It contains man's greatest subjection and homage to God. 1. Because it
seeks all things of free* gift and grace. 2. Because the soul and conscience
themselves are prostrated before God, and cast at his feet as it were, when we
pray.

Reas. 3. Because by prayer, we receive all the spiritual gifts of God.

Reas. 4 Because by the same, we sanctify to our selves all the corporal gifts
of God.

Reas. 5. Because by Prayer we fly unto God, that in him we may be secured
from all evil.

Reas. 6. Because we have most sweet communion and communication of the grace
of God in the exercise of Prayer.

Reas. 7. Because in Prayer either expressly, or employed we give up our selves
unto God, so as after and from prayer, we rise more obliged and bound to God
than we were before; because all Prayer has always adjoined to it some
promise of thankfulness, for hearing our prayer and granting our desires.

Use Is of of Exhortation, that we may more and more give our selves to this
holy exercise of Prayer, as well in public as in private Unto which care many
considerations ought to stir us up: As first, That holy Prayer is so acceptable
to God, that in Scriptures it uses to be called Incense, or Perfume, and
Sacrifice. 2. In that it is so proper to the godly* that in Scriptures godly
men, and such as call upon the name of God, are without difference put for the
same. 3. In that it is so inseparable a fruit of the holy spirit dwelling in
the heart of a believing man, that from thence it is called the spirit of
Prayer; and Prayer is almost the same to spiritual life, as breathing is to
natural or animal life. Moreover that by prayers we best resist all sort of
temptations; whence also it is, that we are bid resist the Devil by Praying;
and to pray and watch, that we fall not into temptation: Lastly, in that all
grace is stirred up, and increased by the exercise of Prayer.

Doct. 2. In prayer we ought to exercise our selves in all the kinds and sorts
of it.

This is hence gathered in that the Apostles exhorts us here, to all prayer,
and supplication, and thanksgiving.

Reas. 1. Because our manifold necessities, as well in respect of evils,
wherewith we are pressed; as in respect of good things that we want, or for
receiving whereof we ow thanks; as also the necessities and occasions of
others, unto whom we ow this* duty of Prayer, do require manifold sorts of
Prayer.

Reas. 2. Because by this means, not one only, or another, but all the graces
of God are put forth and exercised in us, according to their proper objects and
natures.

Reas 3. Because God by this means is many ways glorified of us.

Use Is of Direction, that we rest not on forms of Prayers, as if the saying
over of such were enough, for the fulfilling of our duty in general; because
according to diverse occasions, we ought to betake ourselves to diverse manners
or ways of Praying.

Doct. 3. In Godly prayers the holy spirit exercises a special power of his
own.

From the words, by the holy spirit.

Reas. 1. Because we of our selves know not, neither how, nor what to pray for:
And although we be taught about such things in the word of God, yet for the
practice it self, a special direction of the holy spirit is requisite.

Reas. 2. Because our weaknesses are so many, in the exercise of Prayer, that
they must be helped by the holy spirit.

Reas. 3. Because no prayers can be holy and acceptable to God, unless they
come from the holy Spirit.

Use, Of Direction, that in making our prayers, we trust not to our own wit,
and volubility of gifts, and to our own strength; but that we rely always on
the grace and help of the Holy Spirit.

Doct. 4. In some sort or other we ought always, or at all times to be praying.

From the words, Praying always.

Reas. 1. Because we ought always to have a praying disposition of mind, or a
mind ready to pray: For in this consists the right disposition and ordering of
our mind.

Reas. 2. Because we ought to take all just occasion of this exercise of Prayer.

Reas. 3. Because we ought not to pass over our set and established times of
prayer.

Use Is of Reproof against such, as are so far from this exercise, that they
cannot only pass over whole days, but weeks also without any serious
thoughts of Prayer.

Doct. 5. The manner of Praying, is as much to be taken care of, as prayer it
self.

This is here gathered, in that watching unto prayer is commanded in the same
manner with prayer. Now watching unto Prayer, belongs unto the manner of
Praying, and in some sort it contains all things, that belongs unto it. For,

First, We ought to watch before prayer, that we may so prepare our selves
thereto, as all hindrances may be removed, and we our selves get a fit
disposition of mind and spirit.

Secondly, In prayer we must watch against lukewarmnesse, want of reverence,
wandering thoughts, and the like.

Thirdly, After prayers we must be watchful, against forgetfulness and
slothfulness, whereby we come short of the fruit of our prayers; neither
indeed for our carelessness ought we to expect any.

Reas. 1. Because in every moral action the manner of doing is of greatest
weight, by which it only is, that we not only do that which is good, but do
it well.

Reas 2. Because in prayer, after a special manner we are in Gods presence, in
whose sight, how we behave our selves is a matter of no small concernement.

Reas. 3. Because a corrupt manner of praying, sometimes not only blasts the
power of our prayers, but also makes them to be turned into sin to us.

Use, Of Direction, that we may have a care of all such things, as make for the
right manner of praying; such as are Faith, Humility, Zeal, or Fervor, and
Constancy.

The forty sixth Lords day.
Mat. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Verse 9 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our
Father which a^t in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name.

10 Thy Kingdom come: Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

11 Give us this day our daily bread.

12 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is
the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen.


THis prayer was dictated by Christ, and for this reason ought chiefly by all
Christians to be had in esteem, as coming from him that was the wisdom of God
it self, which therefore both knew well all our necessities, and knew also most
perfectly, what the will of God is toward us: And it was dictated, that it
might be an example or pattern of all Prayers, that we ought to use; not that
we should be bound up to this very frame and form of words; however it may also
be freely used by us: For we read not that this very form of words was used by
the Apostles, though otherwise diverse Prayers of theirs are mentioned as well
in the Acts as in their Epistles. This Prayer is made up of certain Petitions,
whereunto are adjoined a foregoing Preface, and a following Conclusion. The
Preface is in these words; Our Father which art in H^aven. And herein is
proposed and commended unto us a certain description of God, to whom our
prayers are always to be directed. This description sutably to its occasion;
that is, unto praying, lays out unto us those perfections of God, which are
most needful to be known and considered of us for a devout calling upon his
name. And because nothing makes more for this, than that we be assured of Gods
goodness, and good will toward us, whereby he intends good to us; and of his
power, whereby he is able to do all that he pleases in Heaven or on earth;
Therefore, ^ The goodness of God is declared by that title of, Our Father. And
2. His greatest power and majesty is designed in these other words; Which art
in Heaven. He is called Father not only from the benefit of creation and
providence, whereby as with a Fatherly care he provides for us in all things;
but chiefly also for the benefit of adoption, whereby of his special favor he
chooses us to be of the rank and number of his sons. And he is said to be in
Heaven* because in Heaven, especially the third Heaven, he manifests his
majesty, as it were in his royal throne, amongst the blessed and glorious
spirits; and from thence he sends out his Word, as a royal declaration of his
will, through all parts of the world, for the powerful effectuating of all and
every thing, that he wills, or pleases.

Doct. 1. Some preparation of mind is necessary for ^ight making of our
prayers.

This is hence gathered, in that a preface is here used, and that such a one,
as directly makes for preparing of our minds, that we may make our prayers the
more directly before God.

Reas. 1. Because so great is the majesty of God, that to appear before him,
and rashly as it were to rush into conference with him, and so negligently
without any care of our fitness, and predisposition to it, would be such an
indignity, as it were great incivility, and want of wisdom, to use toward
any worldly Prince, or great man.

Reas 2. Because so great is our weakness, that unless our minds be
strengthened by some religious meditation, they will never lift up themselves
to God, so as becomes them.

Reas. 3. Because so great is our unworthiness, that hardly can our minds be
raised up to consider and believe, how our prayers are heard of God, unless we
seriously meditate on the favor or grace of God, and his promises.

U^e, Of Direction how we ought to dispose and settle our selves to prayer;
namely by such a preparation, which chiefly does consist in two things: 1. In
calling away of our mind, and thoughts, and cares, from all other things, not
only unlawful, but otherwise lawful, though worldly, during that time, and
exercise. 2 In setting of our minds, and thoughts, and affections on heavenly
things, and that according to that occasion, which our prayers in general, and
in their special and particular natures, give us.

Doct. 2. God alone by religious prayer is to be called upon.

This is hence gathered; because in this most perfect pattern of Christian
prayer, we are not taught to call upon any in that kind, but whom we may call,
Our Father which art in heaven.

Reas. 1. Because prayer is so divine a worship, and gives so much glory to the
party that it is made to, that without idolatry it cannot be offered to any
creature; whence also in Scripture every where it is called a sacrifice, which
the very Papists themselves confess cannot be offered but to God alone.

Reas. 2 Because no creature can sufficiently know our prayers; to wit, as they
come from the heart, and not from the mouth only.

R. 3. Because no creature can always and every where be present to hear
prayers, where they are made.

Reas. 4. We cannot religiously call on such, as we do not religiously believe
in, Romans 10. But we may not religiously believe in a creature, I^r. 17. 5.

Use. Of Resutation, against the perverse superstion of Papists.

Doct. 3. In all our prayers we ought to come unto God with confidence, as unto
our Father.

It is gathered from the word, Father.

Reas. 1. Because prayer in its most inward and essential nature, is an action
of affiance and trust. For we seek nothing from God, but out of trust and hope
grounded on his promises.

Reas. 2. Because we ought to strive unto this, that we our selves may be
accepted of God, as his sons, that so we may know that our prayers will be
accepted of him: And this we only attain by faith and affiance placed on God,
through Jesus Christ.

Reas. 3. Because we ought to give God this glory, that as a bountiful Father
he will liberally give unto us, when we do ask of him, all that is good for us.

Quest. What shall they do then, that have not yet received the spirit of
adoption, so that with any certainty they may ^all upon God, as their Father?

Ans. Though such cannot for that time receive that comfort of their prayers,
that others do, yet they ought not therefore to cease from the exercise of
prayer, because this it self is a most fit means to attain to this confidence;
when by lifting up the heart to God, we wish at least, if we cannot with
downright confidence and affirmation say of the Word, that yet we could, and
might truly call upon God, as our Father.

Use, Of Direction, that we always call upon God in Christ, in whom alone God
is our Father by adopting us, and reconciled unto us, and accepts of our selves
and of our prayers.

Doct. 4. In our prayers together with confidence toward God, charity toward
our brethren ought always to be joined.

It is gathered from the word, Our For though it be both lawful, and sometimes
expedient and profitable, that a believer say in his prayers; O my Father, for
manifesting his particular confidence in God; and not for designing any
specialler sonship that he has in God, than others; as Christ the Lord alone
might and did use that form of speaking; yet even for designing our particular
confidence, it ought never to be joined with excluding thoughts of others, but
what ever our own particular feelings be, in respect of charity, and the
judgment and desire thereof toward others, we ought always either expressly or
impliedly, to call upon God, as the common Father, as of our selves, so of
others also.

Reas. 1. Because it belongs to our comfort, that we so call on God, as being
members with others of that mystical body, whereunto God has prepared and
promised all good things.

Reas. 2. Because it belongs to the communion of Saints, that they have a
perpetual communication or mutual partaking and benefit of prayers amongst
themselves.

Reas. 3 Because charity toward others, is a disposition, which is in a
special manner required of us, that our prayers may be acceptable to God,
according to that of our Lord; If ye forgive ^hers, y^u shall be forgiven.

Us Of Reproof, against such, who burning with hatred, and desire of revenge,
rush into praying, not that we ought to abstain from praying, because of such
perturbations of ours; as neither from the Lords Supper: But that we ought to
lay aside and purge out such perturbations, not only when we come to partake
publicly of the Lords Supper; but also daily, and privately, when ever we set
our selves to make our daily prayers to God.

Doct. 5. The majesty and power of God are to be set before us, when we call
upon God.

It is gathered from the words; Which art in Heaven.

Reas. 1. Because this majesty of God rightly set before us, and thought upon,
strikes us into an awful reverence and fear of God, which is required unto all
humble and rightly conceived prayers.

Reas. 2. Because the consideration of the same majesty lifts up our minds
above all earthly and worldly things, to think upon and seek for things
heavenly.

Reas. 3. Because the heavenly power of God directly strengthens our
confidence, according to that of the Apostle, Rom 4 21. He believed, and
d^ubted not, that ^e who had promised, could also perform.

Use, Of Direction how in our prayers we may resist sundry thoughts and
temptations; to wit, by lifting up our minds to behold and think upon the
majesty and power of God, in whose presence we are.

The forty seventh Lords day. On the first petition of the Lords prayer.
Hallowed be thy Name.
ALl the petitions of the Lords Prayer are very short, and yet such, as contain
all things that are to be sought for in their own way, and that in an order
most convenient. For the four first Petitions concern the obtaining of good;
and the two last, the removing of evil. Amongst the former, these have the
first place, which nearliest concern the glory of God: And first of all the
glory of God it self is sought and prayed for in the first petition, where by
the name of God, God himself is understood, and such things as most intimately
belong unto him, in as much as he has revealed himself unto the creatures. By
sanctifying of this name then is understood, the manifestation of Gods glory,
as most becomes his most holy majesty.

Doct. 1. All prayers that we offer to God, are to be followed with great zeal
and affection.

This is hence gathered; because all these petitions are so short, but yet
pithy and comprehensive, that it may from thence appear that the power of
prayer consists not so much in multitude of words, and empty or vain
repititions or bablings, as in the servent and well composed desires of the
heart.

Reas. 1. Because the abundance of the heart is here chiefly regarded,
according to which the mouth ought only to speak: And the abundance of the
heart consists in such desires with zeal and fervor, or heat of affections.

Reas. 2. Because God knows what we stand in need of, so that a long and
artificial or skillful expounding of things to God, is not needful, nor does
at all profit, further than it proceeds from an overflowing abundance of the
heart.

Use, Of Reproof, against such bablings, as being expressly condemned by Christ
our Lord himself, are yet wilfully and professedly used by Papists; and by
others also out of a lukewarm formality, in as much as they use a form of
praying, but deny the power of it.

Doct. 2. Such things are in the first place, and with greatest affection to be
sought after, as most concern the glory of Gods name.

This is gathered from the order of the petitions.

Reas. 1. Because in the order of intention, and of a well ordered desire, the
end is first to be desired: And the glory of God is the end of all.

Reas. 2. That which is first in worth, ought to be put before all other
things: And the glory of God has infinite excellency and worth beyond all
things else.

Reas. 3 Because this is one the difference between true and sincere prayer,
and that which is hypocritical and vain; in that hypocrites then only seek
after God, when by their own private and proper necessities they are
constrained to it, and seek not to him first, and for himself. But the godly
call upon God for the esteem that they have of himself especially, although
even then also with him, they seek their own happiness in him, and in him
alone; because this is most of all to glorify God in that manner that himself
has prescribed.

Use. Of Exhortation, that by all means we stir up in our selves this servent
desire toward the glory of Gods name, not only beyond and above all profits
and pleasures of this life, but also above our life it self, both in this
world, and in the world to come, if it were possible that we could desire Gods
glory separately from our own salvation, and glorification in Heaven.

Doct. 3. Our hallowing or sanctifying and glorifying of Go^s name depends upon
his own (...) gift and bounty*

For we are here taught to seek and pray for it from him.

Reas. 1 Because no mortal creature of it self knows the way how Gods name is
to be sanctified; nor does any by that illumination which he has got, so
understand it, but that he still stands in need yet more and more from time to
time to be taught it of God.

Reas 2. Because when we understand how Gods name ought to be sanctified of us,
yet the direction, and leading, and grace of the Spirit of God is needful for
the performing of that, which we know belongs unto our duty.

Reas 3. Because there be many things without us, that belong to the
sanctifying of Gods name, that cannot be brought to any effect by us, but by
the special and powerful working of God himself.

Use* Of Information, that by this we may understand, that all the duties that
we perform unto God are Gods own gifts. For nothing can be by us offered unto
God for sanctifying of his name, unless that first were freely given us of God.
And thus God is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, in all that
spiritual communion, that we have with him. First he forgives us our sins; then
he gives us the grace both to will and to do that which is good and
well-pleasing in his sight; and lastly, all these his own gifts he crowns in
us, both with grace to the end, and glory in the end.

Doct. 4. It is a great benefit of God to us, when we see his name to be
hallowed or glorified.

For here we seek this first, as our principal desire and benefit, that the
name of God may be hallowed.

Reas. 1. Because this hallowing of Gods name, turns always to the profit and
building up of the children of God, who in some sort are made partakers of his
glory.

Reas. 2. Because all such as love God above all things else, are made
possessors of their chief desire, when they see the name of God to be hallowed
and glorified.

Reas. 3. Because God often vouchsafes us this honor, to be made some way
instruments of hallowing and glorifying his name; and this ought to be
acknowledged for a great honor and benefit.

Use* Of Reproof, against the base and earthly minds of men, that are more
taken with a little profit of the things of this world, than with the glorious
hallowing of the name of God.

Doct. 5. It ought to be our greatest grief, if the name of God be profaned or
blasphemed.

For this is it, that is directly contrary to this first and great petition,
and the greatest hearts desire of all the godly.

Reas. 1. Because Gods majesty ought to be most dear unto us.

Reas. 2 Because the actors of such a sin are most wretched, and therefore much
to be pitied, for the miserable blindness and perverseness wherein they lie.

Reas. 3. Because great scandal is given to others.

Reas. 4. Because by this means Gods judgments are in a singular manner thus
provoked and procured, for God will always have his glory, will we, nill we;
either from us freely, or upon us fiercely; either the glory of his mercy from
us, or the glory of his justice and wrath upon us.

Use, Of Direction* how we ought to be affected, when the name of God is
profaned or blasphemed; that is, if it be done by others, we ought to grieve
at the thing, and as far as in us lies, to mend it; but if it be done by our
selves, or by occasion of us; that is, for a life led altogether unworthy of,
and unsuitable to the glorious God, that we profess to serve; then we ought as
it were to repair God of his honor, by our humiliation and repentance for such
misdoings, and by zeal of glorifying him afterward, as we had offended and
dishonored him before.

The forty eighth Lords day. On the second petition of the Lords prayer.
Let thy Kingdom come.
IN the second Petition is handled the principal means, whereby the name of
God is hallowed, or glorified amongst men; and that is, the Kingdom of God,
and its coming is sought for. And by the Kingdom of God properly is understood
that state of the Church, wherein she is made partaker of that happiness, that
she has in her communion with God. For a Kingdom in its general notion, is a
kind of polity or public government and state of men, wherein one has the
supreme and chief command, and all others are subject (less or more) for their
own good. For unless it be for the good of the Subjects, or people, it is not a
Kingdom, but a Tyrany. So the Kingdom of God, is a Polity or State, wherein
God has the Sovereignty or Supreme power and command; and men are subject in
such a sort, that from thence they may reap and receive their chief good, that
can be desired, or eternal and true happiness. By a (...) also all such means
are understood by the Kingdom of God, whereby such a state of the Church is
procured. Of this Kingdom there are two most remarkable degrees; one in that
administration which belongs unto this present life, in respect whereof it is
called the Kingdom of grace: The other unto the life to come, in regard
whereof it is called the K^ngdome of glory. By the coming of this Kingdom
then, is understood its state* or condition; and the giving, or bringing to
pass of all such things, together with the advancing and perfection of them, as
belong to this state, for its accomplishment.

Doct. 1. The chief mea^s to hallow, or glorify Gods name by, is the Kingdom
of God, which consists in his Church.

This is gathered from the connection of this petition with the preceding.

Reas. 1. Because the name of God, or the greatest perfections of God, are more
manifested in this Kingdom, than in any other of his works, but especially his
grace, or mercy, justice, truth, and wisdom.

Reas. 2 Because this Kingdom of God in its perfection comes nighest unto God
himself. For there is nothing out of God himself, that can be compared with his
Church; yea, in a manner all things else are subject to the Church.

Rea. 3. Because nothing is more contrary to the glory of Gods name, than the
impairment of this Kingdom, or trenching upon it, or than the troubling and
deforming of it.

Use, Of Direction and Exhortation, that first of all we seek the Kingdom of
God.

Doct. 2. This Kingdom is not set up, nor brought about by any other, than God
himself.

This is hence gathered, in that the coming hereof is sought from God alone, as
the author and principal cause and procurer of it.

Reas. 1. Because the adversaries and enemies of this Kingdom are more and
mightier, than that they can be overcome by any creature.

Reas. 2. Because the profits and advantages that this Kingdom brings, are
greater, than that they can be imparted to any by any creature.

Reas. 3. Because the administration of this Kingdom is more spiritual, than
that it can be performed by any creature in chief.

Use, 1. Of Refutation, as well against Pelagians, who go about to rob God of a
great part of this Kingdom, and ascribe it to nature; as against Papists, and
others, Who will have the external government of the Church at least to depend
upon humane power and pleasure.

Use 2. Of Direction, that in seeking this Kindome we fly to God by faithful
prayers.

Doct. 3. This Kingdom is come to us, but in part, as yet.

This is hence gathered, in that the coming of this Kingdom is by all during
this life always to be sought for.

Reas. 1. Because always in this life something cleaves to us, which belongs
to the Kingdom of darkness, and must be put off, and laid away.

Reas. 2. Because always something is wanting to us, that belongs to the
Kingdom of light, and must be put on.

Reas 3 Because we must always pant and breath after the accomplishment of
this Kingdom, which is to be revealed and perfected in the last coming of
Christ.

Use, Of Admonition, that we never so set up our rest here, as if we were
arrived at the end and last perfection, but strive unto a further perfection,
than any we have attained.

Doct. 4. It belongs to our duty, that we use all care and pains to advance
this Kingdom of God, by our desires, prayers, and all other lawful means and
endeavors within the compass of our power, place, and calling, that God has
set (...) in.

This is gathered, because we are here taught to do this by prayer; and what we
are bound to pray for, we are bound to use all lawful and expedient means to
bring it to pass: else we should but tempt and mock God by such prayers, by
dividing the right means from the end, and disjoyning of things that God has
conjoined.

Reas. 1. Because the zeal of the House and Kingdom of God (for Gods Kingdom
and his Family or House, are all one) ought to take up and possess our minds
as far as makes for the glory of God.

Reas. 2. Because from it depends our own salvation.

Reas. 3. Because such endeavors, if they be sincere, are never in vain. For
though perhaps they profit little with men sometimes, yet they always advance
the Kingdom of God in our selves, and have the promise of the blessing.

Use, Of Reproof, of such as care nothing what the estate of the Church be, how
the Word is preached, the Sacraments administered, Discipline exercised, and the
like; but it is to be feared that such Gallio's have no part nor portion in
this Kingdom, which they entertain with such slight and neglect.

Doct. 5. We ought to wish for the uttermost perfection of this Kingdom, which
is to be after the day of judgment.

This is hence gathered, in that believers here on earth are taught still unto
the day of judgment to pray for this Kingdom. For further illustration it
needs no more, than what has been said on the former Doctrines.

Doct. 6. The Kingdom of the Devil, and of Darkness, and of Antichrist, and
all other such things, as are opposite to the Kingdom of God, and enemies to
it, we ought with all our heart to detest, and with all our strength to oppose.

This is gathered from the distinctive particle, thy: Wherein is held out an
opposition of this Kingdom to all other Kingdoms and things, that are
contrary to it.

The forty nineth Lords day. On the third petition of the Lords prayer.
Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven.
IN this Petition is sought the fulfilling of Gods will, and in that manner,
that it ought to be sought to be fulfilled: which is explicated by a comparison
of the like; where the things compared are the fulfilling of Gods will by men,
and by Angels: The quality or manner, wherein they are compared, is the manner
of obedience, that ought to be given to this will: Now by the will of God here
properly is understood that which God has revealed unto us concerning our
duty, or that which he has laid upon us to do, by his revealed will; though
the secret will of God also is so far contained under this Petition, as that
we ought to rest content with it, when it appears now to us by the event, that
it was the will of God, Acts 25. 14. This Petition has dependence on the
first, in as much as it is a m^an te^ding to that end, that is there proposed.
It depends also on the second, because it is the effect of that kingdom and
administration; and it is also the perfection and accomplishment of the same
kingdom: For God is not said to have a perfect kingdom of grace, until he
have got all the faithful absolutely subject in all things unto his will: The
fulfilling therefore of the will of God, differs from his kingdom, as the
government differs from the obedience that is given to it; in the same sort
almost, as the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof differ: Mat. 6. 33.
Seek ^e first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be added unto you.

Doct. 1. The name of God is hallowed by men, and his kingdom is advanced,
when his will is religiously and devoutly done.

This flows from the former connection already shown.

Reas. 1. Because reverence to the name of God, which is the hallowing or
glorifying of it, brings with it of necessity obedience to his will.

Reas. 2. In this very thing, that we subject our selves to the will of God, we
give God glory and power, and command over our very souls and lives; and so we
highly glorify him.

Reas. 3. By this doing of the will of God, the kingdom of God comes to be
within us; and within us is his place of majesty and state, and his throne
powerfully set up to him, in our hearts.

Use Is of Direction, according to this rule, we judge of our love and care
toward the name and kingdom of God.

Doct. 2. The revealed will of God should be the rule of our life.

This follows from the substance of the Petition. Reas. 1. Because the will of
God is the law, partly, written in our hearts, and partly revealed in the
Scriptures for this very end, that according to it, we should direct our ways.

Reas. 2. Because it contains in it self all perfection, which belongs to the
imprinting upon us the image of God, and making of our life divine.

Reas. 3. Because according to this will, and the doing of it, God both in this
life, and in the life to come, distributes and disposes of all rewards and
punishments.

Use Is of Admonition, that we deny our own carnal wills and affections or
lusts, with all things that disagree from this will of God; and that we conform
our selves altogether to it, which seems here to be insinuated to us in the
particle thy, which is put here in opposition to our will, and to the lusts of
this world.

Doct. 3. It is God that gives us both to will and to do any thing, that is
according to his will.

For this is the very thing, that here we seek of God.

Reas. 1. Because of our selves we can do nothing that is truly good, and
pleasing to God, in a spiritual sort.

Reas. 2. Because there are so many things both in us and without us, that
fight against this good will of God; that unless God gave us to will and to do
what he will's, and kept us in this mind, we should never be able to attain it.

Reas. 3. Because God ought to have all the glory of any good, which yet could
not be given him, unless he were the Author and giver of all good.

Use Is of Admonition, that with all humility we think of our selves, and of
our own endeavors, and learn to depend altogether upon God, that from him we
may receive both to will and to ^oe that which is good.

Doct. 4. In this doing of Gods will, we ought to strive and endeavor unto an
Heavenly and Angell-like perfection.

From the words,

On earth, as it is in Heaven. Reas. 1. Because this is the best way to help
our imperfections, if we always aim at the chiefest perfection.

Reas. 2. Because we are called unto the same society and communion with those
blessed spirits that are in Heaven, therefore we ought to aspire unto the
imitation of them.

Reas. 3. Because we seek the same happiness and glory that they possess; and
therefore ought to follow the same holiness.

Use, Is, that we always study to obey God with all cherefulnesse, sincerity,
readiness, and entireness, that in Scriptures are attributed to Angels in
their obedience, as special properties and qualifications of the same.

The fiftieth Lords day. On the fourth petition of the Lords prayer.
Give us this day, etc.
THe sum of this petition contains things needful for this present life.
For by bread is understood by a Synecdoche, all that sustaines and comforts
bodily life. The act of God that is humbly desired about these necessary
things, is that he would give us, by which also, by another Synecdoche, is
understood, not only the first free imparting of things to us, that we have
not, but also the continuation of them that we have, together with the right
use and fruit of them, by the blessing of God: And moreover the removing of all
other things, as on the other side are contrary to this present life, or to the
comfort, quietness, and contentment of it. This bread then thus understood, is
illustrated from its subject, and adjunct. From its subject, in that it is
called our bread: And from its adjunct, in that it is called daily bread; that
is, fit for us, and our use, day by day, or from day to day. The giving of God
that we desire, is illustrated also from the adjunct of time, this day; that
is, now when we have need: And from its object, to whom; to wit, us m^n of all
sorts, or all men, but especially such as are of the household of Faith. This
petition depends on the first, in as much as all other comforts of this life,
ought no otherwise, nor no further to be made use of, than as they are
instrumental, or made necessary to the hallowing of Gods name, or glorifying of
him. It depends also upon the last preceding petition (and by it also on that
going before it) because by the necessaries of this life we are made the
fitter, and ought to be readier for doing the will of God upon earth, as it is
done by the holy Angels in Heaven.

Doct. 1. Necessaries of this li^e are on this ground chiefly to be desired and
sought for, that by them we may be the better fitted and enabled for the doing
of the will of God, and glorifying of his name.

This follows from the connection that we have showed.

Reas. 1 Because thus all things are referred to the glory of God, as their
last end, according as they should.

Reas. 2. Because while thus we receive these outward goods, we get all the
good that is in them, and at once also keep our selves free from all the evil,
that someway cleaves to them; in regard whereof, they are called snares,
thorns, and all designed in Scripture by such like names, that set forth unto
us great danger by them, or from them.

Reas. 3 Because thus such bodily goods are turned in some sort into spiritual
goods, as they are looked upon, as effects and signs of Gods blessing, and are
received as pledges of his love, and directed in their use to the increase and
furtherance of spiritual good things.

Use, Of Reproof, against worldly men, who in a carnal manner seek the goods of
this life, and use them also only carnally.

Doct. 2. All the necessaries of this life, both the greatest of them, and the
least, come ^o men's use by the free gift and bounty of God.

This follows from the manner of seeking them; give us etc.

Reas. 1. Because God is absolute Lord of all that is in heaven and in earth;
and therefore whatsoever any creature possesses or enjoyes, it has all this
from Gods free indulgence.

Reas. 2. Because as from God, the thing it self that we possess, depends; so
also does the whole fruit, use, and benefit of it, every way.

Reas. 3. Because this gift of God, is herein singular, and freely bountiful,
in that he gives them to such as are unworthy, and such as too too unworthily
use them, and abuse his gifts.

Use 1. Is of Refutation, against the doctrine of Papists about men's merits,
which have no place so much as in our daily bread, or in one ^crum of bread,
much less in respect of the life to come, or eternal glory.

Use 2. Is of Direction, that we place not our confidence in second causes, but
in God alone, even for these outward things; and that we show all thankfulness
to God, even for these worldly things; and specially beware, that we abuse not
these gifts of God, and make them an occasion and matter of sinning against the
Author and donour of them.

Doct. 3. We ought all to live contentedly on that pittance, that God has
measured out unto us, of the conditions of this life.

This follows from hence, in that we are taught to seek only our daily bread:
so Proverb 30. 8. Feed me with the food of my daily portion, or pittance,
measured ^ut to me.

Reas. 1* Because we ought not to be carried toward such things with such a
desire, as we should seek the kingdom of God with, and the righteousness
thereof, but with greater moderation, and with far lower desires.

Reas. 2 Because we. ought not to bind, and prescribe God the measure of the
things, that we desire of him, but for that we ought to rest content with his
pleasure.

Reas. 3 Because that as he gives, and we have of him, if we enjoy it with
contentment, it brings more true good with it to us, than all the greatest
riches bring, or can bring to worldly men.

Use Is of Exhortation, to keep our selves from all inordinate care and
solicitude about worldly things.

Doct. 4. Our confidence or trust in God, and prayer to him, even about the
necessaries of this life, is daily to be renewed.

This follows from the word, this day.

Reas. 1* Because there is no day wherein we stand not in need of Gods favor
and blessing, even in such things.

Reas. 2. Because daily the blessings of God are renewed toward us, and
therefore also our worship toward him ought daily to be renewed.

Reas. 3 Because every day has in it as it were a picture which represents the
whole life of man; and we are uncertain whether we shall live unto the next
day; therefore every day, as it goes over us, we ought to take care of this
duty.

Reas. ^. Because there is great danger, that we shall find no time, that we
may apply to such duties, but that we will forget and over-passe them
altogether* unless daily we do renew the duty* and do it every day in its own
day.

Use Is of Reproof against such, as either daily neglect these daily prayers,
or very slightly and coldly go about them to perform them.

Doct. 5. We ought not only to pray for, and procure such things to our
selves, but to all others also, as much as in us ly^.

From hence give us, not give me.

Reas. 1. Because this belongs to Charity.

Reas. 2. Because it is the duty of a good steward of the gifts of God.

Use Is of Reproof, not only against such as exercise thefts and robberies,
but also against all such as are guilty of too great sparing niggardliness and
envy.

The one and fifty Lords day. On the fifth Petition of the Lords Prayer:
Forgive us our debts, etc.
THe following Petitions, treats of the removing of spiritual evil, or sin:
And sin is two ways removed; either 1. by forgiveness of sin committed; or 2.
by preservation from sin, that it be not committed: The first is the substance
of the fifth Petition; the last of the sixth and last: In the fifth the
Petition is proposed, and then afterward it is confirmed. In the Petition
because sins are chiefly considered, as to their adjoined guilt: therefore 1.
they are under that notion by a metaphor, or simily marked out to us, and
declared, when they are called debts: The reason of the simily or metaphor is,
because by the law and justice, we are bound to God, to give him entire
obedience; and for omission of any part, or point of this whole or entire
obedience, we were bound to undergo the punishment or penalty of the curse of
the law. Sins therefore are called debts. 1* Because of the want of that
obedience* in them, which we owed to God. 2 Because they did bring with them an
obligation of undergoing those punishments.

Now of both these debts the forgiveness is sought for; that is, the removing
of our guiltiness, that we contracted by our sins; and by consequence
justification and adoption. The argument whereby this petition is enforced, is
taken partly from the place of like things; because from our forgiveness and
mercy to others, we must expect the forgiveness and mercy of God; and partly
from the place of unlikenesse, or of that from the less to the more; in this,
or such ^ Syllogism: If we, who scarce have a drop, or small resemblance of
that mercy, that is in God, do yet forgive men their offenses, whereby they
have offended us; then much more will God forgive us our offenses out of his
infinite mercy, that we have done against him: but the first is true; and
therefore the latter also. This argument is thus expounded, Luke 11. 4. This
petition has its dependence rrom all the foregoing, as a means whereby way is
made for the obtaining of them; because God of his mercy forgiving us our sins,
by so doing removes the hinderance of his grace and blessing, whereby other
things are obtained; and so he gives us all good things that we want, or
desire. It is expressly coupled to the next foregoing petition, by the
conjunction and, which was not used in the former petitions; because the three
former petitions were so nere allied, that of themselves they depended one upon
another, by a natural connextion and consequence; and the fourth did upon the
last of the cther three, by that kindlinesse of connection, that the well-being
of the whole, or person, for the better exercising of its duties and actions
well, has on the well-being of a very necessary and essential part of it self.
But this petition, and that fourth, are of far different kinds, and have not
so direct and immediate a connection in the nature of the things; but that they
required to be coupled together by such a grammatical conjunction, and.

Doct. 1. Our sins are the heaviest of all evils.

This is hence gathered, in that we are taught to pray for the removal of this
evil absolutely, and of none other.

Reas 1. Because they are most opposite to the chief good; that is, unto the
image and holiness of God, as they may be partaken of by us, to our felicity;
and so some way to God himself. Whose will, as much as in us lay, we have
violated.

Reas. 2. Because they spoil us of our greatest perfection.

Reas. 3. Because they beget unto us the greatest miseries.

Use, Of Direction, that having a right esteem of our sins, we may the more
abhor them, and all other evil that comes by them.

Doct. 1. Sin^s bring with them an obligation of the greatest debt.

It is hence gathered, that they are here called debts.

Reas. 1. Because the Law of God binds sinners to suffer pains, and that no
common ones, but of the wrath and curse of God.

Reas. 2. Because this debt is such, that for it, we can never be able to
satisfy God. For whatsoever sinners do, it rather augments, than diminishes
the nature, or account of the debt.

Reas. 3 Because the justice of God exacting so rigorous a discharge of this
debt for sinners, is still upon them, and is as it were perpetually threatening
condemnation to them in their own consciences.

Use. Of Admonition, that neither by a mad kind of secureness, or secure and
careless madness, we neglect these so heavy debts; but go about this by all
means, that we may be set free from them.

Doct. 3. The mercy of God in Christ is sufficient to forgive and remit all our
debts.

This is hence gathered, in that we are here taught to this end to fly to the
forgiving mercy of God.

Reas. 1. Because God is not only a just Judge, but also a merciful Father,
as is in the preface of this prayer.

Reas. 2. Because God according to his infinite wisdom has so ordered things
in Christ, that he can with safety to his justice, of his free mercy forgive us
our sins.

Reas. 3. Because this mercy being infinite, far surpasses our sins, though
in themselves they be horrible.

Use* Of Exhortation, that with all our hearts we fly to this mercy, and rest
in it, and on it.

Doct. 4. Unto remission of sins, together with ^aith, is required a confession
of them, and repentance or a change of mind and amendment.

This follows from the nature of the petition.

Reas. 1* Because none can earnestly desire the blotting out of his sins,
unless he both confess and also hate and detest them.

Reas. 2. Because otherwise he can by no means rightly magnify the mercy of
God, whereunto he flies; but rather goes about to prostitute it, and make it a
Pander or Baud to his sins.

Reas. 3. Because without these, none is fitted for receiving comfort from the
mercy of God in remission of his sins.

Use, Of Reproof, against such as presume on the mercy of God, though they
never thus seriously repent of their sins, nor can be brought to confess or
acknowledge their cruel dispositious to men.

Doct. 5. Mercy and love to our brethren, is a sign of the mercy and love of
God to our selves.

From these words; As we forgive our debtors.

Reas. 1. Because the mercy and love of God shed abroad in our hearts, begets
mercy in us to our brethren, as heat begets heat.

Reas. 2. Because this mercy and love toward men, is for its conformity
thereto, and suitableness to it, a special condition of obtaining the mercy of
God; and so is declared to be tied to it, Mat. 6. 14. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your Father also that is in Heaven; will forgive you.

Reas. 3. Because this forgiving of all injuries and wrongs done to us, by
others, is taken of the special and free mercy of God communicated unto us; and
this grace is the effect of Gods mercy forgiving us our sins.

Use* Of Admonition, that we deceive not our selves, and promise to our selves
the mercy of God, whilst we nourish in our own hearts hatred and ran^our
against our brethren.

The fifty second Lords day. On the sixth petition of the Lords prayer.
(...) u^ not into temptation, etc.
IN this petition the business is about the evil of sin in respect of its
dominion, which it uses to have over men; concerning which, we have first the
petition; and secondly, its declaration, or opposition. In the petition we pray
against this evil in its twofold cause; whereof the first is, the proper cause
of sin, intending it; which is the temptation of the Devil, or the Devil
tempting us to sin. Now temptation is nothing else but an argument propos^d to
us, whereby we are induced to be persuaded, and drawn into sin. The other
cause, that is looked at in this petition, is not properly the cause of the
sin, nor any efficient or author of it, but a governor and orderer as well of
the sin it self, as of the tempting to sin, and of the effects of both; but the
true cause of the evil of punishment, that follows sin: And this is Gods
effectual and powerful way of working about sin, or exercising of his
providence, which usually is called Gods permission, although it be more than a
bare and an idle permitting. The explication of this petition is in praying for
the contrary to this evil, that we prayed against in the words going before;
which is prayed against from Gods gracious acting toward us, contrary to that,
which before was called a leading into temptation. For it is called a
delivering or plucking of us out of temptation.

Doct. 1. The guilt of former sins committed, deserves altogether at gods
hands, that we should be quite given over to temptations and sins.

This is gathered from the connection; wherein first forgiveness of sins is
sought, and then deliverance from temptations, and evil for sin.

Reas. 1. Because sin being an aversion, or turning away from God, therefore it
deserves, that he should turn away himself, and his grace from us.

Reas. 2. Because for sin, we both give our selves up as it were servants to
sin, and to him that tempts to sin; We deserve therefore directly, and very
rightly, that we should be given to such masters, as we our selves have chosen.

Reas. 3 When we rush into sin, we neglect that grace of God, by which we might
have been preserved from sin; and therefore we deserve to be deserted by him.

Use 1. Of Admonition* that we so much the more take care to keep our selves
from sin.

Use 2. Of Direction, that we daily seek from God, the forgiveness of our
sins, even for this end, that we be not further given up to sin, and to
temptation, but that we may be preserved from both.

Doct. 2. Whosoever have forgiveness of sins, or seriously se^k after it, they
have a desire, and true purpose to abstain and keep themselves from sinning in
time to come.

This is also clear from the connection of these two petitions.

Reas. 1. Because otherwise they would not truly abhor sin, and so would show
themselves altogegether indisposed, and not qualified for remission of sins.

Reas. 2. Because else they would not be thankful to God, that forgave them
their sins.

Reas. 3. Because else that forgiveness would be in vain, if they should again
purpose to themselves to return to the like condition, wherein they were
before.

Use, Of Reproof, of such as seem to wish for forgiveness of sin, but in the
mean time have no care to fly from sin.

Doct. 3. Who so desires to keep himself from sin, ought also to keep himself
from all temptations and occasions that lead into sin.

It is clear from the petition, which prays against temptations to sins

Reas. 1. Because the end of such temptations is sin, and the misery that
follows upon sin.

Reas. 2. Temptations are so many, so subtle, and so powerful, that unless
with great care we take heed to our selves, it cannot be, but they lead us into
sin.

Reas. 3. Because of our selves we are carried that way, and incline unto this,
that by giving place to temptations we may betray our own souls to the
tempter.

Use, Of Admonition, to such as from too much security and boldness, rashly
expose themselves to the danger of diverse temptations and inticements to sin,
for temptation is not to be desired and sought after, but as wisely as we can
to be shunned; and where that cannot be, stoutly and courageously to be
repulsed.

Doct. 4. Our Father that is in Heaven, disposes also of our temptations
according to his own good pleasure.

For thus it is here held out to us, that it is he, that either leads us into
temptation, or causes us not to be brought into it; but kept from it.

Reas. 1. Because he exercises his providence in guiding and measuring of every
temptation.

Reas* 2. From him depends the strengthening of our souls against such
temptations, as we are vexed with.

Reas* 3* From him depends the issue of the temptation it self, together with
its effects, which follow on it, either of their own nature, or by accident.

Use Of Comfort, because from hence we may have comfort against all
temptations, that we be never fully led into them, as 1 Cor. 10. 13. No other
temptation has overtaken you, but as uses to befall men; but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it.

Use 2. Of Exhortation to thanksgiving, that we are not led unto this and that
temptation; because this should not be attributed to our own strength and
wisdom, but to the grace of God.

Use 3. Of Admonition, that with horror, fear and trembling, we pray chiefly
against this judgment of God* which he exercises upon many sinners, when he
leads them into manifold temptations.

Doct. 5. It is a great benefit of God toward his own, that he thus delivers
them from evil, that they be not delivered into temptation.

This is hence gathered, in that this is sought from God by a doubling of the
same petition in a man^ lead us not into, but deliver us from.

Reas. 1. Because a mischief to man lies in the prevaleuey of temptations, when
he is not only tempted, and led somewhither unto temptation, but also led into
it, so as he is inwrapped in it, and held entangled therein, after the will of
the tempter Satan, and so is kept captive in the slavery of sin.

Reas. 2. Because so great is the force of temptations, and such is our natures
slipperinesse, and deceitfulness, that from this evil of temptation we cannot
be delivered, but by God.

Reas 3. Because God delivers not all, but of his just judgment suffers many
to be led into temptation, of whom a great part (for ought we know) were no
worse than we our selves, who yet are delivered from them.

Use, Of Direction, 1. What evil it is, that we should chiefly pray against at
Gods hands to be delivered from; to wit, not against outward afflictions, which
are also temptations; nor yet against all other temptations absolutely, but
against that deadly evil of sin in them, that is intended to us by Satan,
both by afflictions, and all other his temptations, which in truth are often
times no less dangerously couched in prosperity, than in adversity. 2. How we
should wholly depend upon God for deliverance from this evil, and so give him
the glory.

On the conclusion of the Lords prayer.
For thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory, etc.
THis is the conclusion of the Lords prayer, wherein two things are contained;
1. The confirmation of all the foregoing petitions. 2. The obligation of our
affection, that moves us to offer up these petitions to God, and in some sort
moves God also to hear the petitions offered. The confirmation is taken from
the causes, which concur in God for strengthening of our confidence about the
hearing of our petitions at his hands. The efficient cause is, 1. The right and
authority of God, by which he can and may dispense and dispose of all,
according to his own pleasure; and it is here called the Kingdom of God* for
thine is the Kingdom; that is, the sovereignty, the supreme dominion, and
right. 2. The same efficient is also, that power of God, or his might, whereby
he is able to put in execution all to what he has right; that is, all that he
pleases, or whatsoever he will: Thine is the power. 3. The final cause, is his
own glory; Thine is the glory. All which are illustrated by their adjunct of
duration, not for a time only, and then either to cease, or to pass to
another; but for ever and ever: but unto ages of ages, or worlds of worlds, as
the old English did bear; or world without end* as now it goes; that is, to all
eternity. The obligation of sealing up of our affection, is in the word of
acclamation, Amen; whereby is shown* 1. The strength of our desire, wherewith
we follow after all these things, that were proposed in these petitions. 2. The
strength of our faith, whereby we rest in, and rely on Gods mercy, for them
all. 3. Of our hope, whereby we look for and wish, that God would ratify and
hold firm all our petitions, in the same manner as he does the promises,
whereunto himself has prefixed this same word of strong asseveration (for it
is of both) Amen, Amen, that is, Verily, Verily, a kind of oath; and so hold
our acclamation as firm, as his own asseveration: and that is beyond
exception.

Doct. 1. No petition, nor p^r ought to be made to God, without some praise of
his name at least implied.

This is hence gathered, that in the very brief pattern of petitions, a
solemn praise of the name of God is subjoyned, how ever it be in order to
confirm all the petitions foregoing.

Reas. 1. Because it is not our selves that we ought either only, or chiefly
to look at in the worship of God; but it is the honor of Gods name, that we
should so much regard.

Reas. 2. Because this is a most powerful motive, to obtain what we seek, if
in all things we give God his glory.

Reas. 3. Because it is a chief part of worship.

Use, Of Reprof, against our negligence on this behalf, who are so wholly taken
up with the things that belong to our own necessities, that we neglect the
giving God his honor by duly praising of his name; when yet it is the sole
thing aimed at in this prayer of our Lords, that the glory of God may have the
first and the last place, as the Alpha and Omega of all his worship, the
beginning and the end of ^ight serving him. For the first petition is about the
hallowing or glorifying of his name; and the last conclusion is the extolling
and praising of him to the same glory.

Doct. 2. It makes very much for the strengthening and confirming us in our
prayers, if we set before our eyes the infinite sovereignty and right, and the
infinite might, and glory of God.

From the words; Thine i^ the Kingdom, power, and glory.

Reas. 1. Because hence it appears, that we do rightly, and according as just
order does require, fly unto God in our prayers; and seek all good things from
him, because he only has the absolute right and might, to dispense all these
things, according as his own honor and glory requires.

Reas. 2. Because hence it appears, that we may have certain and sure
confidence, that he will hear our prayers, because it is as easy to him to do
all this, as to will it; and it belongs also to his glory in some sort, to will
the same.

Reas. 3. Because from hence we are taught, both in what manner, and for what
end, we ought to look for the accomplishment of our desires; to wit, in such
manner as shall seem good unto God, according to that wisdom and power of
his, whereby he exercises sovereignty of kingdom and command, or dominion in
all things, and in such manner, as may make most for the glory of his name.

Use, Of Direction, that we use these and the like titles of God, in our
prayers, not for a fashion, but from religious resentment and intention, that
our prayers may be the more powerful, from the greater feeling, and abundance
of our hearts.

Doct. 3. All things that uphold our faith and our pr^ers, are from the
everlasting and eternal God.

From these words; For ever and ever. Or thus rather it makes for the same
purpose; that we consider, that all things that sustain our faith, and our
prayers, are in the eternal God, unto eternity, or for ever and ever, etc

Reas. 1 Because from hence it appears, that now God is the same, and such unto
us, as he was from the beginning of the world to any other, that called upon
his name, Isa 59. 1. and ^1. 17.

Reas. 2. Because from hence we are confirmed in this, that God will unto
eternity remain still our God, even then when he will cease by changeable
dispensations to do us any more good, as here he does, because then we shall
be settled in the possession of our last and highest good

Use, Of Direction* for the right use of this divine attribute of eternity.

Doct. 4. While we pray, and especially toward the end of prayer, we ought to
put forth our petitions with all earnestness of desire, and lively strength of
faith, and of affections.

From the word Amen.

Reas. 1. Because as at the end our prayer is as it were come to its
perfection, so we ought there to exercise the perfection of our faith,
affection, conscience, and desire.

Reas. 2 Because every natural and kindly motion grows stronger and faster
toward its end; otherwise if it be flashy in the beginning, and flag toward
the end, it is a token it was forced, or framed upon some wrong ground, and
will not prove durable and kindly unto the end.

Reas. 3 Because our affection in the end of prayer ought then to act from the
doubled and recollected force and power of all the affections going before.

Reas. 4* Because by this means in a sort we redouble our whole prayer, while
first we propose all our petitions one by one in order, with their own measure
of desire and affection; and thereafter press vehemently and earnestly for them
all together, that they may all be granted us, and so according to our
earnestness, ^est as confident that they will.

Use* Of Reproof, against the negligence of men on this behalf, which is grown
so great, that now it is gone out of use amongst us, to signify such our
affections, or strong wishes and desires, by saying, Amen; as the Apostle
witnesses and says, that all Christians of old were taught, and did use to
practice* 1 Cor. 14. 16.

A Table of the Texts of Scripture, fitted for each Lords day of the year.
I. Psalm 4. verse. 6, 7, 8. LOrds day, There are many that say, etc. Page 1 II.
Rom 7* 7. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? etc. p. 13 III. Rom 5 12.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered, etc. p. 17 IIII. Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man
deceive you with vain words, etc. p. 24 V. Romans 8 3. For what the Law could not
do, etc. p. 30 VI. 1 Timothy 3. 16. And without controversy great, etc. p. 37 VII.
Act. 16 31. And they said believe on the Lord Jesus, etc. p. 46 VIII. Mat. 28.
19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, etc. p. 56 IX Rev. 4. 11. Thou art
worthy, O Lord, that thou, etc. p. 62 X. Romans 11. 36. For of him, and through
him, and to him, etc. p. 72 XI. Acts 4 12. Neither is there salvation in any
other, etc. p. 78 XII. Acts 2. 36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know,
etc. p. 83 XIII. Math. 16. 16. Thou art Christ the son of the living God. etc.
p. 90 XIV. Mat. 1. 20. But while he thought on these things, etc. p. 96. XV: 1
Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sinners, etc. p. 103 XVI.
John 10. 17, 18. Therefore the Father loves me, that I lay, etc. p. 110 XVII.
Ioh. 10. 17, 18. Ibidem, etc. p. 117. XVIII: Mark. 16. 19. So then after the
Lord had spoken unto them, etc. p. 122 XIX. Math. 25, 31. to 39. When the son
of man shall come. etc, p. 129. XX. 1 Cor. 6. 19. What know ye not that your
body, etc. p. 137 XXI. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Husbands love your wives even as,
etc. p. 142 XXII. Phillip* 3. 20, 21. For our conversation i^ in heaven, etc.
p. 147 XXIII. Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his Grace, etc. p. 154
XXIIII. Iam. 2. 22. See^ thou how faith wrought with, etc. p. 161 XXV. Romans 4.
11. And he received the sign of circumcision, etc. p. 166 XXVI. and XXVII.
Mat. 28. 19. Go therefore and teach all Nations, etc. p. 173 XXVIII. and XXIX.
1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, etc. p. 181 XXX. 1 Cor. 11.
28, 29. But let a man examine himself, etc. p. 188 XXXI. Mat. 16. 19. And I
will give unto thee the Keys, etc. p, 196 XXXII, As in the 24, lecture, p* 161
XXXIII. Lords day E^s. 4* (...). 20, 21, (...) have (...) (...) Christ, (...)*
^* 201 XXXIII^* Exodus* ^0* verse* 1, 2, 3. (...) (...) (...) th^se (...) (...)
^aying, (...)* ^. 308 XXXV. Exo^ (...) verse 4, 5* 6. Tho^ (...) (...) (...)
(...) by self any gra^, etc p* 217 XXXVI. and XXXVII. Exodus (...)* verse. 7.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc. p. 223 XXXVIII*
Ex^* (...). verse. 8, 9, 10, ^. Remember the Sabbath day to keep, etc. p. 229
XXXIX* E^od. 20 verse* 12. Honor thy father and thy mother that the, etc. p.
237 XL* E^od* 20. ^rs* 13* Thou shall not (...), (...)* p. 242. XLI. Exodus* 20*
verse* ^4. Thou shall not commit adultery* p. 247 XLII. Exodus 20. verse. 15. Thou
shall not (...). p. 251 XLIII. Exodus 20. verse 16. Thou shall not (...) false
witness, etc. p. 255 (...)* Exodus* 20* (...)* 17. Thou shall not co^t ^hy (...)
wife, etc. p. 260 XLV. Ephesians. ^. verse* 18. Praying always with all praye^,
etc. p. 265 XLVI. Mat. 6. verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. After the manner therefore
pray ye^ Our father, etc. p. 270 XLVII. On the first petition. Hallowed be thy
name. p. 276 XLVIII. On the second petition. Let thy Kingdom come. p. 281
XLIX* On the third petition. Thy will be done on earth a^ it is in heaven. p
285 L. On the forth petition. Give us this day our daily bread p. 289 LI. On
the fifth petition. Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive, etc. p. 293 LII.
On the sixth petition. Lead us not into temptation. p. 298 The conclusion of
the Lords prayer. Because thine is the Kingdom, etc. p. 303
FINIS.

