LOOKING UNTO JESUS.

A VIEW OF THE Everlasting Gospel: OR, THE SOULS EYING OF JESUS.

As carrying on the great Work of Man's Salvation from First to Last.

By ISAAC AMBROSE, Minister of the GOSPEL.

Isaiah 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye Saved all the Ends of the Earth. LONDON,
Printed for Richard Chiswel, Benj. Took, and Thomas Sawbridge, 1680.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of BEDFORD, Lord RUSSEL, Baron of
THORNEHAVGH.
Right Honorable,
ONce I made bold to prefix an Epistle to Your Honor, before my Book entitled
Ultima, since which time, You have continued with increase Your wonted favors;
As the Sun that rejoices to run his race, and is unwearied after his many
revolutions; so Year after Year, have You indefatigably expressed Your great
Bounty, whereby both my self and family have been exceedingly refreshed. As I
cannot but in way of thankfulness acknowledge thus much; So I shall be a
sincere Remembrancer both of your Honor, and Your nearest Relations at the
Throne of Grace.

My Lord, I have now composed this Work, containing a necessary practice and
high privilege of every Christian; it is by way of supplement to the other
duties set down in my Book called Media, but because of my large handling it, I
reserved it for a tract by it self. Indeed of all other duties, I prefer it as
the chief, and I exceedingly wonder that before this time, it has not been
undertaken by some abler hand. Christians ordinarily go to Prayer, Sacraments,
Hearing, Reading, and Meditation of the Word; and sometimes (though more
seldom) they set on the exercise of other Duties, as self-trial, self-denial,
the improving of experiences, the clearing of evidences, extemporary and
deliberate meditation, etc. but in the mean time how is the main, the prime
employment, even the duty of duties, of Looking unto Jesus, wholly neglected?
If many, or most have been ignorant of it hitherto, I think it is high time, to
discover it to the sleepy world; and it may be when day is clear, they will
walk in the light, and bless God for finding out a way, wherein they may more
immediately have commerce with Jesus Christ. I could have wished that others
more able had appeared in this service, in a particular handling of this
excellent subject, I find it in print wished for by a godly Brother, where he
complains that Christ's love had been so little studied. Men have been very
swift in searching after other truths, but slow in searching after this, An
ample exact discovery of this love of Christ, I say of this love (in carrying
on our souls salvation from first to last) may well be set down amongst the
desiderata, the desirables of Divines, it having been so little handled (unless
in some parts or pieces) by any: Surely it is very sad to think, that the
knowledge of this love of Christ (in a continued series) being of such
necessary and high concernment has been so little enquired into. O what a
gallant Gospel-design were it for some one who is acquainted with the Spirit in
a large measure, to go over the whole History of the Gospel (of the everlasting
Gospel of Jesus) and to observe the glorious shinings of the love of Christ to
Believers in all! it would be precious if some would take it in hand, and
perfect it to the purpose, but it is sad to think it has been neglected so
long. As the Lord has enabled, I have adventured; and if for my rashness in
not waiting any longer, to see if any Star of a greater magnitude would have
appeared, I must be censured, I fly to your Honor for Patronage. Nor only for
Patronage, but I humbly heg of You, and Yours, to peruse and practice this
slender Work; who can tell but some of the golden Oil of Grace may come out of
Jesus Christ the true Olive Tree, even through these Pipes? and if so, your own
experiences will be satisfactory answers to all other censures. Sure I am in
this exercise (however the directions may be weak) you will find the advantage
of lying at the wellhead, and so you may drink more sweetly than others that
make use only of the streams. That you (my noble Lord) and your virtuous Lady,
with your hopeful Issue, may receive spiritual good by this Treatise, and all
other helps which God's good providence, may put into your hands. Is the hearty
prayer, My Lord,

Of your Honors thankful, faithful, though very unworthy, servant, ISAAC
AMBROSE.

TO THE READER.
AMongst all the duties I formerly mentioned, I omitted one that now I look
upon as chief and choice of all the rest: This is the duty I call Looking unto
Jesus, and if I must discover the occasion of my falling on it, I shall do it
truly and plainly, and in the simplicity of the Gospel, as thus. In the Spring
1653. I was visited with a sore sickness, and as the Lord began to restore my
health, it came into my thoughts what my Jesus had done for my soul, and what
he was doing, and what he would do for it, till he saved it to the uttermost.
In my conceptions of these things I could find no beginning of his actings, but
in that eternity before the world was made; nor could I find any end of his
actings, but in that eternity after the world should be unmade; only betwixt
these two extremities I apprehended various transactions of Jesus Christ, both
past, and present, and to come. In the multitude of these thoughts Within me,
my soul exceedingly delighted it self, and that delight stirring up in me other
affections (for one affection cannot be alone) I began to consider of those
texts in Scripture, which seemed at first to impose the working of my
affections on so blessed an Object, as a Gospel-duty: then I resolved, if the
Lord Jesus would but restore my health, and prolong my life, I would endeavor
to discover more of this Gospel-duty, than ever yet I knew: and that my pains
therein might not hinder my other necessary labors, my purpose was to fall on
this subject in my ordinary preaching, wherein I might have occasion both to
search into Scriptures, several Authors, and my own heart. In process of time I
began this work, begging of God that he would help me to finish, as he inclined
me to begin, and that all might tend to his glory, and the Churches good. In
the progress of my labors I found a world of spiritual comfort, both in
respect of the object that I handled, Jesus Christ, and in respect of the act,
wherein consisted my duty to him, in Looking unto Jesus. 1. For the Object, it
was the very subject whereon more especially I was bound to preach; Christ in
you the hope of glory (said Paul to his Colosians) and he immediately adds,
whom we preach, Col. 1.27, 28. and unto me, who am less than the least of all
the Saints, is this grace given; what grace? that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. Ministers ought in duty
more abundantly to preach Jesus Christ. Doctor Sibbs is clear, that the special
office of the ministry of Christ is to lay open Christ, to hold up the
tapistry, and to unfold the hidden mysteries of Christ: and therefore he
exhorts that we should labor to be always speaking somewhat about Christ, or
tending that way: when we speak of the law, let it drive us to Christ: when of
moral duties, let them teach us to walk worthy of Christ: Christ, or some what
tending to Christ, should be our theme, and mark to aim at. Sibbs Cantic. p.
428. And I may feelingly say, it is the sweetest subject that ever was Preached
on; is it not as an ointment poured forth, whose smell is so fragrant, and
whose savor is so sweet, that therefore all the Virgins love him? is it not
comprehensive of all glory, beauty, excellency, whether of things in Heaven, or
of things on Earth? is it not a mystery sweet and deep? surely Volumes are
written of Jesus Christ, there is line upon line, Sermon upon Sermon, Book upon
Book, and Tome upon Tome, and yet such is the mystery (as one speaks plainly)
that we are all but as yet at the first side of the single Catechism of Jesus
Christ: yea, Solomon was but at What is his Name? and I fear many of us know
neither Name nor thing. It is a worthy study to make further and further
discoveries of this blessed Mystery, and it were to be wished, that all the
Ministers of Christ would spend themselves in the spelling, and reading, and
understanding of it. Look as some great point does require the abilities of
many Scholars (and all little enough when joined together) to make a good
discovery thereof; such is this high point, this holy, sacred, glorious
Mystery, worthy of the pains of all the Learned; and if they would all bring
their notes together, and add all their studies together (which I have in some
measure endeavored in the following Treatise) they should find still but a
little of this Mystery known, in comparison of what remains and is unknown;
only this they should know, Quod difficily intellectu, dilectabile inquisitu
(as Bernad said) That which is hard to understand, is delightful to be dived
into; and so I found it. 2. For the act of looking unto Jesus, as it is
comprehensive of knowing, desiring, hoping, believing, loving, so also of
joying; how then should I but be filled with joy unspeakable and glorious,
whilst I was studying, writing, and especially acting my Soul in the exercise
of this Looking? If there be any Duty on Earth resembling the Duty of the
Saints in Heaven, I dare say, this is it. Mr. Rutherford in his Epistle to
Christ dying, writes thus, An act of living in Christ, and on Christ, in the
acts of seeing, enjoying, embracing, loving, resting on him, is that noonday
Divinity, and Theology of Beatifical Vision: there is a general assembly of
immediately illuminated Divines round about the Throne, who study, lecture,
preach, praise Christ night and day: Oh what rays, what irradiations and
dartings of intellectual fruition, beholding, enjoying, living in him, and
fervor of loving, come from that face, that God-visage of the Lord God
Almighty, and of the Lamb that is in the midst of them? And, Oh what
reflections, and reachings forth of intellectual Vision, embracing, loving,
wondering, are returning back to him again in a circle of Glory? Now if this be
the Saints Duty, who are perfect in glory; do not we imitate them, and feel
something of Heaven in our imitation, in our looking also unto Jesus? I write
what in some measure I have felt; and of which I hope to feel yet more; and
therefore whoever thou art that read, I beseech thee, come, warm thy heart
at this blessed fire! O come, and smell the precious ointments of Jesus Christ!
O come, and sit down under his shadow with great delight! Oh that all men
(especially into whose hands this Book shall come) would presently fall upon
the practice of this Gospel-art of looking unto Jesus! if herein they find
nothing of Heaven, my skill will fail me; only let them pray, that as they look
to him, so virtue may go out of him, and fill their souls.

Reader, One thing more I have to say to thee; if thou would know how to
carry on this Duty constantly, as thou do thy morning, and thy evening
prayer; it were not amiss if every day, either morning, or evening, thou
would take some part of it at one time, and some part of it at another time,
at least for some space of time together. I know some, that in a constant daily
course carry on in secret those two necessary duties of meditation and prayer;
what the subject matter of their meditation is, I am not very certain; only our
experience can tell us, that be it heaven, or be it hell; be it sin, or be it
grace, or be it what it will; if we be in exercise of the self-same subject
either constantly, or frequently, we are apt to grow remiss, or cold, or
formal; and the reason is, one thing tires quickly, unless that one be all: now
that is Christ, for He is All, Col. 3.11. if then but once a day thou would
make this Jesus Christ thy subject to know, consider, desire, hope, believe,
joy in, call upon, and conform unto, in his several respects of plotting,
promising, performing thy redemption in his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, Session, Intercession, and coming again; and that one of these
particulars might be thy one days exercise, and so every day thou would
proceed from first to last, in thus looking unto Jesus, I suppose thou would
never tire thy self; and why so? O there is variety in this matter to be looked
unto, and there is variety in the manner of looking on it. Ex. gr. one day thou
might act thy knowing of Jesus in carrying on the great work of thy salvation
in his Eternity; the next day thou might consider Jesus in that respect; and
the next day thou might desire after Jesus in that respect; and the next day
thou might hope in Jesus in that respect; and so on, till thou come to the
last day of the work; which (besides I suppose, the Reader will, at least, once
read over the whole book; and then for this constant daily exercise, during
eighty one days in a year, I leave the object in every period to be read, or
not read, as he pleases; unless it may, in whole, or in part, conduce any
thing to that one act of knowing Jesus in such or such a respect.
the object handled at large in every period, in these very actings upon the
object) would in all amount to the number of eighty one days. Now would not
this variety delight? It is the observation of Mr. Lockyer, on Col. 1.16. that
an holy soul cannot tire it self in the contemplation of Jesus: how much less
can it tire it self in Looking unto Jesus, which is far more Comprehensive than
contemplating of Jesus? come, try this Duty, and be constant in it at least for
eighty one days in one year, and so for eighty one days in every year during
thy life; and then for thy meditations on any other subject I shall not take
thee quite off, but leave the remainder of the year, which is above three parts
more, to thy own choice. If thou art so resolved, I shall say no more, but the
Lord be with thee, and if sooner or later thou find any benefit by this
work, give God the glory, and remember him, in thy prayers, who has took this
pains for Christ's honor, and thy souls good. So rests

Thy Servant in Christ Jesus, I. A.

The CONTENTS of This BOOK.
BOOK I.
Chap. 1. THe Proem, Division, and Opening of the Words Page 1 Chap. 2. Sect.
1. The Duty of Looking off all other Things, Confirmed and Cleared Page 2 Sect.
2. An Exhortation to Look off all other Things Page 5 Sect. 3. Directions how
to Look off all other Things Page 7
Chap. 3. Sect. 1. An Explanation of the Act, and Object Page 8 Sect. 2. The
main Doctrine and Confirmation of it Page 10 Sect. 3. Use of Reproof Page 11
Sect. 4. Use of Exhortation Page 13 Sect. 5. Motives from our Wants, in case of
Neglect Page 14 Sect. 6. Motives from our Riches, in case we are lively in this
Duty Page 16 Sect. 7. More Motives to Encourage us in this Work Page 18 Sect.
8. Use of Direction Page 21

BOOK II.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of the Eternal Generation of our Jesus Page 23 Sect. 2. Of
our Election in Christ before all Worlds Page 26 Sect. 3. Of that great Treaty,
in Eternity, betwixt God and Christ, to save Souls Page 27 Sect. 4. The Project
Page 28 Sect. 5. The Counsel ibid. Sect. 6. The Foreknowledge Page 31 Sect. 7.
The Purpose. Page 33 Sect. 8. The Decree Page 34 Sect. 9. The Covenant Page 35
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation in that Eternity Page 38 Sect. 2. Of Considering Jesus in that
Respect ibid. Sect. 3. Of Desiring after Jesus in that respect Page 45 Sect. 4.
Of Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page 47 Sect. 5. Of Believing in Jesus in
that respect Page 49 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that respect Page 51 Sect. 7.
Of Joying in Jesus in that respect Page 53 Sect. 8. Of Calling on Jesus in that
respect Page 54 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus in that respect ibid.

BOOK III.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of Christ promised by Degrees Page 57 Sect. 2. Of the
Covenant of Promise, as manifested to Adam Page 59 Sect. 3. Of the Covenant of
Promise, as manifested to Abraham Page 64 Sect. 4. Of the Covenant of Promise,
as manifested to Moses Page 69 Sect. 5. Of the Covenant of Promise, as
manifested to David Page 77 Sect. 6. Of the Covenant of Promise, as manifested
to Israel, about the Time of the Captivity Page 81
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation, from the Creation, until His First Coming Page 90 Sect. 2. Of
Considering Jesus in that respect ibid. Sect. 3. Of Desiring Jesus in that
respect Page 96 Sect. 4. Of Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page 100 Sect. 5.
Of Believing in Jesus in that respect Page 102 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that
respect Page 105 Sect. 7. Of Joying in Jesus in that respect Page 108 Sect. 8.
Of Calling on Jesus in that respect Page 110 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus in
that respect. Page 111

BOOK IV. PART I.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of the Tidings of Christ Page 117 Sect. 2. Of the Conception
of Christ Page 119 Sect. 3. Of the Duplicity of Natures in Christ Page 122
Sect. 4. Of the Distinction of the Two Natures in Christ Page 124 Sect. 5. Of
the Union of the Two Natures of Christ in one and the same Person Page 125
Sect. 6. Of the Birth of Christ Page 133 Sect. 7. Of some Consequents after
Christ's Birth Page 139
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation in His Birth Page 141 Sect. 2. Of Considering Jesus in that respect
Page 142 Sect. 3. Of Desiring after Jesus in that respect Page 146 Sect. 4. Of
Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page 147 Sect. 5. Of Believing in Jesus in that
respect Page 150 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that respect Page 155 Sect. 7. Of
Joying in Jesus in that respect Page 157 Sect. 8. Of Calling on Jesus in that
respect Page 160 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus in that respect ibid.

BOOK V. PART II.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of the First Year of Christ's Ministry: And therein of the
Beginning of the Gospel Page 167 Sect. 2. Of the Preaching of John Baptist Page
168 Sect. 3. Of the Baptism of Jesus Page 170 Sect. 4. Of the Fasting and
Temptation of Christ Page 174 Sect. 5. Of the First Manifestations of Christ
Page 180 Sect. 6. Of Christ's Whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple
Page 182
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of the Second Year of Christ's Ministry, and of His Acts in
general for that Year Page 175 Sect. 2. Of Christ's Sermons this Year Page 176
Sect. 3. Of Christ's Prophetical Office Page 177 Sect. 4. Of Christ's Miracles
Page 179
Chap. 3. Sect. 1. Of the Third Year of Christ's Ministry, and generally of his
Actings in that Year Page 184 Sect. 2. Of Christ's Ordination of His Apostles
ibid. Sect. 3. Of Christ's Reception of Sinners Page 187 Sect. 4. Of Christ's
easy Yoke, and light Burden Page 192
Chap. 4. Sect. 1. Of the Fourth Year of Christ's Ministry, and generally of
His Actings in that Year Page 200 Sect. 2. Of the Distinction, or several
Divisions of Christ's Righteousness ibid. Sect. 3. Of the Holiness of Christ's
Nature Page 201 Sect. 4. Of the Holiness of Christ's Life Page 202 Sect. 5. Of
the great Controversy, Whether we are not Justified by the Passive
Righteousness of Christ only, without any Consideration had to the
Righteousness of Christ, either Inherent in Him, or Performed by Him? Page 204
Chap. 5. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation in His Life Page 207 Sect. 2. Of Considering Jesus in that respect
Page 208 Sect. 3. Of Desiring after Jesus in that respect Page 315 Sect. 4. Of
Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page 317 Sect. 5. Of Believing in Jesus in that
respect Page 320 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that respect Page 324 Sect. 7. Of
Joying in Jesus in that respect Page 326 Sect. 8. Of Calling on Jesus in that
respect Page 328 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus in that respect Page 329

BOOK VI. PART III.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of the Day of Christ's Sufferings divided into Parts and
Hours. Page 339 Sect. 2. Of the Brook over which Christ passed Page 341 Sect.
3. Of the Garden into which Christ ontred Page 344 Sect. 4. Of the Prayer that
Christ there made Page 345 Sect. 5. Of the Dolours and Agonies that Christ
there suffered Page 348 Sect. 6. Of Judas Treason, Christ's Apprehension,
Binding and Leading unto Annas Page 350 Sect. 7. Of Christ's Examination, and
Condemnation, with their Appendices Page 354
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of Christ's Indictment, and Judas fearful End Page 359 Sect.
2. Of Christ's Mission to Herod, and the Transactions there Page 362 Sect. 3.
Of Christ and Barabbas compared; and of the Question debated betwixt Pilate,
and the Jews Page 364 Sect. 4. Of Christ stripped, whipped, clothed with
Purple, and crowned with Thorns Page 367 Sect. 5. Of Christ brought forth and
sentenced Page 370 Sect. 6. Of Christ's Crucifying, with its Appendices Page
373 Sect. 7. Of the Consequents after Christ's Crucifying Page 376
Chap. 3. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation in His Death Page 378 Sect. 2. Of Considering Jesus in that respect
ibid. Sect. 3. Of Desiring Jesus in that respect Page 383 Sect. 4. Of Hoping in
Jesus in that respect Page 386 Sect. 5. Of Believing in Jesus in that respect
Page 391 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that respect Page 397 Sect. 7. Of Joying
in Jesus in that respect Page 399 Sect. 8. Of Calling on Jesus in that respect
Page 401 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus in that respect. Page 402

BOOK VII. PART IV.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of the Time of Christ's Resurrection Page 411 Sect. 2. Of
the Reasons of Christ's Resurrection Page 413 Sect. 3. Of the Manner of
Christ's Resurrection Page 415 Sect. 4. Of the Arguments of Christ's
Resurrection Page 419 Sect. 5. Of Christ's Apparition to Mary Magdalen Page 421
Sect. 6. Of Christ's Apparition to His Ten Disciples Page 431 Sect. 7. Of
Christ's Apparition to all His Apostles Page 436 Sect. 8. Of Christ's
Apparition to all the Apostles at the Sea of Tiberias Page 442
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation in His Resurrection Page 443 Sect. 2. Of Considering Jesus in that
Respect Page 444 Sect. 3. Of Desiring after Jesus in that respect Page 449
Sect. 4. Of Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page 452 Sect. 5. Of Believing in
Jesus in that respect Page 458 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that respect Page
462 Sect. 7. Of Joying in Jesus in that respect Page 464 Sect. 8. Of Calling on
Jesus in that respect Page 466 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus in that respect
Page 467

BOOK VIII. PART V.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of Christ's Ascension, and of the Manner how Page 475 Sect.
2. Of the Place where He Ascended Page 477 Sect. 3. Of the Reasons why He
Ascended ibid. Sect. 4. Of God's Right Hand, and of Christ's Session There Page
480 Sect. 5. Of the Two Natures, wherein Christ sits at God's Right Hand Page
482 Sect. 6. Of the Reasons why Christ does sit at God's Right Hand ibid. Sect.
7. Of the Time when the Holy Ghost was sent Page 485 Sect. 8. Of the Persons to
whom the Holy Ghost was sent Page 486 Sect. 9. Of the Manner how the Holy Ghost
was sent Page 487 Sect. 10. Of the Measure of the Holy Ghost now given p. 490.
Sect. 11. Of the Reasons why the Holy Ghost was sent Page 491
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation, in His Ascension, Session, and Mission of the Spirit Page 499 Sect.
2. Of Considering Jesus in that respect Page 500 Sect. 3. Of Desiring after
Jesus in that respect Page 503 Sect. 4. Of Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page
505 Sect. 5. Of Believing in Jesus in that respect Page 511 Sect. 6. Of Loving
Jesus in that respect Page 517 Sect. 7. Of Joying in Jesus in that respect Page
519 Sect. 8. Of Calling on Jesus in that respect Page 521 Sect. 9. Of
Conforming to Jesus in that respect Page 522

BOOK IX. PART VI.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. What the Intercession of Christ is Page 527 Sect. 2.
According to what Nature Christ does Intercede Page 528 Sect. 3. To whom
Christ's Intercession is directed Page 529 Sect. 4. For whom this Intercession
is made Page 530 Sect. 5. What Agreement there is betwixt Christ's
Intercessions, and the Intercessions of the Highpriests of Old ibid. Sect. 6.
What the Difference is betwixt Christ's Intercessions, and the Intercessions of
the Highpriests of Old Page 538 Sect. 7. What the Properties of this
Intercession of Christ are Page 539 Sect. 8. Wherein the Intercession of Christ
consists Page 540 Sect. 9. How powerful and prevailing Christ's Intercession
are with His Father Page 546 Sect. 10. Of the Reasons of Christ's Intercession
Page 549
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the Great Work of our
Salvation in His Intercession Page 552 Sect. 2. Of Considering Jesus in that
respect ibid. Sect. 3. Of Desiring after Jesus in that respect Page 555 Sect.
4. Of Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page 557 Sect. 5. Of Believing in Jesus
in that respect Page 500 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that respect Page 564
Sect. 7. Of Joying in Jesus in that respect Page 566 Sect. 8. Of Praying to,
and Praising of Jesus in that respect Page 568 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus
in that respect Page 569

BOOK X.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Of Christ's Preparing for Judgment Page 573 Sect. 2. Of
Christ's Coming to Judgment Page 576 Sect. 3. Of Christ's Summoning the Elect
to come under Judgment Page 578 Sect. 4. Of Christ, and the Saints Meeting at
the Judgment-Day Page 583 Sect. 5. Of Christ's Sentencing, or Judging the
Saints for Eternal Glory Page 586 Sect. 6. Of Christ, and the Saints judging
the rest of the World Page 589 Sect. 7. Of Christ, and His Saints going up into
Heaven, when shall be the End of the World Page 600. Sect. 8. Of Christ's
surrendering, and delivering up the Kingdom to God, even the Father Page 603
Sect. 9. Of Christ's Subjection to the Father, that God may be All in All Page
606 Sect. 10. Of Christ's being All in All to His Redeemed Saints, to all
Eternity Page 609
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on Man's Salvation, in His
Second Coming to Judgment Page 616 Sect. 2. Of Considering Jesus in that
respect ibid Sect. 3. Of Desiring after Jesus in that respect Page 620 Sect. 4.
Of Hoping in Jesus in that respect Page 623 Sect. 5. Of Believing in Jesus in
that respect Page 628 Sect. 6. Of Loving Jesus in that respect Page 634 Sect.
7. Of Joying in Jesus in that respect Page 636 Sect. 8. Of Praying to, and
Praising of Jesus in that respect Page 638 Sect. 9. Of Conforming to Jesus in
that respect, ibid.

LOOKING UNTO JESUS: The first Book.
HEBR. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the beginner, and finisher of our Faith.


CHAP. I. The Proem, Division, and opening of the Words.
THE most excellent subject to discourse, or write of, is Jesus Christ.
Augustine having read Cicero's works, Dulces non sunt, quia nomen Jesu non est
in illis. Aug. Si scribas, non sapit mihi, nisi legero ibi Jesum. Si disputes
aut conferas, non sapit mihi, nisi sonuerit ibi Jesum. Ber. 1 Cor. 2.2.
commended them for their eloquence, but he passed this sentence upon them,
They are not sweet, because the name of Jesus is not in them. And Bernards
saying is near the same; if thou writest, it does not relish with me, unless I
read Jesus there; if thou disputest, or conferrest, it does not relish well
with me, unless Jesus sound there. Indeed all we say is but unsavory, if it be
not seasoned with this salt. I determined not to know any thing among you
(says Paul) save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified: he resolved with himself
before he Preached among the Corinthians, that this should be the only point of
knowledge that he would profess himself to have skill in, and that in the
course of his Ministry he would labor to bring them to: this he made the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height of his knowledge; yea doubtless
(says he) and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord: Ephesians. 3.18. Phil. 3.8.
In this knowledge of Christ there is an excellency above all other knowledge
in the World; there is nothing more pleasing and comfortable, more animating
and enlivening, more ravishing and soul-contenting; only Christ is the sum and
center of all divine revealed truths; we can preach nothing else as the object
of our faith, as the necessary element of our souls salvation, which does not
some way or other either meet in Christ, or refer to Christ; only Christ is the
whole of man's happiness; the Sun to enlighten him, the Physician to heal him,
the Wall of Fire to defend him, the Friend to comfort him, the Pearl to enrich
him, the Ark to support him, the Rock to sustain him under the heaviest
pressures; As an hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the Tempest,
Isa. 32.2.
as Rivers of Waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great Rock in a
weary Land. Only Christ is that Ladder betwixt Earth and Heaven, the Mediator
betwixt God and Man, a Mystery which the Angels of Heaven desire to pry, and
peep, and look into. 1 Pet. 1.12.
Here Is a blessed subject indeed, who would not be glad to pry into it, to be
acquainted with it? This is life eternal to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent: Come then, let us look on this Sun of righteousness; we cannot
receive harm, but good by such a look; Joh. 17.3.
indeed by looking long on the natural Sun we may have our eyes dazzled, and our
faces blackned; but by looking unto Jesus Christ, we shall have our eyes
clearer, and our faces fairer; Prove 15.30.
if the light of the eye rejoice the heart, how much more when we have such a
blessed object to look upon? As Christ is more excellent than all the world, so
this sight transcends all other sights; it is the Epitome of a Christians
happiness, the quintessence of evangelical Duties, Looking unto Jesus.

In the Text we have the act and Object; the act in the Original is very
emphatical, (...); the English does not fully express it; it signifies an
averting, or drawing off the eye from one object to another; there are two
expressions, (...) and (...); the one signifies a turning of the eye from all
other objects; the other a fast fixing of the eye upon such an object, and only
upon such. So it is both a looking off, and a looking on. On what? That is the
object, a looking unto Jesus; a Title that denotes his mercy and bounty, as
Christ denotes his office and function. I shall not be so curious as to enquire
why Jesus, and not Christ is nominated; I suppose the person is aimed at which
implies them both; only this may be observed, that Jesus is the purest Gospel
Name of all other names; Jesus was not the dialect of the Old Testament; the
first place that ever we read of this title as given to Christ, it is in Matthew.
1.21. Mat. 1.21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.
Some observe that this Name Jesus was given him twice; once till death, Matthew.
1.21. and afterward for ever, Phil. 2.10. the first was a note of his entering
into Covenant with God to fulfill the Law for us, and to die for our sins, the
second was a note of so meritorious a person, who for his humility was more
exalted than any person ever has been, or shall be. First, Jesus was the
humble name of his deserving grace: now Jesus is the exalted name of his
transcendent glory: at first the Jews did Crucify Jesus, and his name; and
the Apostle did then distrust whether Jesus was the true Jesus; but now God
has raised him from the dead, Luke 24.21. Phil. 2.9.10.
and has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at
the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth. My meaning is not to insist on this Name in
contradistinction to any other names of Christ; he is often called Christ, and
Lord, and Mediator, and Son of God, and Emmanuel; Why Jesus is all these;
Jesus is Christ, as he is the anointed of God; and Jesus is Lord, as he has
dominion over all the world; and Jesus is Mediator, as he is the reconciler of
God and man; and Jesus is the Son of God, as he was eternally begotten before
all worlds; and Jesus is Emmanuel, as he was incarnate, and so God with us.
Only because Jesus signify Savior, and this name was given him upon that very
account, For he shall save his people from their sins; I shall make this my
design to look at Jesus more especially, as carrying on the great work of our
salvation from first to the last. This indeed is the glad-tidings, the Gospel,
the Gospel-priviledge, and our Gospel-Duty, Looking unto Jesus.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I. The Duty of looking off all other things, confirmed, and cleared.
look off all other things; the note is this: We must take off our mind from
every thing, which might divert us in our Christian Race from looking unto Jesus.
(...), the first word, or first piece of a word in my Text speaks to us thus,
hands off, or eyes off from any thing that stands in the way of Jesus Christ. I
remember 'twas writ over Plato's door, (...), there is none may come hither that
is not a Geometer; but on the door of my Text is written clean contrary, (...),
No earthly minded man must enter here: not any thing in the world, be it never
so excellent, if it stand in the way of Jesus Christ, is to be named the same
day; we must not give a look or squint at any thing that may hinder this fair
and lovely sight of Jesus.

Genesis 10.7.
Thus was the Lords charge to Lot, look not behind thee; he was so far to
renounce and detest the lewdness of Sodom; as that he must not vouchsafe a look
toward it?

Isai 17.7, 8.
At that day shall a man look toward his maker, and his eyes shall have
respect to the holy one of Israel; and he shall not look to the Altars, the
work of his hands. This was the fruit of Gods chastisement on the Elect Israel,
that he should not give a look to the Altars, lest they diverted, or drew his
eyes from off his Maker.

2 Cor. 4.18.
We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen, says Paul. A Christians aim is beyond visible things, O when a soul
comes to know what an eternal God is, and what an eternal Jesus is, and what an
eternal Crown is; when it knows that great design of Christ to save poor souls,
and to communicate himself eternally to such poor creatures, this takes off the
edge of its desires as to visible temporal things, what are they in comparison?

But what things are they we must look off in this respect? I answer, -- 1.
Good things. 2. Evil things.

1. Good things. The Apostle tells us of a cloud of witnesses in the former
verse, which no question in their season we are to Look unto. But when this
second object comes in sight, he scatters the cloud quite, and sets up Jesus
himself; now the Apostle wills us (...), to turn our eyes from them, and to
turn them hither to Jesus Christ q. d. If you will indeed see a sight once for
all, look to him: the Saints, though they be guides to us, yet are they but
followers to him; he is the arch guide, the leader of them, and of us all, look
on him. There is a time when James may say, James 5 10. ^ohn 13.15. Zach. 2 13.
take my brethren the Prophets who have spoken in the Name of the Lord for an
example; but when Jesus comes forth, that said, I have given you an example, an
example above all examples, then be silent O all flesh before the Lord. Let all
Saints and Seraphims then cover their faces with their wings, that we may look
on Jesus, and let all other sights go.

2. Evil things, 1. In general, 2. In special.

1. In general, we must look off all things that are on this side Jesus Christ,
and so, so much the rather, if they be evil things; in a word, we must look off
all self; whether it be sinful self, or natural self, or religious self; in
this case we must draw our eyes off all these things.

2. In special, we must look off all that is in the world; 1 John 2.16.
and that the Apostle comprizeth under three heads, the lusts of the eyes, the
lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life; (1.) Pleasures, Profits, and Honors.

1. we must look off this world in respect of its sinful pleasures; Jude tells
us, such as are sensual have not the spirit: we cannot fixedly look on
pleasures, Jude 18.19. Job 21.12, 13, 14, 15.
and look on Jesus at once. Job tells us, that they that take up the Timbril,
and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ, that spend their days in
mirth, are the same that say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; what is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have if we pray unto him? We have a lively example of this in
Augustines conversion; he would indeed have had Christ, and his pleasures too;
but when he saw it would not be, Oh what conflicts were within him. In his
Orchard (as he stories it in his book of confessions) all his pleasures past
represented themselves before his eyes, saying, What will thou depart from us
for ever? Dimittesne nos and a momento isto non crimus tecum ultra in aeternum?
Aug. in lib confess. Et tu Domine usque quo? quam diu, quam diu cras and cras
and quare non modo? quare non hoc hora sinis est turpitudinis meae: Aug. ibid
Toll and lege ^ toll and lege, Idem ibid. Romans 13.13, 14.
and shall we be no more with thee for ever? O Lord (says Augustine, writing
this confession) turn away my mind from thinking that which they objected to
my soul! What filth? What shameful pleasures did they lay before my eyes? At
length after this combat, a shower of tears came from him, and casting himself
on the ground under a Fig Tree, he cries it out, O Lord, how long, how long
shall I say, to morrow, to morrow? Why not to day Lord, why not to day? why
should there not be an end of my filthy life even at this hour? Immediately
after this he heard a voice, as if it had been a boy or a girl singing by,
take up, and read; take up, and read; and thereupon opening his Bible that lay
by him at hand, he read in silence the first Chapter that offered it self,
wherein was written, Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering or wantonness, not in strife and envying; but
put ye on the Lord Jesus, and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof. Further then this sentence I would not read (says Augustine)
neither indeed was it needful; for presently, as if light had been poured into
my heart, all the darkness of my doubtfulness fled away. His eye was now taken
off his pleasures, and for ever after it was set on Jesus.

2. We must look off this world in respect of its sinful profits: a look on
this keeps off our looking unto Jesus. Whosoever loves the world, the love of
the Father is not in him; just so much as the world prevails in us, so much is
Gods love abated both in us, 1 John. 2 15. Jam. 4.4.
and toward us; ye adulterers, and adulteresses (says James) know ye not that
the friendship of the world is enmity with God? Covetousness in Christians is
spiritual adultery; when we have enough in God and Christ, and yet we desire to
make up our happiness in the creature, this is plain whoreing. Now there are
degrees in this spiritual whoredom: as, --

1. The minding of this world; ye know there may be adultery in affection, when
the body is not defiled; unclean glances are a degree of lust: so the children
of God may have some worldly glances, straggling thoughts, when the temptation
is strong, the world may be greatned in their esteem and imagination.

2. The setting of the heart upon the world; this is an higher degree of this
spiritual adultery: our hearts are due and proper to Christ: now to set them on
the world, which should be chaste and loyal to Jesus Christ, what adultery is
this? Ye cannot serve God and Mammon: Matthew. 6.24.
that woman that is not contented with one husband, must needs be an harlot.

3. The preferring of the world before Christ himself. This is the height of
covetousness, and the height of this adultery; what, to make the members of
Christ the members of an harlot? Why worldlings! those admiring thoughts are
Christ's, those pains are Christ's, that love is Christ's, that time, that care,
that earnestness is Christ's, they are all Christ's; and will you give that which
is Christ's unto the world? and prefer the world before Christ with his own?
What, live as professed prostitutes, that prefer every one before their
husbands? how will this expose you to the scorn of men and Angels? at the last
day thy will come pointing, and say, This is the man that made not God his
strength, but trusted in the abundance of his riches; Psalm 52.7.
this is the Gadaren that loved his swine more than Christ Jesus. Love not the
world, said John. 1 John 2.15.
Christ is never precious in man's apprehension, so long as the world seems
glorious to him. As we begin to relish sweetness in Christ, so the world begins
to be bitter to us: Cui Christus incipit dulc^ss^^e, necess: esto marescere
mundum. Bern.
the more sweetness we taste in the one, the more bitterness we taste in the
other.

3. We must look off the world in respect of its sinful honors: what is this
honor but a certain inordinate desire to be well thought of, or well spoken
of, to be praised, or glorified of men? as if a man should run up and down
streets after a feather flying in the air, and tossed hither and thither with
the gusts and blasts of infinite men's mouths; it is a question whether ever he
get it; but if he do, it is but a feather; such is this pride of life, honor,
vainglory, it is hard to obtain it, but if obtained, it is but the breath of
a few men's mouths, that alter upon every light occasion; but that which is
worst of all, it hinders our sight of Jesus Christ, not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; 1 Cor. 1.26. Heb 11.24, 26.
wordly honor keeps many back from Christ; and therefore Moses when he was
come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, -- esteeming
the reproaches of Christ greater riches than all the Treasures of Egypt. If the
blind Man in the way to Jerico had depended on the breath, or liking, or
approbation of the multitude, he had never received the benefit of his sight;
Luke 18.39.
for they (says the text) which went before, rebuked him that he should hold
his peace; they dissuaded him from running and crying so vehemently after
Christ; experience tells us, how these things pull and draw us off from Jesus
Christ, the lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and pride of life.

look off every thing that diverts our looking unto Jesus?

1. Because we cannot look fixedly on Christ, and such things together, and at
once; the eye cannot look upwards and downwards, at once in a direct line; we
cannot seriously mind heaven and earth in one thought; no man can serve two
masters, says Christ, especially such as jar, Mat. 6.24.
and who have contrary employments, as Christ and Mammon have.

2. Because whiles we look on these things, we cannot see the beauty that is in
Christ: suppose a squint look on Christ, whilst we have a direct look on other
things; alas, Christ will be of no esteem that while; this was the voice of
sinners concerning Christ, he has no form, Isa 53.2
nor comeliness; and when we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him. Indeed beauty is the attractive of the soul, the soul must see a beauty in
that which it lets out it self to in desiring: but our wishing looks on other
things, makes Christ but mean and contemptible in our eyes.

3. Because all other things, in comparison of Christ, are not worthy a look;
they are but as vile things, as under-things, as poor, and low, and mean, and
base things, in comparison of Christ: I count all things but loss (says Paul)
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Phil 3.8.
-- I count them but dung that I may win Christ. (...), some translate it
chafe, others dogs-meat, others excrements, dung; all agree, it is such a
thing as men usually cast away from them with some indignation.

4. Because it is according to the very law of marriage; therefore shall a man
forsake father, Genesis 2.24
and mother, and cleave to his wife; the Lord Christ marries himself to the
souls of his Saints. Hos. 2.19
I will betroth thee unto me for ever; I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies: and
for this cause the soul must forsake all, and cleave unto Christ; as married
wives use to do, we must leave all for our husband the Lord Jesus; Harken, O
daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thy own people,
P^al. 45.10
and thy fathers House.

5. Because Christ is a jealous Christ; now jealousy is a passion in the soul,
that will not endure any sharing in the object beloved; the woman that has a
jealous husband, must leave all her old companions: if she cast any amorous
looks or glances after them, the husband will be jealous, and Jealousy is
cruel as the Grave. Christians, Cant. 8.6. Exodus 20.5.
our God is a jealous God, our Christ is a jealous Christ; He cannot endure,
that we should look on any other things, so as to lust after them.

6. Because all other things can never satisfy the eye; Eccles. 1.8.
all things are full of labor (says Solomon) man cannot utter it, the eye is
not satisfied with seeing; it is but wearied with looking on diverse objects,
and yet still desires new ones: but once admit it to behold that glorious sight
of Christ, and then it rests fully satisfied. Hence it is that the Daughters of
Zion are called to come forth; Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, Cant. 3.11.
and behold King Solomon with the Crown wherewith his Mother has crowned him
in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart. Go
forth O ye daughters of Zion, lay aside all private and earthly affections, and
look upon this glory of Christ. As the daughters of Jerusalem sitting or
remaining in their chambers, closets, houses, could not behold the glory of
King Solomon passing by, and therefore they were willed to come forth of their
doors: even so, if we will behold the great King, Jesus Christ, in his most
excellent glory (a sight able to satisfy the Eye, and to ravish the Heart) we
must come out of our Doors, we must come out of our selves, otherwise we cannot
see his Glory; we are in our selves shut up in a dark dungeon, and therefore we
are called upon to come forth into the clear light of faith, and with the Eyes
of Faith to behold in daily meditation, the Glory of Christ Jesus.

SECT. II. An Exhortation to look off all other things.
ONe word of Exhortation. Christians! I beseech you look off all other things,
especially all evil things. I know I am pleading with you for an hard thing; I
had need of the Rhetoric of an Angel, to persuade you to turn your Eyes from
off these things; nay, if I had, all were too little, it is God only must
persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem; and yet let me offer a few
considerations, venture at a persuading of you, Genesis 9.17.
and leave the issue with God.

1. Consider, that all other evil things are in Gods account as very nothing;
verily, every man at his best estate is altogether vanity; not only man, but
every man; Psalm. 39.5.
nor every man in his worst condition, but every man at his best estate; nor
every man: man at his best estate is little worth, but every man at his best
estate is vanity, emptiness, nothing; it may be so in part, nay, but in every
part, he is wholly, totally, altogether vanity; would any man think, that a
great, rich, honorable Man, whom we look upon with such high admiring
thoughts, should be laid thus low in Gods esteem? O wonder, wonder! and yet
it is no such wonder, but one day you shall find the experience of this truth
your selves. Rich men have slept their sleeps, and none of the men of might
have found their hands. Psalm. 76.5.
or as others render it, they have found nothing in their hands; that is, rich
men have passed over this life as men do pass over a sleep, imagining
themselves to have golden mountains and rocks of diamond; but when they awake
at the day of death, they find themselves to have nothing. Why Christian, will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Prove. 23.5.
1. Observe that riches are not; they are nothing, those things that make men
great in the eyes of the world, are nothing in the eyes of God. 2. Observe that
God would not have us so much as set our eyos upon them, they are not objects
worth the looking on. 3. Observe with what indignation he speaks against those
that will set their eyes upon these vanities, Will thou set thine eyes upon a
thing which is not? q. d. what a vain, unreasonable, sottish, senseless thing is
this?

2. Consider that all such things (if they are any thing) they are but trifles,
deceits, thorns, miseries, uncertain things: this is an ordinary theme; it is
every man's object, and every man's subject, and a very easy thing it is, to
declaim up the vanity, misery, uncertainty of the creatures; Ay but do you make
it the matter of your meditation, and be you serious in it, think of it deeply,
and desire God to be in your thoughts! Oh what work will it then make in your
breasts? O how would it wean your loves and desires off all these things!
Christians! consider all these adjuncts of all sublunary things; when the
creatures tempt you, be not enticed by the beauty of them, so as to forget
their vanity; say, Here is a flower, fair, but fading; here is a glass that is
bright, but very brittle.

3. Consider the difference of these objects, Christ, and all other things; as
thus, all other things are vanities, but Christ is a real, solid substantial,
excellent, glorious thing; all other things are temporary, fading things, but
Christ is an enduring substance, the same yesterday, Revel. 1.4.
and to day, and for ever, which is, and which was, and which is to come: all
other things are thorns, vexation of spirit, but Christ is full of joy and
comfort, a most ravishing object, Cant. 5.16.
all composed of loves, or altogether lovely. O who would make it his business
to fill his coffers with pibbles, when he may have pearls, or gold, or silver,
or precious things? what, must you look off your sins? why see before you the
graces of the Spirit of Christ? must you look off your idel sinful company?
see before you the fellowship of the Father, 1 John 1.3.
and the Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; must you look off your pomp and glory? see
before you the privilege of adoption, you shall be called the sons and
daughters of God, Romans 8.13.
heirs and coheirs with Christ; must you look off your worldly riches? see
before you the riches of the graces of Christ: must you look off sinful
pleasures? see before you fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
at Christ's right hand are pleasures evermore: must you look off your own
righteousness? see before you the righteousness of Christ Jesus. O what a vast
difference is there betwixt these objects, Christ, and all other things?

4. Consider that Christ looked off heaven and heavenly things for you, how
much more should you look off the earth and earthly things, the world and
worldly things for him? Christ left the glory, the company, the pleasures of
Paradise for you, and he made himself of no reputation, he nothing'd himself
(as it were) for you; you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor 8.9.
who though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that you through
his poverty might be made rich. O let that melting love win you to him, and
wean you off all other things!

5. Consider that the rational soul of man is often too high a birth to spend its
strength upon other things? the soul of man is of the same nature with Angels;
it is a kind of divine spark; now if a man have a golden mill, he would not use
it to grind dirt, straws, and rotten sticks in; the soul, the mind, the
thinking faculty of man is too high to be exercised in the things of this
earth; the soul is of a most excellent capacious nature, it is fit to converse
not only with Angels, but with the eternal God himself, with Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; it is of a transcendent being; put all the world into the balance
with it, and it is nothing in comparison: the soul of the meanest gally-slave
is more precious than heaven and earth, than Sun, and Moon, and stars, and all
the host of heaven; now if a man's soul be of such an highborn nature, if the
Lord has put such a spirit into the bosom of man, for him to bestow the
strength of it upon low, base, mean, and earthly things, Oh what an evil is
this?

9. Consider how short is the time that you have here in this world: this is
the argument of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29.31.
because the time is short, therefore let us use the world as if we used it
not, therefore let our hearts be taken off these things; yet a few days, and
you shall be here no more; time passes on, many hundred diseases are ready to
assault you; you that are reading, hearing, talking or walking, you must very
shortly be carried on men's shoulders, and laid in the dust, and there left to
the worms in darkness and corruption; you are almost there already; it is but a
few days, or months, or years, and what is that when once thy are gone and
past? and Oh what is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and then lose
his soul? Math. 16, 26.


7. Consider the great account that you are to give of earthly things: it is
the sin of most of the sons of men to look on creature comforts, but they
consider not the account thy must give for them. Oh here is a prevailing motive
to take off your eyes! Consider the last accounts; what if you were now to die,
and to go the way of all flesh, and then to make up your reckoning, what good
would it do you to remember all those contentments and pleasures you once
enjoyed upon the earth? If the factor, after many years spent in foreign
countries, at last returns home with this bill of accounts, thus much for
singing, so much for dancing, this for courting, that for feasting, who would
not blame him for so fond a reckoning? oh it will be a sad reckoning if the
bill come in, that you have spent most of your time in looking and gazing upon
earthly things.

SECT. III. Directions how to look off all other things.
1. STudy every day more and more the vanity of the creature: Read over the
Book of Ecclesiastes well; it is enough, through the assistance of Christ, to
teach you that lesson. A serious and fruitful meditation of that word, Vanity
of vanities, Eccles. 2.2.
says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity, what work might it make
in your hearts; men usually look on these things through some false glass, or
at a distance, which makes them so admire them; but if they could see them
truly in themselves, oh how uncomely would they be? or if they could see them
as compared to Christ, oh how vain would they be? honors and greatness in that
respect would appear as bubbles, pleasures and delights in that respect would
appear as shadows.

2. Converse but a little with any evil thing on this side Christ; Have as
little to do with the world, the sinful pleasures, profits, riches, manners of
it, as possibly you can; the lesser the better; things of this world have a
glutinous quality, if you let the heart lie any while amongst them, it will
cleave unto them, and if it once cleave to them, there will be no way but
either Repentance or Hell fire must part them.

3. Be more and better acquainted with Jesus Christ; get nearer to him, be more
in communion with him, get more tastes of Christ and heaven, and earth will
relish the worse for them. Oh when I look on Christ, and consider, that he that
was the Lord of heaven and earth, put himself into so poor and low a condition,
merely for the redeeming of his Elect, how should this but deaden my heart to
the world? Phil. 3.8.
I account all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, and account them but dung that I may win Christ. If Christ be in
view, all the world then is but dung, and dross, and loss in comparison; the
Glory of Christ will darken all other things in the world.

4. Set before you the examples of such Saints, who accounted themselves
pilgrims and strangers upon earth. The Apostle gives you a Catalogue of such,
who confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, and see how
they are used, Heb. 11.12.37.38.
they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
sword, they wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented; who were these? they were they of whom the world was not
worthy. Oh when you read, or hear how joyfully these servants of the most high
went through their wilderness condition, methinks this should take off your
hearts from earthly things.

5. Go in your meditations to heaven, and keep there a while; the mind that is
in heaven cannot attend these earthly things; would a man leave his plough and
harvest in the field to run with children a hunting after butter-flies? no more
will a soul that is taking a survey of heaven and heavenly things, fix his eyes
on such poor things below: non vacat exiguis, etc. is the character of a truly
prudent man; the children of that Kingdom above have no while for trifles, and
especially when they are employed in the affairs of the Kingdom. Oh when a
Christian has but a glimpse of eternity, and then looks down on the world
again, how does he contemn and vilipend these things? Eccles. 2.2.
How does he say of laughter, thou art mad, and of mirth, what is this thou
do? whilst the Saints are tasting heaven, they feel such sweet that they
care not for other things: Christians! how would this meditation wean your
hearts? and make you laugh at the fooleries of the world? and scorn to be
cheated with such childish toys? If the devil had set upon Peter in the mount,
when he saw Christ in his transfiguration, and Moses and Elias talking with
him, would he so easily have been drawn to deny his Lord? what, with all that
glory in his eye? so if the devil should set upon a beliveing soul and persuade
his heart to profits, or pleasures, or honors of the world, when he is taken
up in the Mount with Christ, what would such a soul say, Get thee behind me
Satan, would thou persuade me from hence with many trifling toys? would
thou have me sell these joys for nothing? is there any honor or delight like
this? or can that be profit, which loses me this? Some such answer would the
soul return. Oh if we could keep the taste of our souls continually delighted
with the sweetness of Heaven; as a man would spit out aloes after honey, so
should we spit out all these baits of the world with disdain.

6. Cry mightily unto God, that he would take off your hearts and eyes, Psalm.
119.37.
turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, prays David; either God must do it,
or you will be wearied in the multitude of your endeavors; but if the Lord
draw off the eye, it will be drawn indeed. Psalm. 11^.36.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness, prays David
again; if the heart bend down-wards, then go to God to erect it, and to incline
it heaven-wards; if it be after covetousness, then cry to God, and say, Lord,
not after covetousness, but after thy testimonies incline my heart.

I have hitherto stood only at the door of the Text to call you in; if now you
will enter, and be intent and fix your eyes, I Will show you a blessed, a most
glorious sight. But first I must explain the act, you must look.] Secondly, the
object, you must look on Jesus.]

CHAP. III.
SECT. I. An Explanation of the Act and Object.
1. FOr the act, you must look.] Looking is either ocular, or mental.

First, for ocular vision, there may be some use of that in heaven, for there
we shall look on Jesus; with these eyes shall I behold him, says Job; Job 19
27. 1 John 3 2. 1 Cor. 13.12. 2 Cor. 5.7.
and we shall see him as he is, says the Apostle; now we see him, as in a
glass, but then we shall see him face to face. But till then we must walk by
faith, and not by sight.

Secondly, for mental vision, or the inward eye, that is it that will take up
our discourse, and that is it which the Apostle speaks of in his prayers for
the Ephesians, Ephesians 1.18.
that the eyes of their understanding may be opened, that they may know, etc.
Sim^^ds sight and says.
Now the excellency of this mental sight is far above the ocular sight; for
there are more excellent things to be seen by the eye of the mind, than by the
eye of the body; we only see a piece of the creation by the eye of the body,
but the mind reaches every thing that is in it, yea the mind reaches to him
that made it; God is invisible, and yet this eye sees God; Heb. 11.27.
it is said of Moses, that he saw him that is invisible. 2. It is the sight of
the mind that gives light and vigor to the sight of the eye, take away the
inward light, and the light of the external sense is but as darkness and death.
3. It is the sight of the mind that looks into the worth, use, etc. propriety
of any thing presented; the eye can see a thing, but not the worth of it; a
beast looks on gold as well as a man, but the sight and knowledge of the worth
of it is by the internal light of the mind, so the eye can see a thing but not
the use of it; a child looks on a tool in the hand of a workman, but the sight
and knowledge of the use of it, is only by a man of reason that has internal
light to judge of it: and so the eye can see a thing, but not the propriety of
it; a beast looks on his pasture, but he likes it not because it is his, but
because it is a pasture, and well furnished. Now we know that the worth, and
use, and propriety of a thing, are the very cream of the things themselves, and
this the eye of the mind conveys, Genesis 42.7, 8.
and not the eyes of the body. It is said of Joseph, that he saw hi^ brethren,
and knew them, but they knew not him: this was the reason why Joseph was so
exceedingly taken at the sight of his Brethren, that his bowels wrought with
joy, and a kind of compassion toward them, but they were before him as common
strangers, though they saw Joseph their brother a Prince, yet they were taken
no more with the sight of him than of any other man, because they knew him not.

Again, this mental looking is either notional and theoretical; or practical
and experimental; the first we call barely the look of our minds; it is an
enlightening of our understandings with some measure of speculative sight in
spiritual and heavenly mysteries: the second we call the look of our minds and
hearts, whereby we not only see spiritual things, but we are Sub oculorum
nomine-omnes affectus notari non rarum est. Calv. in Ps. 25.17. Phil. 3.10.
affected with them; we desire, love, believe, joy, and embrace them. To this
purpose is that rule, that words of knowledge do sometimes signify the
affections in the heart, and the effects thereof in our lives. And this was the
look which Paul longed for, that I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection; (i.e.) that he might have experience of that power, In legendu
lib^is non quaeramus scientiam sed sapo^em Dei. Phil 1.9.
that it might so communicate it self unto him, as to work upon him to all the
ends of it. And this was the look that Bernard preferred above all looks. In
reading of books (says he) let us not so much look for science, as savoriness
of truth upon our hearts. This I pray (said the Apostle) that your love may
abound yet more and more, in knowledge, and in all judgment; (i.e.) in
knowledge and feeling. And certainly this feeling, this experimental Looking on
Jesus, is that my Text aims at; it is not a swimming knowledge of Christ, but
an hearty feeling of Christ's inward workings; it is not heady notions of
Christ, but hearty motions toward Christ, that are implied in this inward
looking.

2. For the Object, you must look on Jesus.] It is the blessed'st Object that
the eye of the mind can possibly fix upon; of all Objects under Heaven, Jesus
has the pre-eminence in perfection, and he should have the pre-eminence in our
Meditation. It is he that will make us most happy when we possess him, and we
cannot but be joyful to look upon him, especially when looking is a degree of
possessing. -- Jesus, for the name signifies Savior; it is an Hebrew name; the
Greeks borrowed it from the Hebrews, the Latins fom the Greeks, and all other
Languages from the Latins: It is used five hundred times in Paul's Epistles,
says Genebrard: it comes from the Hebrew word Jehoshua, or Joshua, which in
the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah Ezra 5.2. Nehem. 8.17
(written after the Babylonian captivity) is Jeshua, and so is our Saviors
Name always written in the Syriack translation of the new Testament. This name
Jesus was given to Christ the Son of God, by his Father, and brought from
Heaven by an Angel, first to Mary, and then to Joseph; and on the day when he
was circumcised (as the manner was) this Name was given him by his Parents, as
it was commanded from the Lord, by the Angel Gabriel. Luke 1.26.31
Not to stand on the Name, for the matter it includes both his office, and his
natures; he is the alone Savior of man, Act. 4.12.
for there is none other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved, and he is a perfect and an absolute Savior; Heb. 7.25.
he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them. I will not deny, but that the work
of salvation is common to all the three persons of the Trinity; it is a known
rule, Opera trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa.
all outward actions are equally common to the three persons; for as they are
all one in Nature and Will, so must they be also one in Operation; the Father
saves, the Son saves, and the holy Ghost saves; yet we must distinguish them
in the manner of saving; the Father saves by the Son, the Son saves by paying
the ransom and price of our salvation, the holy Ghost saves by a particular
applying of that ransom unto men: Now whereas the Son pays the price of our
redemption, and not the Father, nor the holy Ghost, therefore in this special
respect he is called our Savior, our Jesus, and none but he.

This object, though contained in a word, is very comprehensive; herein is set
forth to our view, the offices of Christ, the two Natures of Christ, the
qualities of Christ, the excellencies of Christ: O what variety of sweet matter
is in Jesus? he has in him all the powders of the merchants; an holy soul
cannot tire it self in viewing Jesus; Cant. 3.6.
we know one thing tyres quickly, unless that one be all: which so is Christ,
and none else, he is all, and in all, all belonging to being; and all belonging
to well-being; Col. 3.11.
in things below Jesus, some have this excellency, and some have that, but none
have all, and this withers contemplation at the root; contemplation is soul
recreation, and recreation is kept up by variety; but, O what variety is in
Jesus? variety of time, He is Alpha and Omega; variety of beauty, he is white
and ruddy: variety of quality, he is a Lion and a Lamb, a servant and a Son;
variety of the excellency in the world, he is Man, and God. O where shall we
begin in this view of Jesus? Who shall declare his Generation? or who shall
count and reckon his Age? All the Evangelists exhibit unto us the Savior, Esa.
53.8.
but every one of them in his particular method; Mark describes not at all the
genealogy of Jesus, but begins his history at his Baptism; Matthew searches
out his original from Abraham; Luke follows it backwards as far as Adam; John
passes further upwards, even to the Eternal Generation of this Word that was
made flesh: so they lead us to Jesus, mounting up four several steps; in the
one we see him only among the men of his own time; in the second he is seen in
the Tent of Abraham; in the third he is yet higher, to wit in Adam; and
finally, having traversed all ages, through so many generations, we come to
contemplate him in the beginning, in the bosom of the Father, in that eternity
in which he was with God before all worlds: And there let us begin, still
Looking unto Jesus, as he carries on the great work of our salvation from first
to last, from everlasting to everlasting.

SECT. II. The main Doctrine, and confirmation of it.
BUt for the foundation of our building take this Note. --

Inward experimental looking unto Jesus, such as stirs up affections in the
heart, Or thus, Inward experimental knowing, considering, desiring, hoping,
believing, loving, joying, calling on Jesus, and conforming to Jesus, it is a
complicate, foulded, compounded Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

I need not much to explain the Point, you see here is an Ordinance, or a
Gospel-duty held forth; many other Duties we have elsewhere described, but this
we have kept for this place; and the rather for that this is a choice Duty, a
compounded Duty, an high Gospel-ordinance. No question but Watchfulness,
Self-trial, Self-denial, Experiences, Evidences, Meditation, Life of Faith,
etc. do well in their place and order; yet as oars in a boat, (though it be
carried with the tide) may help it to go faster; it is Jesus lifted up, (as
Moses lifted up the Serpent) which strikes more soundly into the beholder, than
any other way. Looking unto Jesus, is that great Ordinance appointed by God for
our most especial good. How many souls have busied themselves in the use of
other means, and though in them Christ has communicated some virtue to them,
yet because they did not trade more with him, they had little in comparison?
such a one as deals immediately with Christ will do more in a day, than another
in a year, and therefore I call it a choice, a complete, a complicate, an high
Gospel-Ordinance. Now what this Ordinance is, the Text tells you, it is a
Looking unto Jesus.

1. Jesus is the Object; and Jesus I ground this on all the Texts jointly, as
on Isa. 45, 22. Isa. 65.1. Micha 7.7. Zach 12.10. Numb. 21.8. John 3.15. Heb.
12.2. Phil. 3.20. 2 Cor. 3.18. Mat 1.21. etc. Isa. 45.22. Isa 65.1. Psalm 25.15
Psalm. 34 5. Heb. 12.3.
as Jesus, as he is our Savior, as he has negotiated, or shall yet negotiate
in the great business of our salvation. 2. Looking unto, is the act; but how?
it is such a Look as includes all these acts, knowing, considering, desiring,
hoping, believing, loving, joying, enjoying of Jesus, and conforming to Jesus.
It is such a look as stirs up affections in the heart, and the effects thereof
in our life; it is such a look as leaves a quickening and enlivening upon the
spirit; it is such a look as works us into a warm affection, raised resolution,
an holy and upright conversation. Briefly, it is an inward, experimental
Looking unto Jesus.

For confirmation of the point; this was the Lords charge to the Gentiles of
old, Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth. -- And I said,
behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my Name. And
according to this command was their practice; Mine eyes are ever toward the
Lord, says David, and they looked unto him and were lightened, and their faces
were not ashamed. -- Thus in the Gospel, after this command, Looking unto
Jesus, it follows, Consider him that has endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself. And according to this command is the practice of
Gospel-believers, 2 Cor. 3 18.
We all with open face beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord. Instead of the vail of Mosaical figures, God has now given to his Church
the clear glass of the Gospel; and hence all believers under the Gospel do by
contemplative Faith, behold Christ, together with the glorious light of his
mercy, truth, goodness, and the rest of his Divine Attributes; and by means
thereof they are made like unto him in the glory of Holiness, and in newness of
life.

The reasons why we are thus to Look unto Jesus, will be as so many motives,
which we shall reserve to an use of Exhortation; but the reasons why this
Looking unto Jesus, is, 1. An Ordinance. 2. An Ordinance of Christ, may be
these. --

1. Why an Ordinance? here is only this reason, the will of the Lord: Even so
father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Ordinances are certain impositions
set forth by an external mandate of a Lawgiver, having Authority to command. It
is the will of Christ to impose this Law on all the sons of men, that they
should Look up unto him; and concerning this, what have we to do to enquire
into the reason? it is our Duty to obey, and not to know of him why he
commands; if (...) was enough in Pythagoras his School, to put the business
past disputing amongst his Scholars, I am sure it should be much more in
Christ's School; we will therefore enquire no further reason for it.

2. Why an Ordinance of Christ? it is this; because all spiritual Ordinances,
Laws, Institutions, do hold on Christ; it is not in the liberty of man to erect
any new spiritual Ordinance in the Church of Christ. I will not deny, but the
power of man may come in to order such things, as are not proper, but rather
common to the Church with other societies, as to meet together in some place,
and at some time, etc. according to that rule, Let all things be done decently,
and in order; for this is not an institution, 1 Cor. 14.42.
but only the dictate of right reason. But when it comes up to an Ordinance,
Law, Institution, (i.e.) when something more shall be put on the thing, than
nature has put on it, when by virtue of the institution, there is conjoined to
it some kind of spiritual efficacy to work upon the soul, this only holds on
Christ. Hence, because in the preaching of the Word, and in the administration
of the Sacraments we expect a virtue, a spiritual efficacy, more than they have
or can yield in any natural way, therefore we say, these are Ordinances of
Christ; and so because in Looking unto Jesus, we expect a virtue, a spiritual
efficacy, to go along together with it, more than nature can give it; therefore
we call this an Ordinance, and an Ordinance of Christ, to distinguish it from
all other Ordinances, Rules, Constitutions of men whatsoever.

SECT. III. Use of Reproof.
WEll then, is inward experimental looking unto Jesus a choice, an high
Gospel-Ordinance? Duty? the truth is, that as the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5.19.
so the eyes of the whole world are misplaced; there is few that have a care of
this choice, of this high Gospel-Ordinance: I shall therefore reprove both the
ungodly, and godly.

1. For the ungodly, not God, nor Christ is in all their thoughts. Alas! Psalm.
10.4.
they never heard of such a Duty as this; they cannot tell what it means, to
Look unto Jesus. Nor speak I only of poor Indians, and other Savages of the
unchristian world, whose souls are over clouded with the blackest mists of
irreligion, that the Prince of darkness can possibly inwrap them in, who came
into the world, not knowing wherefore; and go out of the world, not knowing
whither, an heavy case, which cannot sufficiently be bewailed with tears of
blood; But I speak of such as live with in the Paradise of the Christian
Church, that have nothing to distinguish them from those Indian miscreants, but
an outward conformity, outward formalities, the charity of others, and their
own slight imaginations; why alas! these are they that the Lord complains of,
that they have eyes, and see not; Jer. 2 32.
My people have forgotten me days without number, they have negligently
suffered me to be out of their minds, and that for a long time. You will say,
is there any such here? Can I tax any of you, that you should not Look up to
Jesus? are not your eyes toward Christ in your prayers, praise, soliloquies,
public and private Duties? Nay, are not you now in the Duty, whilst I am
speaking, and you hearing?

I answer, however you may deem that you do this or that; yet God reckons it as
a thing not done in these respects. --

1. When it is not done to purpose; as if our looking to Christ makes us not
like Christ; a man may give a thousand glances every day toward Christ, yet if
there be no effectual impression upon the heart, Christ takes it as if he had
never looked toward him at all.

2. When it is done unwillingly. Sometimes men think of Christ, but they know
not how to shun it; the Lord breaks in upon their spirits whether they will or
no, whereas their own temper is to follow, and to pursue other objects: thus
you drop into our assemblies out of custom, or fashion, or for some sinister
end, and here is Christ lifted up upon the pole, he is discovered in his
beauties, graces, sweetnesses, excellencies; but when you see him, you say, he
has no form nor comeliness; Isa. 53.2. Isa. 52.3.
there is beauty that we should desire him. Let no man deceive himself; though
he cast his eyes toward Heaven all the day long, if he love not this work, he
does nothing, he Looks not at Jesus.

3. When it is not done according to the rule; this is not to eat the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20.
said Paul to his Corinthians; no question they did eat it, but because it was
not done after its due manner, he says, this is not to eat the Lords Supper.
Many think of Christ, and Look up to Jesus, but because their thoughts are not
holy, awful and subjecting to the Spirit, in no way proportionable to the
goodness and glory of the Son of God, they look loosely, carelessly, and
carnally upon him, he therefore reckons it as not done: this is not to Look
unto Jesus.

4. When a man makes it not his course and trade to look unto Jesus. A man may
come unto a Carpenters house, and take up his tools, and do something at his
work, but this makes him not a Carpenter, because it is not his trade. The best
Saints sin; yet because it is not their trade and course, 1 John 5.18
they are said, not to sin: whosoever is born of God, sins not. And so
ungodly men may look, and muse, and meditate, and think of Christ; but because
this is not their course and trade, they make it not their work to look to
Christ, they are therefore said, not to look to him.

Why now consider, you that plead that you are Christians, and that you mind
Christ at this very instant, that you are in the duty, even whilst I am
speaking of it, and yet you neither do it to purpose, nor willingly, nor
according to rule, nor as it is your trade; is it not with you, Matthew 7.22
as it is with them of whom Christ spoke; many will say to me at that day,
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in they name? and in thy name have cast out
devils? and in thy name have done many wonderful works? they will plead at the
last day, as you plead now; but for all that, you know the answer, I never knew
you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Verse 23
Surely Christ will say to you one day, I know you not, I was a stranger to you
upon earth; I could not have an eye from you, but when your lazy idle spirits
pleased: and now out of my sight, I Will never own you, nor look upon you more.

2. For the godly, are not they careless of this Duty? O their excursions from
God! sad dejections of spirit! inordinat affections of the world! and in the
meanwhile, O the neglect of this Gospel-ordinance, even amongst Saints
themselves! I know not whether, through want of skill, or through want of will;
but sure I am, this duty lies dormant, neglected of most of the people of God:
their faults I may express in these respects. --

1. In not sending out their understandings, in not pointing their minds
toward Jesus. I write unto you (said the Apostle) to stir up your pure minds,
by way of remembrance; it is in the Original (...), 2 Pet. 3.1 Psalm. 57.8 Judge
7.12
to awaken your pure minds; and it was but need. See how David calls upon
himself, Awake my glory! and see how Deborah calls upon her self, Awake, awake
Deborah, awake, awake, utter a song. Awaking is a word that imports rouzing, as
birds that provoke their young ones by flight to make use of their wings; now,
how few are there that thus call upon themselves? it was the Prophets
complaint, no man stirs up himself, Isa. 64.7
to take hold of God. O what a shame is this? is it fit that our
understandings, which God has entrusted us withal, should be no more improved?
is it fit that our minds (those golden cabinets which God has given us, to be
filled with heavenly treasure) should either be empty, or stuffed with vanity,
nothing, worse then nothing? O that such glorious creatures as our souls,
should lacquey after every creature, which should be in attendance upon Christ,
which should be like Angels, waiting and standing in the presence of our God! O
that such glorious things as our immortal spirits, should run after vanity, and
so become vain; which if rightly improved, should walk with Angels, should
lodge themselves in the bosom of the glorious God! Do we not see how Christ is
sending out to us continually? the thoughts of his heart are love, eternal
love? and shall not we send out our thoughts toward him? shall not we let our
minds run out toward him?

2. In not bending of their minds to this work. It may be the mind looks up,
but it is so feeble, that like an arrow shot from a bow weakly bent, it reaches
not the mark. It is the wise man's counsel, Eccl. 9.10
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all they might. O that Gods
people should be so lazy, dull, sluggish, sloathfull in this spiritual work!
As Jesus said to the multitudes concerning John, Matt 11.7
What went ye out into the wilderness to see? So may I ask believers in their
looking unto Jesus, What went ye out to see? when you crawle, and move, as if
you had no hearts nor spirits within you, whom go ye forth to see? what, Heb. 1
3.
him that is the Lord of glory? what, him that is the brightness of his Fathers
glory, and the express image of his person? what, are such heavy and lazy
aspects fit to take in such a glory as this is? you see in what large streams
your thoughts fly forth to other things. and are you only languishing, weak,
and feeble, in things of so great concernment? Oh that Christians should be
cold in spirituals, and hot in the pursuit of earthly temporal things.

3. In not binding of their minds to this object, in not staying the eye on
Jesus Christ. Some may give a glance at Christ, but they are presently wheeled
off again: but why does not the eye abide there, at least, till it come to some
profitable issue? is not Christ worthy on whom our souls should dwell?
Certainly if we love our Jesus, that love will hold us; Christ then will be in
our thoughts, and minds, and we cannot off him: as the lodestone having drawn
the iron, it keeps it fast to it self; so if love draw our hearts, it holds it
fast to the object loved. Christ himself acknowledges such an operation of
love upon himself, Turn away thine eyes, for they have overcome me; thou have
ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, with one of thine eyes: Cant. 6.5.
Christ was held in the galleries, and captivated with love to his people, so
that his eyes was ever upon them; nay he could not get his eyes off them, Can a
mother forget her child? Isa. 49.14.
no more can I forget you; and is Christ so tender in his love toward us, that
he ever minds us, and shall our minds be so loose to him? so fluttering, and
fleeting? shall there be no more care to bind our selves in cords of love to
him, who has bound himself in such cords of love to us?

4. In not daily exercising this blessed Duty; it may be now and then they are
awakened, and they get up into heaven to see their Jesus, but it is not daily.
Oh consider! Is this now and then going to heaven within the vail, to live the
life of friends? is this to carry our selves as children? what, to be so
strange at home? but now and then, once in a month, in a year, there to be
seldom, where we should always be? is Jesus Christ such a mean thing, that a
visit now and then should serve the turn? the Queen of Sheba hearing Solomon's
wisdom, Oh said she, 1 King 10.8.
Blessed are those thy servants that always stand before thee, and hear thy
wisdom; if she were so taken with Solomon, remember that a greater than Solomon
is here; and shall we deprive our selves of that blessedness, which we might
enjoy by standing always in the presence of Christ, to hear his Wisdom, and to
behold his Glory?

Oh my Brethren, let us take shame to our selves, that to this day we have been
so careless in sending, bending, binding our minds to this blessed object,
Jesus Christ; yea, let us blush that we have not made it our daily business.
Psalm. 1.2.
David describes the blessed man by his delighting in the law of the Lord, and
by his meditating on that Law day and night; how then is he to be reproved,
that neither meditates on the Law of the Lord, nor on the Lord, the Lawmakers,
day and night? O alas! we keep not a constant course, we are not daily in the
exercise of viewing Jesus; nay, I fear, we look upon this Duty of looking unto
Jesus, as a questionable thing; it seems to many as a Duty unknown, unheard of,
unthought of, it is not in their notice, and how should it be in their
practice? But I leave this first Use.

SECT. IV. Use of Exhortation.
IS inward, experimental Looking unto Jesus a choice, and high
Gospel-ordinance? I beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.1. Romans 12.1. Romans 15.30
I beseech you by the mercies of God, I beseech you brethren, for the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, to look unto Jesus: or if
my beseeching will not prevail, why yet look on me as an Ambassador of Christ,
consider as though God did beseech you by me, I beseech, I pray you in Christ's
stead; it is a message that I have from God to your souls, to look unto Jesus;
and therefore set your hearts, 2 Cor. 5.20 Deuteronomy. 32.46
to all the words that I testify to you this day, for it is not a vain thing,
but it is for your lives.

O that I should need thus to persuade your hearts to look unto Jesus! What, is
not your Jesus worthy of this? why then are your thoughts no more upon him? why
are not your hearts continually with him? why are not your strongest desires,
and daily delights in, and after the Lord Jesus? what is the matter? will not
God give you leave to approach this light? will he not suffer your souls to
taste and see? why then are these words in the Text? why then does he cry, and
double his cry, behold me, behold me? Ah vile hearts! How delightfully, and
unweariedly can we think of vanity? how freely, and how frequently can we think
of our pleasures; friends, labors, lusts? yea, of our miseries, wrongs,
sufferings, fears? and what, is not Christ in all our thoughts? It was said of
the Jews, that they used to cast to the ground the book of Esther before they
read it, because the name of God is not in it; and Augustine cast by Cicero's
writings, because they contained not the name of Jesus; Christians! thus should
you humble, and cast down your sensual hearts, that have in them no more of
Christ: O chide them for their wilful or weak strangeness to Jesus Christ! O
turn your thoughts from off all earthly vanities, and bend your souls to study
Christ, habituate your selves to such contemplations as in the next Use I shall
present; and let not those thoughts be seldom or cursory, but settle upon them;
dwell there, bath your souls in those delights, drench your affections in those
rivers of pleasures, or rather in the sea of consolation; O tie your souls in
heavenly galleries, have your eyes continually set on Christ! Say not, you are
unable to do thus, this must be Gods work only, and therefore all our
exhortations are in vain. Baxte's Rest
A learned Divine can tell you, though God be the chief disposer of your
hearts, yet next under him you have the greatest command of them your selves:
though without Christ you can do nothing, yet under him you may do much; or
else it will be undone, and you undone through your neglect; do your own parts,
and you have no cause to distrust whether Christ will do his; it is not usual
with Christ to forsake his own people in that very work he sets them on. -- Oh
but we can do nothing: how nothing? what, are you neither spiritual nor
rational creatures? If a carnal Minister can make it his work to study about
Christ through all his life time, and all because it is the trade he lives by,
and knows not how to subsist without it: why then me thinks a spiritual
Christian should do much more; if a Cook can labor and sweat about your meat,
because it is the trade that maintains him, though perhaps he taste it not
himself; Methinks, you for whom it is prepared, should take the pains to taste
its sweetness, and feed upon it. Christians! if your souls were sound and
right, they would perceive incomparably more delight and sweetness in knowing,
thinking, believing, loving and rejoicing in Jesus Christ, than the soundest
stomach finds in his food, or the strongest senses in the enjoyment of their
objects. Now for shame never say, Phil. 4.13.
you cannot reach it. I can do all things (says Paul) through Christ that
strengthens me. Oh it is our sloth, our security, our carnal mind, which is
enmity to God and Christ, that keeps us off. Be exhorted! Oh be exhorted in the
fear of God!

SECT. V. Motives from our wants in case of neglect.
TO quicken us to this Duty, I shall propound some moving considerations;
Ponder and weigh them with an impartial judgment; who knows but through the
assistance of Christ they may prove effectual with your hearts, and make you to
resolve upon this excellent Duty of Looking unto Jesus.

Consider 1. Our wants, in case of our neglect. 2. Our riches, in case we are
lively in this Duty.


1. For our wants; if Christ be not in view, there is nothing but wants.

Suppose first a Christless soul, a poor creature without any beam or ray of
this Sun of righteousness, and what a sad condition is he in? I may say of such
a one that --

1. He is without light: there is no oil of saving knowledge, no star of
spiritual light arising in his soul; ye were once darkness, says the Apostle
to his Ephesians: not only dark, Ephesians. 3 8.
but darkness it self; they were wholly dark, universally dark, having no
mixture, nor glimpse (whilst without Christ) of spiritual light in them. Of
such carnal wretches, John 16.3.
says our Savior, they have not known the Father, nor me; they have not known
the Father in his Word, nor Me in my Natures, Offices, Sufferings, Exaltations,
Communications: very miserable is the carnal man's Ignorance of God and Christ,
he has no saving knowledge of Jesus.

1 Cor. 1.30.
2. Such a one is without Grace, without Holiness; Christ is our wisdom and
sanctification, as well as righteousness and redemption. Where Christ is not,
there is no spiritual wisdom, no inclination to the ways and works of
sanctification.

3. Such a one is without contentation; the soul in this case finds nothing but
emptiness and vanity, in the greatest abundance. Let a man have what the world
can give, yet if he have not Christ, he is nothing worth; Christ is the marrow
and fatness, the fullness and sweetness of all our endowments; separate Christ
from them, and they are bitter, and do not please us; empty, and do not fill us.

Isa. 1.6.
4. Such a one is without any spiritual beauty; there is nothing in him but
sores and swellings, and wounds and putrefaction; from the sole of his foot, to
the crown of his head, there is nothing in him but loathsome and incurable
maladies; hence the greatest sinner is the foulest monster; bodily beauty
without Christ is but as green grass upon a rotten grave; did man see his
uncomliness and deformity without Jesus Christ, he would style himself as the
Prophet styled Pashur, Jer. 20.3.
Magor-Missabib, fear round about, every way a terror to himself.

5. Such a one is without peace: there is no true, spiritual, heavenly peace,
no joy and peace in the holy Ghost without Jesus Christ. Joram asking Jehu, is
it peace? 2 Kings 9.22.
was answered, what have thou to do with peace, so long as the whordomes of thy
mother Jezabel, and her witchcrafts are so many? a Christless man asking, is it
peace, O Messenger of God? he can look for no other but Jehu's answer, What
have thou to do, O carnal man, with peace, so long as thy lusts are so strong
within thee, and thy estrangements from the Prince of peace, so great? the soul
that is without Jesus Christ, is an enemy to the God of peace, a stranger to
the Covenant of peace, incapable of the Word of peace, an Alien to the way of
peace: there is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 57.21.
says my God.

6. Such a one is without acceptance, with God the Father: Christ only is
Gods beloved, and therefore as Joseph's brethren might not look him in the face,
unless they brought their brother Benjamin, so cannot we look God in the face
with any confidence or acceptance, unless we bring Christ with us in the arms
of our faith; without Christ man is stubble, and God is a consuming fire to
destroy him; man is a guilty malefactor, and God a severe Judge to condemn him;
the whole of man without Jesus Christ is a very abomination in Gods presence.

7. Such a one is without life: he that has not the Son, has not life, says
John; 1 John 5.12. Ephesians. 2.1.
Christ lives not in that soul, it is a dead soul, dead in sins and trespasses.
As the dead see nothing of all that sweet and glorious light which the Sun
casts forth upon them, so the dead in sin have no comfortable apprehension of
Christ, though he shine in the Gospel more gloriously than the Sun at noon. And
as the dead know not any thing; Eccles 9 5
so the dead in sin know nothing at all of the wisdom of Christ guiding them,
or of the holiness of Christ sanctifying them, or of the fullness of Christ
satisfying them, or of the death of Christ mortifying their lusts, or of the
resurrection of Christ quickening their souls, or of the dominion of Christ
reigning in their hearts. O what a misery is this!

All this you may say is true to a Christless soul; but what evil to him that
may have a title to Christ, and yet minds not Christ, makes not use of Christ,
does not look unto Jesus?

Such a case I confess may be; yea, as many Duties are neglected by some godly,
so this main Duty is (I may tremble to think it) exceedingly neglected. But, O
the sin, and sadness of those souls! O the wants attending such poor creatures!
Consider them in these particulars.

1. They have not that wisdom, knowledge, discerning of Christ, as otherwise
they might have. By looking, and serious observing of Christ, we gain more, and
more knowledge of Christ; but if we will not look, how should we understand
those great mysteries of grace? nor speak I only of speculative knowledge, but
more especially of practical and experimental; without looking on Christ, we
cannot expect that virtue should go out of Christ; there is but a poor
character or cognizance of Christ upon them that are such; they have not so
clear, and comfortable, and inward, and experimental a knowledge of Jesus
Christ.

2. They do not so taste the goodness of Christ, as otherwise they might;
Christ is no other unto them, whilst neglected by them, but as an eclipsed
Star, with whose light they are not at all affected; Christ is not sweet to
them in his Ordinances, they find not in them that delight and refreshment,
that comfort and contentment, which they usually minister: they cannot say of
Christ as the Spouse did, I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was sweet to my taste; Cant. 2.3.
they are in the case of Barzillai, who could not taste what he did eat, or
what he did drink; nor could hear any more the voice of singing-men, or of
singing-women: so they cannot taste the things of God, nor hear the spiritual
melody which Christ makes to the souls of them that look up to him.

3. They have not that love to Christ, which Christ's beholders have; they
meditate not upon Christ, as lovers on their love; they delight not themselves
in Christ, as the rich man in his treasure, and the bride in the bridegroom,
which they love; their thoughts are rather on the world than Christ; their
palates are so distempered, that they have no pleasure in the choycest wine,
they cannot say that their souls long after him; and no wonder, for how should
they love Christ, who turn their eyes from him who is the fairest of ten
thousands to other objects? Surely they have no flaming, burning love to
Christ, that will give every base thing a kind of pre-eminence above Christ.

4. They have not that sense of Christ's love, which those that exercise this
Duty have; whilst the soul neglects Christ, it cannot possibly discern the
love of Christ; it perceives not Christ applying the Doctrines of his love to
the conscience: Christ appears not in his banqueting house, he enables not the
soul to pray with confidence, he makes it not joyful in the house of prayer.
And hence it is, that such souls move so slowly in Gods service; they are just
like Pharaohs charrets, without wheels; O they perceive not the Love of Christ,
either in the clear revelation of his secrets, or in the free communication of
his graces, or in the sanctifying and sweetning of their trials, or in sealing
up the pardon of their sins: O they feel not those ravishing comforts, which
usually Christ speaks to the heart, when he speaks from his heart in love. O
the want! O the misery of this want!

5. They have not that experience of the power of Christ, which they have that
are in the exercise of this Duty. Would you know wherein lies the power of
Christ? I answer, in casting down the strong holds of sin, in overthrowing
Satan, in humbling men's hearts, in sanctifying their souls, in purifying their
consciences, in bringing their thoughts to the obedience of Christ, in making
them able to endure afflictions, in causing them to grow and increase in all
Heavenly graces; and this power they partake of, who rightly and experimentally
look up to Christ. But if this Duty be neglected, there is no such thing; hence
we call this, the Duty of Duties, the chief Duty, the especial Duty; and for
all other Duties, Means, Ordinances, if Christ be not in them, they are nothing
worth; In every Duty this is the essential part, that we look through all, unto
Jesus; it is only from Christ, that Virtue and Efficacy is communicate in
spiritual Ordinances; there were many people in a throng about Christ, but the
infirm woman that touched him, was she alone that felt efficacy come from him;
we see many attend the Ordinances, frequent the Assemblies, but some few only
find the inward power of Christ derived unto their souls. They that neglect, or
are grossly ignorant of this great mystery of looking unto Jesus, are no beter
then strangers to the power of Christ.

6. They have not that sense of the worth and excellency of Christ, that are
unacquainted with this Duty; they are not so ravished with his Beauty, they are
not so taken with the Sweetness and Pleasantness of the Face of Christ; he is
not the fairest of ten thousands in their eyes; and hence it is, that they do
not take pleasure, long after, delight or joy themselves in Christ: indeed
these affections are the Evidences of our high esteem; they that rejoice not in
Christ, nor have any longings after Christ, they put a very unworthy price upon
Christ.

7. They have not that sense either of their own wants, or of the worlds
vanity, who are not in the practice of this Duty. In this glass we see that man
is blind, and no Sun but Christ can Enlighten him; that man is naked, and no
garment but Christ's can cloth him; that man is poor, and no treasure but
Christ can make satisfaction for him; that man is empty, and none but Chrst can
fill him; that man is distressed, perplexed, tormented, and none but Christ can
quiet him. Why? all this, and much more than this appears in this glass of
Jesus: the soul that looks here, cannot but comprehend an end of all other
perfection; yea, the further it looks on the creature, the deeper and deeper
vanities it discerns. But alas! there is no observation, no sense, no feeling
either of man's wants, or of the worlds vanity, or of any suitable good in
Christ, to them that are not in this Divine and Spiritual contemplation.

Thus far of their wants, that neglect this Duty of looking unto Jesus.

SECT. VI. Motives from our riches, in case we are lively in this Duty.
2. FOr our riches, in case we are lively in this Duty: Oh the blessed incomes
to such souls! we may reckon up here those very particulars which the others
wanted. 1. That Christ gives Light unto them; as the receiving of the Sun gives
light to the body, so the receiving of the Sun of Righteousness gives light, a
spiritual, heavenly, and comfortable light to their souls. 2. That Christ gives
grace and holiness unto them; of his fullness we receive grace for grace. As the
print upon the wax answers to the seal, or as the characters upon the Son
answers to the Father; so there are certain stamps of the grace of Christ upon
the Saints, that what good they do, it springs not from external motives only,
as in hypocrites, but from Christ working in them an inward principle of new
nature; and upon this account does John John 1.17
tell us, the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
3. That Christ gives contentation or satisfaction unto them: as the pearl
satisfied the Merchant in the Parable with treasure, so Christ satisfies the
soul with wisdom in the understanding, with the sense of his love in the
heart, with sure and blessed peace in the conscience; they that rightly look
unto Jesus, may say as Jacob did, Luke 2.32
I have enough. 4. That Christ gives glory unto them; he is the glory of
Israel, he is both the Author, and the matter of their glory; he is the glory
of their justification, as the garment is the glory of him that wears it; he is
the glory of their redemption, as the ransomer is the glory of the captive: he
is the glory of their sanctification, as Jordan cleansing him from his leprosy
was the glory of Naaman; he is their all in all, in whom they glory, and to
whom they give all honor, and glory, and power, and praise. 5. That Christ
gives peace unto them, God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, he
is the Author, 2 Cor. 5.29 Ephesians. 2.14. Acts. 10.36
and the world is the object of this reconciliation. Christ is our peace; and
peace is preached by Jesus Christ; they that hear Christ in the Word, or that
look unto Christ by the eye of faith, they have this peace; for Christ only in
Ordinances is the revealer, and procurer, and the worker of peace in all the
children of peace. 6. That Christ procures acceptance with God for them; he
stands betwixt God and such believers; and as they mind him, so he is ever
mindful of them, pleading their cause, answering all the accusations of Satan,
and praying to his Father in their behalf. 7. That Christ gives life unto them;
he that has the Son, has life; 1 John 5.11.
he that has Christ in his heart as a root of life living in him, or as a King
setting up his throne within him, or as a Bridegroom betroathing himself in
loving kindness to him, he has life, the life of grace, and the earnest of the
life of glory. 8. That Christ gives wisdom unto them, Christ has in him all
the treasures of wisdom, and therefore he that looks most to Christ is the
wisest man in the world; he that has the Sun, has more light than he that
has all other lights in the world, and wants the Sun. 9. That Christ gives a
taste of his goodness unto them; they cannot look unto him, but he makes them
joyful with the feeling of himself and Spirit: and hence it is that many times
they brake out into Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, Ephesians. 5.19
and make melody in their hearts unto the Lord. O there is a goodness of
illumination, regeneration, sanctification, consolation, contentation,
pacification, and spiritual freedom flowing from Christ to the souls of his
Saints, which to carnal men is a sealed Well, whose waters their palates never
tasted. 10. That Christ gives a sincere and inward love of himself unto their
hearts. No sooner is their eye of faith Looking unto Jesus, but presently their
hearts is all on fire; such a sutableness is betwixt Christ and their souls, as
is betwixt the hearts of lovers; their love to Christ is like the love of
Jonathan to David, a wonderful love, and passing the love of women; 2 Samuel 1.26
they love him as the bridegroom to whom their souls are married, as the
choycest pearl by whom they are enriched, as the Sun of consolation, by whose
beams their souls are comforted, as the fountain by whom their hearts are
refreshed, and their desires every way satisfied. 11. That Christ gives the
sense of his own love to them; they cannot look on Christ, but they see him
loving, and embracing their humble souls; they see him binding up their broken
hearts; they behold him gathering to himself, and bearing in the bosom of his
love, and comforting with the promises of his Word their wounded spirits; they
behold him like Jacob serving in the heat and in the cold for Rachel, serving
in manifold afflictions from his cradle to his cross, to make a Spouse unto
himself. 12. That Christ gives the experience of his power to them; they that
look on Christ, do feel the power of Christ inwardly in their souls, dissolving
the works of Satan, casting down his Kingdom, and mighty holds within them,
healing all their spiritual maladies, sustaining them in all afflictions,
filling their souls with all Spiritual and Heavenly might, making them strong
in knowledge, and strong in faith, and strong in love, and strong in motion, and
coming to Christ, as a river of much waters is strong in coming home to the
Ocean. 13. That Christ gives the sense of his own worth and excellency unto
them, they see now in Christ is wisdom surpassing the brightness of the Sun,
even all the treasures of wisdom; in Christ is power excelling the strength of
rocks, he is not only strong, but strength it self; in Christ is Honor
transcending all the Kings of the earth, for he is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; in Christ is beauty excelling the Rose of Sharon, and Lilly of the
valleys, he is fairer than all the flowers of the field, than all the precious
stones of the earth, than all the lights in the firmament, than all the Saints
and Angels in the highest heavens. 14. That Christ gives the sense of their
wants, and of the worlds vanity, and of his suitable goodness unto them, In
looking unto Jesus they see themselves in themselves miserable, and all other
things miserable comforters: they have learnt the meaning of that Psalm, Psalm.
146.3, 4.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man and in whom there is no
help, his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that very day his
thoughts perish; happy is the man that has the God of Jacob for his God, whose
hope is in the Lord his God. 15. That Christ gives all things, every thing unto
them. All things are yours (says the Apostle) whether Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. All
things are yours; First, all the Ministers of Christ from the highest to the
lowest, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas; they are your servants, they are
men that watch over you for your salvation. Secondly, the world is yours;
indeed the world stands but for your sakes, if your number were but once
completed, quickly would the world be set on fire: you will say, ay! but how
is the world ours? we find not this, for who has the world at will? why,
though you have not, yet the misery you find in the world, the want of wealth
as well as the enjoying of it is yours, (i e.) it tends to your advantage.
Thirdly, life is yours, it is a fitting, a preparing, a squaring of you for a
better life, even for eternity. Fourthly, death is yours; for you shall die
just then when it is best for you, death shall serve but as a servant to your
advantage. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Fifthly, things present, and things to come, are yours; godliness has the
promise of this life, and of that which is to come. Sixthly, I will add, the
Lord himself is yours, take God, and look on him in his greatness, in his
mighty power, even this great God, the Lord of heaven and earth, is yours, he
is yours, and all that he has is yours, and all that he does is yours, and all
that he can do is yours, I will be thine (says God to Abraham) I will be to
thee an exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1.
Here is a Catalogue, an Inventory of a Christians riches; have Christ and have
all; when an Heathen was but asked; where all his treasure was, he answered,
where Cyrus my friend is: and if any ask you, where all your treasure is, you
may answer, where Christ your friend is; in this respect you may truly say,
Ephesians. 3.8.
there is no end of your riches, they are called the unsearchable riches of
Christ; Paul could find no bottom of these riches; O who would not look unto
Jesus? If Christ be yours (besides those particulars enumerated in this Text,
(1 Cor. 3.22, 23.) God is yours, the Father is yours, the Son is yours, the
Spirit is yours, all the promises are yours; for in Christ they are all made,
and for him they shall be performed. Come, let the proud man boast in his
honor, and the mighty man in his valor, and the rich man in his wealth; but
let the Christian pronounce himself happy, only happy, truly happy, fully
happy, in beholding Christ, enjoying Christ, having Christ, in Looking unto
Jesus.

You have the Motives of our wants, in case of neglect: and of our riches in
case we are active, frequent, serious, and lively in this Duty. But for our
further encouragement to fall upon it, I shall add a few Motives more.

SECT. VII. More Motives to encourage us in this work.
1 COnsider your looking on Jesus will maintain your communion with Jesus; and
is not this worth the while? Why Christians! what is this communion with
Christ, but very heaven aforehand? hereby we enjoy his person, and all sweet
relation to his person, his death, and all the saving fruits, privileges, and
influences of his death; hereby we are brought into Christ's banqueting house,
Cant. 2.4.
held in his galleries, his banner over us being love: hereby we are carried up
into the Mount with Christ, that we may see him (as it were) transfigured, and
may say with Peter, Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us here build
Tabernacles. Oh it is an happy thing to have Christ dwell in our hearts, and for
us to lodge in Christ's bosom! Oh its an happy thing to maintain a reciprocal
communication of affairs betwixt Christ and our souls! as thus; he bare our
sins, take we his healing: he endured wounds for us, drink we the spiritual
balsom that sprang out of his wounds; he took upon him our unrighteousness, do
we cloth our selves with his righteousness: he endured pains for us, come we
to him, and take his rest to our souls; he embraced our curse and condemnation,
do we embrace his blessing, justification, and salvation. To this end do we
look on Jesus, if he hide his face by desertions, rest not till we find him; if
we find him, hold him fast, let him not go, disturb him not out of our hearts
by our corruptions. Thus if we would prize the presence of Christ, how
comfortably should we maintain and increase our Communion with Christ.

2. Consider, that your daily necessities call for a frequent looking up unto
Jesus; you have need of Christ, you have need that he pray in you, and need
that he pray for you to your heavenly Father; you have need that he work in
you, and need that he work for you his own blessed will; you have need that he
present you and yours blameless before his Fathers presence in life, and death,
and at the judgment day; there is not a moment in your life, wherein you stand
not in continual need of Jesus Christ; And can a hungry man forget his bread?
can the heart that pants for thirst forget the River? can a man in bonds forget
freedom? can a child in distress forget a Father in honor and wealth? Oh then
let your necessities drive you to Christ; and mind you of Christ; Is not he the
fountain that supplies all wants? Christians! consult your own Experiences;
when you look up to Jesus, and lean on Jesus, are you not best at rest? O then
why do you not always rest and lean upon him? sometime you say, his Bread is
sweet, and his Cup is pleasant, how amiable is his Presence? At such a time you
have never done wondering at him; O the sweet impression, that are even then on
your spirits! why do you not then always look unto him? or at least, why are
you not frequent in his disciples posture, who looked steadfastly toward Heaven
as Christ went up? Act. 1.10.
How richly might your idle hours, and spare time be laid out here, to the
supply of all necessities, bodily, or spiritual?

3. Consider, that an eye, an heart on Christ, is one of your most
unquestionable Evidences of sincerity. Where your Treasure is, there will your
hearts be also. Matthew. 6.21.
If Christ be your Treasure, your hearts will be on Christ; and surely an heart
set upon God in Christ is a true evidence of saving Grace. External actions are
easiest discovered, but those of the heart are surest Evidences: when thy
learning will be no good proof of thy Grace, when thy arguments from thy tongue
and hand may be confuted, yet then will this Argument from the bent of thy
heart prove thee sincere. Take a poor Christian that has a weak judgment, a
failing memory, a stammering tongue, yet if his heart be set on Christ, I had
rather die in this man's condition, and have my soul in his souls case, than in
the case of him without such an heart, though he had the most eminent gifts,
and parts, and abilities of any in the world. Christians! as you would have a
sure testimony of the love of God, and a sure proof of your title to glory,
labor to get your hearts on Christ, O look on Jesus. You may be sure Christ
will acknowledge that you really love him, when he sees your hearts are set upon
him.

4. Consider, that your looking on Jesus, will strengthen patience under the
Cross of Christ. This is the very particular Motive of the Text, Heb. 11.1, 2,
3.
Let us run with patience the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus,
the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him
endured the Cross, despising the shame; and is set down at the right Hand of
the Throne of God; for consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your mind. It is storied of a
Martyr, that having offered him a Cup of spirits to sustain him, when he seemed
to faint under his greatest Trial, he returned this answer, My Lord and Master
had Gall and Vinegar given him to drink; as if he had been astonished to see
himself fare better than Jesus Christ. How may it strengthen your patience in
sufferings to think of Christ's patience? What, are you served ill? Ay, but
Jesus Christ was not served so well; can you suffer so much as he has done? I
tell you nay. O then do you stay your murmurings and repinings, bear with
patience the little you endure; and to this end, Consider him that has endured
the contradictions of sinners.

5. Consider, that a through-sight of Christ, will increase your inward joy in
Christ, Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was
glad. Joh 8.56.
A right sight of Christ, will make a right-sighted Christian glad at heart; I
wonder not that you walk uncomfortably, if you never tried this Art of
Christ-contemplation; can you have comfort from Christ, and never think of
Christ? does any thing in the world glad you, when you do not remember it? If
you were possessed of all the Treasure in the Earth, if you had title to the
highest Dignities, and never thought of them, sure they would never rejoice
you. Come look up unto Jesus, fix your eyes, thoughts, and hearts on that
blessed objects, and then you may expect David's experience, Psa 63.5.
my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee upon my bed,
and meditate of thee in the night watches. A frequent access to Christ in a way
of meditation cannot but warm the soul in spiritual comforts. When the Sun in
the spring draws near our part of the earth, how do all things congratulate its
approach? the earth looks green, the trees shoot forth, the plants revive, the
birds sing sweetly, the face of all things smiles upon us, and all the
creatures below rejoice: Christians! if you would but draw near, and look on
this Son of Righteousness, Jesus Christ, what a spring of joy would be within
you? how would your Graces be fresh and green? how would you forget your winter
sorrows? how early would you rise (as those Birds in the spring) to sing the
Praise of our great Creator, and dear Redeemer.

6. Consider that your Eye on Jesus will preserve the vigor of all your
Graces. As the body is apt to be changed into the temper of the air it breaths
in, and the food it lives on, so will your spirits receive an alteration
according to the Objects which they are exercised about. You that complain of
deadness and dullness, that you cannot love Christ, nor rejoice in his loves,
that you have no life in Prayer, nor any other Duty, and yet you never tried
this quickening course, or at least you were careless and unconstant in it;
what, are not you the cause of your own complaints? say, is not your life hid
with Christ in God? O whether must you go but to Christ for it? If you would
have light and heat, why then are you not more in the Sunshine? if you would
have more of that grace which flows from Christ, why are you no more with
Christ for it? for want of this recourse to Jesus Christ, your Souls are as
candles that are not lighted, and your duties are as Sacrifices which have no
fire; fetch one coal daily from this Altar, and see if your Offerings will not
burn; keep close to this reviving Fire, and see if your affections will not
warm. Surely if there be any comfort of hope, if any flames of love, if any
life of faith, if any vigor of dispositions, if any motions toward God, if any
meltings of a softened Heart, they flow from hence; men are apt to bewail their
want of desire, and hope, and joy, and faith, and love to Jesus Christ, whilst
this very duty would nourish all these.

7. Consider, it is but equal that your hearts should be on Christ, when the
heart of Christ is so much on you. Christ is our Friend, and in that respect he
loves us, and bears us in his heart; and shall not he be ours? Surely this is
ill requital; this is a great contradiction to the law of Friendship: But
Christ is our Lord as well as Friend; and if the Lord of glory can stoop so low
as to set his heart on sinful dust, one would think we should easily be
persuaded to set our hearts on Jesus Christ. Christians! do you not perceive
that the heart of Christ is set upon you! and that he is still minding you with
tender love, even when you forget both your selves and him? Do you not find him
following you with daily mercies, moving on your souls, providing for your
bodies, and preserving both! does he not bear you continually in the arms of
love, and promise that all shall work together for your good? does he not give
his Angels charge over you, and suit all his dealings to your greatest
advantage? and can you find in your hearts to cast him by? can you forget your
Lord, who forgets not you? Fie upon this unkind Ingratitude! When the Lord
speaks of his thoughts and respects to us, he gives this language, Can a woman
forget her sucking-child, Isa. 49.15, 16.
that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea, they may
forget, yet will not I forget. Behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my
hands, thy walls are continually before me. But when he speaks of our thoughts
to him, the case is otherwise: Jer. 2 32.
can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire? yet my People have
forgotten me days without number, q. d. you would not forget the clothes on
your backs, you would not forget your braveries, your Ornaments, your Attires,
and are these of more worth than Christ? yet you can forget me day after day.

8. Consider, it is a command of Christ, that we should look to Jesus. Behold
me, behold me; lo I, lo I; A command not only backed with Authority, but
accompanied with special Ordinances appointed to this end: what is Baptism? and
what is the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.24 25.
but the representation of Jesus Christ? Is it not Christ's command in his last
Supper, Do this in remembrance of me? and this do ye as often as ye drink in
remembrance of me? In this Ordinance we have Christ crucified before our Eyes,
and can we forget him? Or, can we hold our eyes off him? can we see the Bread
broken, and the Wine distinctly severed from the bread, and not call to mind
(according to the Scripture) Christ's Agony in the Garden, and on the Cross? can
we take, and eat the bread? and take, and drink the cup, and not apprehend
Christ stooping down from Heaven to feed our souls? At such a time if we forget
the Lord Jesus Christ, it will argue our disaffection, our ingratitude, our
disobedience every way.

Psa 73.28 Psalm 104.34.
9. Consider, it is both work and wages to look up unto Jesus. Hence David
professed, it is good for me to draw near to thee, and my meditation of him
shall be sweet: the word imports a sweetness with mixture, like compound
spices, or many flowers. Every thought of Jesus is sweet and pleasant, nay,
it is better than wine, Cant. 1.4.
we will remember thy love more than Wine; there is more content in
contemplating on Christ, more refreshing to the spirit, than wine gives to the
body, How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God? Psa. 139.17.
look in what kind soever you account a thing precious, so precious are the
thoughts of God and Christ to a man, whose heart is in a right frame. Such a
one loves every glance of Christ, and the more it sees, the more it loves; It
is said of one Eudoxius, that he wished he might be admitted to come near the
body of the Sun, to have a full view of it, though it devoured him; he was
something rash in his wish: but there is something proportionable in a godly
spirit, he so loves Christ, that he could be content to be swallowed up in the
beholding of him. Certainly there is a blessing in this work; when we are bid
to look unto Jesus, it is but to receive from Jesus: is it any thing else but
to call and invite us to look on the most pleasing and delightful object? That
in the beholding of it, it may convey it self unto us, and we be delighted and
filled with it? it is all one as if he should bid us sit down by a well of
Life, and drink; or if he should bid us be as the Angels are, who are blessed
in the beholding of this Jesus; why come then, if this be a blessed work, why
will we unbless our selves? If the work will exalt us, why will we debase our
selves, in not closing with it? If we might live above heaven, why will we live
below? certainly when thoughts of Christ are moving in us, Christ himself is
not far off, he will come, and enter too; and how sweet is it for Christ to
come and take up his habitation in our souls.

10. Consider how the Angels exceedingly desire to look on Jesus: they stoop
down, and pry into the Nature, Offices, and graces of Jesus Christ: which
things (says the Apostle) the Angels desire to look into. He alludes to the
manner of the Cherubims looking down into the Mercy-Seat; this is the study, 1
Pet. 1.12.
yea this is the delight and recreation of the Elect Angels to look on Jesus,
and to look into the several scopes of our salvation by Jesus Christ, to behold
the whole frame, and fabric of it, to observe all the parts of it from the
beginning to the end, to consider all the glorious Attributes of God, his
Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy, all shining and glittering in it like bright
Stars in the Firmament; this I say is their work, yea, this is their Festivity
and Pastime. And shall not we imitate the Angels? shall not we think it our
honor to be admitted to the same privilege with the Angels.

11. Consider that looking unto Jesus is the work of Heaven; V^ta contemplativa
incipit in hoc seculo, proficitur in futu^o. Bern.
it is begun in this life (says Bernard) but it is perfected in that life to
come; not only Angels, but the Saints in glory do ever behold the face of God
and Christ; if then we like not this work, how will we live in Heaven? the
dislike of this Duty is a bar against our entrance; for the life of a
blessedness is a life of Vision; surely if we take no delight in this, heaven
is no place for us.

12. Consider that nothing else is in comparison worth the minding or looking
after. If Christ have not your hearts, who? or what should have them? O that
any Christian should rather delight to have his heart among Thorns and Briers,
than in the Bosom of his dearest Jesus! Why should you follow after drops, and
neglect the Fountain? why should you fly after shadows, and neglect him who is
the true substance? if the mind have its current from Christ toward other
things, these things are not only of less concernment, but destructive: they
are gone far from me, and have walked after Vanity, Jer. 2.5.
and are become vain. How unworthy the world is of the look of Christians,
especially when it stands in competition with Jesus, we have discussed before.

Many other Motives might be given, but let this suffice. I have done with the
exhortation; In the next place I shall lay open to you the particular way of
this Duty, which all this while I have been persuading to.

SECT. VIII. Use of Direction.
IS inward, experimental looking unto Jesus a choice, or an high Gospel
Ordinance? why then some directions how we are to perform this Duty. Practice
is the end of all sound doctrine, and duty is the end of all right faith; now
that you may do what you have heard in some good measure, I shall prescribe the
directions in the next part prescribed.

But first in the work observe those two parts of the Text, the act, and
object; the act is looking unto; and the Object is Jesus. 1. By looking unto,
we mean (as you have heard) an inward experimental knowing, desiring, hoping,
believing, loving, calling on Jesus, and conforming to Jesus: it is not a bare
swiming knowledge of Christ, it is not a bare thinking of Christ; as Christ
has various excellencies in himself, so has he formed the soul with a power
of diverse ways apprehending, that so we might be capable of enjoying those
diverse excellencies that are in Christ; even as the creatures having their
several uses, God has accordingly given us several senses, that so we might
enjoy the delights of them all: what the better had we been for pleasant
odoriferous Flowers, or sweet perfumes, if we had not possessed the sense of
smelling? or what good would language, or music have done us, if God had not
given us the sense of hearing? or, what delight should we have found in meats,
or drinks, or sweetest things, if we had been deprived of the sense of tasting?
so what pleasure should we have had even in the goodness and perfection of God
and Christ, if we had been without the faculty and power of knowing, desiring,
hoping, believing, loving, joying, and enjoying? as the senses are to the body,
so are these spiritual senses, powers, affections to the soul the very way by
which we must receive sweetness and strength from the Lord Jesus.

2. By Jesus, who is the Object of this Act, we mean a Savior, carrying on the
great work of man's salvation from first to last; hence we shall follow this
method, to look on this Jesus, as our Jesus in these several periods. 1. In
that Eternity before all time until the Creation. 2. In the Creation the
beginning of time until his coming. 3. In his first coming, the fullness of time
until his coming again. 4. In his coming again the very end of time to all
Eternity. In every of these Periods, Oh what a blessed Object is before us! Oh
what wonders of love have we to look upon! Before I direct you how to look on
him in these respects, I must in the first place propound the Object: still we
must lay the colors of this admirable beauty before your eyes, and then tell
you the art how you are to look upon them.

You may object, the Apostle in this Text refers this look only to the passion
and session of Christ. Bp. Arde.
But a worthy Interpreter tells you out of these words, That Christ our blessed
Savior is to be looked on at all times, and in all acts; though indeed, then,
and in those Acts more especially. Besides, we are to look unto Jesus, as the
Author and finisher of our Faith; and why as the Author and finisher of our
Faith, but to hint out to us that we are to stand still, and to behold, as with
a steadfast eye, what he is from first to last? You have called us hither (say
they in Canticles) to see your Shulamite, What shall we s^e in him? What says
the Spouse, but as the company of two Armies? that is, many legions of good
sights; an Ocean of bottomless depths of manifold high perfections. Or if these
words be understood of the Spouse and not of Christ, yet how many words do we
find in Canticles expressing in him many goodly sights? Myrrh, Aloes, and
Cinnamon, all the Trees of Frankincense, all the Powders of the Merchants are in
him; he is altogether lovely: he is all every whit of him desirable, he is not
one single Star, but a constellation; there is in him a confluence, a bundle,
an army of glorious sights, all in one cluster, meeting and growing upon one
stalk. There Is many glorious sights in Jesus, I I shall not therefore limit my
self to those two especial ones, but take all those before me I have now
propounded.

And now, if ever, stir up your hearts. Say to all worldly business and
thoughts, as Christ to the Disciples, Matthew 2^.36.
Sit you here while I go and pray yonder. Or as Abraham when he went to
sacrifice Isaac, left his Servants and Ass below the Mount, saying, Stay you
here, and I and the Lad will go yonder, and Worship, and come again to you; so
say to all worldly thoughts, Abide you below, while I go up to Christ, and then
I will return to you again. Christians! your selves may be welcome, but such
followers may not.

LOOKING UNTO JESUS. The Second Book.
Revel. 1.8, 11. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the
Lord; which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. -- I am
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; and what thou see, write in a book,
and send it to the seven Churches.


CHAP. I.
SECT. I. Of the eternal Generation of our Jesus.
WE must Look unto Jesus, the beginner and finisher of our faith: we must
behold Jesus as with a steadfast eye from first to last. As he is Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last, so accordingly we
must Look unto him. 1. He is Alpha, the beginner, (so it is in the Original)
(...), the beginner, the inceptor, the first wheel of our faith, Heb. 12.2. and
of the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls, 2 These. 2.13. 2 Timothy 1.9.
Tit. 1.2. Now Christ may be called a beginner, in respect of the Decree, or
execution. I shall begin with the Decree, wherein he begun before the beginning
of time to design our happiness, for the praise of the glory of his Grace,
Ephesians. 1.6. Many depths are in this passage. To this purpose we told you that
Jesus is Gods Son, and our Jesus, eternally begotten before all worlds. In this
first period we shall look on him, 1. In relation to God. 2. In relation to us.

1. In his relation to God, who shall declare his generation? Isa. 53.8.
He is Gods Son having his subsistence from the Father alone, of which Father
by communication of his essence, he is begotten from all eternity.

For the opening of this eternal generation of our Jesus, we shall consider, 1.
The thing begotten. 2. The time. 3. The manner of begetting. 4. The mutual
kindness and love of him that begets, and of him that is begotten, which brings
forth a third person, or subsistence, which we call the Holy Ghost.

1. For the thing it self, it is Jesus Christ, who must be considered two ways,
as he is a Son, and as he is a God. Now as he is a Son, he is the thing
begotten, but not as he is a God. As he is God, he is of himself, neither
begotten, nor proceeding; the Godhead of the Father, and the Godhead of the
Son is but one and the same thing; and therefore Esientia filiis est a seipsa
and hac ratione, dici potest (...) essentia tamen siliis non est a seipso ideo
sic non est (...).
the Son as he is God, he is God of himself, without beginning even as the
Father; but as he is a Son, he is not of himself, but the Son of the Father,
begotten of him; and hereupon it follows, that the Son is begotten of the
Father, as he is a Son, but not as he is a God.

2. For the time of this generation, it has neither beginning, middle, nor
end, and therefore it is eternal before all worlds; this is one of the wonders
of our Jesus, that the Father begetting, and the Son begotten, are coeternal.
Wisdom in the book of Proverbs (which with one consent of all Divines is said
to be Christ) affirms thus, Prove 8.24.25 2^, 2^
When there was no depths I was brought forth, When there were no fountains
abounding with water; before the Mountains were settled, before the hills was, I
was brought forth; while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor
the highest part of the dust of the world; when he prepared the heavens, I was
there; when he set a compass upon the face of the depth, I was there. And a
little before, ^rov. 8.22, 23
the Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old, I
was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the world was; that is
to say from eternity; for before the world was made, there was nothing but
eternity. It may be alleged to the contrary, that the saying of God the
Father, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psa. 2.7 Acts 13.32, 33
is expounded by Paul of the time of Christ's resurrection. And we declare unto
you glad tidings (says Paul) how that the promise which was made unto the
fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he has
raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, thou art my
Son, this ^ay have I begotten thee. But we distinguish betwixt generation it
self, and the manifestation or declaration of it. Jesus the Son of God from all
eternity was begotten; but when he was incarnate, and especially when he was
raised again from the dead, then was he mightily declared to be Gods Son by
nature. And of this declaration or manifestation of his eternal generation is
that of the Apostle understood.

3. For the manner of this generation of Jesus the Son of God, understand,
there be two manners of begetting; the one is carnal, and outward, and this is
subject to corruption, alteration, and time; the other is spiritual, and
inward, and such was the beginning of the Son of God, of whose generation there
is neither corruption alteration, nor time. Isa. 53.8 Romans 11.33
But alas! how should we declare his generation? O my soul, here thou may
admire, and adore with Paul and David, and cry out, O the depths of the riches
both ^f the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways p^^^ finding out? There is no searching for us into the secret
counsels of God, which he never revealed in his Word; but so far as he has
revealed himself, we shall in sobriety according to the light of the
Scriptures, endeavor a discovery of the manner of this spiritual generation of
the Son of God: as thus, --.

We must consider in God two things, 1. That in God there is an understanding.
2. That in God this understanding everlastingly acts or works.

For the first, that God has a most excellent understanding, or that he is
understanding it self in the highest degree, is very clear; for he that gives
understanding to all his intelligible creatures, must needs have it, and be it
most eminently in himself: if fire be the cause of heat in other things, it
must needs be, that fire is the hottest of any thing; Propter quod unum quodque
tale, illud est magis tal^. Job 12 13 Prove. 8.14
the axiom is common, but the Scripture verifies it, with God is wisdom and
strength, he has counsel and understanding. Nay, that this understanding is
his very being is very plain, Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom, I am
understanding, and I am strength.

For the second, that this understanding in God everlastingly acts or works, is
very clear; for that understanding (which is the nature, essence, and being of
God) is a mere act, or the first act, it is all one with the life of God; now
as all life is active in it self, so the chief life (such as in the highest
degree is to be attributed to God) must needs be active; what is the life of
God, but an essential property, whereby the Divine nature is in perpetual
action, living and moving in it self? and hereof is that speech in Scripture so
often used, Jer. 4.2 Jer. 38.16 Numb. 14.21 Romans 14.21
the Lord lives; hereof likewise is that asseveration or oath so often used by
God, as the Lord lives, and As I Live says the Lord; well then, the
understanding of God being active, or working from all eternity, it must needs
have some eternal object on which it acts or works; every action requires a
suitable object, about which it must act, or be exercised: so then if Gods
understanding act eternally, it must have some eternal object; and if Gods
understanding act most perfectly, it must have some most perfect object to act
upon; and what is that but only God himself? that Gods understanding should
act out of himself, would argue his understanding to act upon that which is
finite and imperfect: Certainly nothing is infinite, eternal, and perfect, but
only himself; and therefore if his understanding will act upon any suitable
object, he must act upon nothing but himself.

And now we come to the manner of this high, mystical, spiritual generation of
Jesus the Son of God. As the understanding of God does act and reflect upon it
self from all eternity, so it works this effect, that it understands and
conceives it self; it apprehends in the understanding an image of that Object
which it looks upon, and this very image is the Son of God. This we shall lay
out by some similitudes. A man's soul (we know) does sometimes muse and meditate
on other things; as it thinks of Heaven, or it thinks of earth; this we call a
right or direct, or emanant thought; but sometimes the soul does muse, or
meditate on it self, as when it thinks of its own Essence, or faculties, or the
like; and this we call a reflect thought; why now the soul understands it self,
now it has some Idea, or image of it self, now it conceives it self; this is
our phrase, it conceives it self. There is not only a carnal, but a spiritual
Conception; as when I understand this or that, I say, I conceive this or that,
I have the Idea, or image of this or that, within my Soul. Or as in a glass, a
man does conceive and get a perfect image of his own face by a way of
reflection; so God in beholding and minding of himself, does in himself beget
or conceive a most perfect, and a most lively image of himself, which very
image is that in the Trinity which we call the Son of God. Thus you read in
Scripture that Jesus the Son of God is called the brightness of his Fathers
Glory, Heb. 1.3.
and the express Image of his person. 1. The brightness of his Fathers Glory,
herein God the Father is compared unto a lightsom body, and God the Son unto a
beam, or splendour sent forth, or issuing out from that glorious body. 2. The
express Image of his Person, herein God the Father is compared unto a seal, and
God the Son unto an impression resulting from the seal; Now look as wax upon a
seal, has the engraven Image of the Seal; so the Son of God (which the Father
has begotten or conceived of his own understanding) is the very Image of his
Fathers understanding; hence not only the Father, but also the Son is called
Understanding it self. I have Counsel and Wisdom, (says Christ) I am
Understanding; Prove. 8.14.
whatsoever the Father is, the Son is; indeed the understanding in men, and the
thing understood, are not usually one and the same, but in God it is all one:
Gods conceivings and begettings are the most inward of all; the Father
conceives of himself, and in himself; and his conceiving is a begetting, and
his begetting abides still in himself, because his understanding can no where
meet with any thing suitable, but that which he himself is; and that conveying
of himself, or begetting of himself is the second subsistence in the Trinity,
which we call the everlasting Son of God.

4. For the mutual kindness and lovingness of him that begets, and of him that
is begotten, we say this brings forth a third person or subsistence in God. Now
for the understanding of this matter, we must consider two things; first, that
in the Essence of God, besides his understanding there is a Will. Secondly,
that this Will does work everlastingly upon it self, as his Understanding does.

For the first, that in the Essence of God, besides his Understanding, there is
a Will, is very clear; for he that gives a will to all rational creatures,
cannot want it himself; how should he be without will, whose will it is that we
will? of necessity it is that there should be some prime or chief will, on
whose will all other wills should depend; but the Scriptures are plain, I am
God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me. Isa. 46.9, 10.
-- My Council shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.

For the second, that this will in God does everlastingly work upon it self, is
clear: for, as does the understanding, so does the will; but the understanding
of God does act upon it self as the chief, and most perfect Truth, therefore
the will of God does will himself as the chief and most perfect good. Indeed
what other suitable Object can the will of God have besides himself? an infinite
will must needs have an infinite good; and in this sense, as our Savior tells
us, there is none good but one, that is God; Mat. 9.17.
hence it is that the will of God, does reflect upon it self, and acquiess in
it self as in an infinite good.

And now we come to the manner of this high, mystical, spiritual procession of
the Spirit from the Father and the Son. As the Will of God does act and reflect
upon it self from all Eternity; so it works this effect, that it delights it
self in the infinite good which it knows in it self; for the action of the
Will is delight and liking; and this very delight which God or his Will has in
his own infinite goodness, does bring forth a third person, or Subsistence in
God, which we call the holy Ghost: So that indeed, if you would know what the
Holy Ghost is, I would answer, it is the mutual kindness, and lovingness, and
joy, and delight of the Father and the Son. The Father by this act of Will does
joy and delight in his Son, and the Son by this act of Will does joy and
delight in his Father; and this is it which the Son says of himself, and of
his Father, Prove. 8 30.
I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, q. d. I was from all
eternity his delight, and he was from all Eternity my delight: the Father (as
it were) from all Eternity aspired in his Will, and Love, and joy unto the Son;
and the Son (as it were) from all Eternity aspired in his Will, and Love, and
joy unto the Father; and from this common desire and aspiring of either Person
the Holy Ghost proceeds, which makes up the whole Tri^^^y of persons.

I shall lay out this by some similitude or resemblance; As when a man looks in
a glass, if he smile, his image smileth too: here is but one face, and yet in
this Unity we may find a Trinity: the face is one, the image of the face in a
glass is another, and the smiling of them both together is a third, and yet all
are in one face, and are of one face, and all are but one face; so the
understanding which is in God is one; the reflection, or image or his
understanding he beholds in himself as in a glass, is a second; and the love
and likeing of them both together, by reason of the will fulfilled, is a third;
and yet all are in one God, and all are but one God. In this Trinity there is
neither first nor last, in respect of time, but all are at once, and at one
instant; even as in a glass the face, and the image of the face, when they
smile, they smile together, and not one before, nor after another. -- For
conclusion of all. As we have the Son of the Father by his everlasting will in
working by his understanding; so we have the Holy Ghost of the love, and joy,
and delight of them both, by the joint working of the understanding and will
together; whereupon we conclude three distinct persons, or subsistences, which
we call the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in one spiritual, yet unspeakable
substance, which is very God himself. -- My meaning is not to insist on the
Father, or the holy Ghost, but only on the Son. Yet thus far I have added, that
you may better understand the manner of this generation of the Son of God;
together with the mutual kindness, lovingness, joy, and delight betwixt the
Father and the Son, even from Everlasting.

SECT. II. Of our Election in Christ before all Worlds.
NOw let us look on Christ in his Relation to us before all Worlds. God being
thus alone himself from everlasting, and besides himself there being nothing at
all, the first thing he did (besides what ye have heard) or the first thing he
possibly and conceivably could do, it was this; a determination with himself,
to manifest his Glory: Or, a purpose in himself to communicate his glory out of
his aloneness everlasting unto somewhat else: I say unto somewhat else, for
what is communication but an efflux, an emanation, an issuing from, or a motion
betwixt two Terms? I have now brought you to the acts, or actions of God in
reference to his Creatures; follow me a little, and I shall anon bring you to
Christ in relation to your selves.

These acts or actions of God were and are. 1. The Decree. 2. The Execution of
the Decree of God. I must open these Terms.

1. The Decree is an action of God, out of the Council and purpose of his own
Will, determining all things, and all the Circumstances, and order of all
things from all Eternity in himself certainly, and unchangably, and yet freely,
Who works all things (says the Apostle) after the Counsel of his own will;
Ephesians. 1.11.
and this work, or action of God is internal, and for ever abiding within his
own Essence it self.

2. The execution of the Decree is an act of God, whereby God does effectually
work in time all things as they were fore-known and Decreed. And this action of
God is external, and by a temporal act passing from God to the Creatures.

Now for the Decree, that is of diverse kinds: As first, There is a Decree
common and general, which looks to all the creatures; and it is either the
Decree of creation, or the Decree of Providence and preservation. 2. There is a
Decree special, which belongs to reasonable creatures, Angels, and Men, it is
called the Decree of Predestination; and it consistss of the Decree of Election
and Reprobation. Concerning the common and general Decrees we have but little
laid down in Scriptures, and it is little, or nothing at all to our purpose;
And concerning the special Decree of Angels, there is not much in Scriptures,
and that is as little also to our purpose; we have only to deal with Men, and
with Gods Decree in relation to Man's Salvation before all Worlds.

And this we call Predestination, or the Decree of Election; which is either of
Christ, or of the Members of Christ. Christ Himself was first Predestined:
This appears by that Saying of God; Behold My Servant whom I uphold, Isa. 41.2.
Mine Elect in whom My Soul delights; I have put My Spirit upon him, he shall
bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles. These very words the Evangelist
interprets of Christ Himself, Matthew. 12.18. Mat. 12.18.
And Christ being Predestinate, the Members of Christ were Predestined in
Him: So the Apostle; According as He has chosen us in Him, before the
Foundation of the World. Ephesians. 1.4.
We are chosen in Christ as in a common Person; He was the first Person Elected
in order, and we in Him. Suppose a New Kingdom to be set up, a New King is
chosen, and all his Successors are chosen in him: Why, God has Erected a
Kingdom of Glory, and He has chosen Jesus Christ for the King of this Kingdom;
and in Him He has chosen us, whom He has made Kings and Priests unto the most
High God. But observe we this of the Apostle; He has chosen us in Him before
the Foundation of the World. 1. He] has chosen, (i.e.) God the Father has
chosen; not that the Son and Spirit chose not also; for if Three of us had but
one Will common to us all, One could not will any thing, which the Will of the
other Two should not also will: But because the Son sustains the Person of one
Elected, and the Spirit is the Witness sealing this Grace unto our Hearts;
therefore the Father only is expressed; as the Father alone is often named in
Prayer, not that the other Persons are not to be prayed unto; but because the
Son is considered as the Mediator, and the Spirit as the Instructor, teaching
us to Pray as we ought; therefore the Father only is expressed.

2. He has chosen us in Him:] This Him] denotes Christ God-man; and this in
Him] notes the same Christ God-man, as the Head and first Elect, in whom, and
after whom, in order of Nature, all His Body are Elected: Mark here the Order,
but not the Cause of our Election; Though Christ be the Cause of our Salvation,
yet Christ is not the Cause of our Election: It is only the Foreknowledge of
God, and His free Love, that is the Cause thereof.

3. He has chosen us in Him before the Foundation of the World.] (i.e.) From
all Eternity; but because within Eternity God does foresee the Things which
are done in time; therefore this Phrase (say some) may be extended not only to
respect the Actual Creation, but the Decree it self of the World's Being; q. d.
He has chosen us in order of Nature, before His Decree did lay the Foundation
of the World. My meaning is not to enter into Controversies; this all grant,
that the ancient Love, which the Lord has born to us in Christ, is not of
Yesterday, but before all Worlds. Paul mentions Grace given us before all
Worlds. 1 Timothy 1.9.
But that which is the most observable in the Text, as to our purpose, is, that
we are chosen in Him. We read of Three Phrases in Scripture speaking of Christ:
Sometimes we are said to have Blessings in Him, and sometimes for Him, and
sometimes through Him. Sometimes in Him, as here, He has chosen us in Him;
sometimes for Him, as elsewhere, To you it is given for Christ His sake; not
only to Believe, but to Suffer; sometimes through Him, as in that of Paul;
Thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Phil. 1.29. 1 Cor. 15.57.
Now Blessings come through Christ, in respect that Christ is a Mediator not
only of Impetration, but Execution; not only obtaining and receiving from Grace
all Good for us, but in executing and applying Efficaciously the same unto us:
And Blessings come for Christ, in respect that Christ does by His Obedience
obtain every good Thing, which in time is communicated to us: And we have
Blessings in Christ, because that in Christ, as a Common Storehouse, every
thing is first placed, which is to be imparted afterward to any of us. And
thus we are chosen in Christ, as in a common Person. This Grace of Election
began first at Christ our Head* and so descends downwards on us His Members.
Christ is the First Begotten amongst all His Brethren, having the Pre-eminence;
Romans 8.29.
or Christ was the Firstborn among many Brethren, the First that opened the
Womb. Christ was sealed, and set apart to be the Prince of our Salvation,
before (in order of Nature) we were Elected. Concerning this Election, or
Predestination of Christ, the Apostle puts all out of question; Who verily was
foreordained before the Foundations of the World, 1 Pet. 1.20.
but was manifest in these last Times for you.

SECT. III. Of that Great Treaty, in Eternity, betwixt God and Christ, to save
Souls.
NOw was it, that God the Father called forth His Son to perform the Office of
the Mediator; that in Him all those that should be Saved, might be Chosen.
Concerning this Call of God the Father in a special sort, the Apostle is clear;
Heb. 5.4, 5.
No man takes this honor unto himself; Heb. 5.4, 5.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron: So also Christ glorified not
himself to be made an High Priest; but He that said unto Him, Thou art My Son,
to day have I begotten Thee, He called Him unto this Honor. Christ thrust not
Himself into this Office; but He came to it by the Will of God the Father, and
by his Appointment: For it pleased the Father by Him to Reconcile all things to
Himself; Col. 1.10, 11. John 6.27.
and Him that God the Father sealed: And why? but the more to assure us of the
good will of God to save us, seeing he has called his Son unto it: For
therefore will he accept of all that Christ should do for us, as that which he
himself has ordained.

And now was it, that God the Son embraced the Call of the Father, and
undertook the Office of Mediator: Heb. 10.7. Isa. 50.5. John 14.31.
Then said I, Lo I come. No question, it was Truth from Everlasting: The Lord
God opened mine Ear, and I was not Rebellious, neither turned away back. And,
As the Father gave Me Commandment, even so I do. No sooner the Father called,
but Christ accepts the Office to which He was designed by the Father: John 6.27.
This is plain by those words, Him that God the Father sealed; sealed by
Ordination, and sealed by Qualification, and sealed by way of Investiture; as
Public Officers are invested in their Places by receiving their Commissions
under Seal. And it must needs be so; because whatsoever the Father wills, John
10.30.
the Son wills also: I and My Father are One, says Christ: How One? Why, One
in Will, and One in Power, and One in Nature. 1. One in Will: That appears in
the words precedent, concerning Christ's Sheep; Ver. 28.
My Father gave them Me, -- and I give unto them Eternal Life: They are both
agreed to save Christ's Sheep; the Father is willing, and Christ is willing:
Look how much the Will of the Father is in it; so much the Will of the Son is
in it: For He and the Father are One. 2. One in Power: That appears likewise in
the words precedent; Ver. 28, 29.
These Sheep shall never perish, (says Christ) neither shall any Man pluck
them out of My Hand: My Father is Greater than All, and no Man is able to pluck
them out of My Father's Hand. Here is first the Power of Christ, and all in Him
engaged for the Salvation of His Sheep; that, if he have any Power in Him, and
be able to do any thing, not one of them shall Perish: And he gives the Reason
of the Prevalency of his Power, from his Father's Power, engaged as much as his
own in this Business; they are alike fast in his Hands, and in his Father's
Hands: For He and the Father are One. 3. One in Nature: And of this, I suppose,
are the words more especially understood: The Father and Son are both of one
Nature, of one Essence, of one Being: And this is not only an Argument that
they did both agree, and were like to agree in that Great Transaction of saving
Souls; but that they can never disagree: Two that essentially have Two Wills,
though for the present agreeing in One; yet they may come to disagree, and will
not the same Thing; but if essentially they have but One Will, it is impossible
then but that they ever must agree. -- So then, the Father from Everlasting
calls the Son to the Office of Mediator: [q. d. Come My Son, the Son of My
Joy, and high Delight; My beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased: There Is a
Thought in My Heart to communicate My Self out of this Aloneness everlasting,
unto somewhat else; and My Thought, or Purpose, or Intention, lies in this
Order: First, I intend My own Glory, then Christ, then the Church, then the
World; thus is My Providence to dispose every thing so much more principally
and timely, by how much it is more Excellent: Next to My Glory, and the
manifestation of it, I will have a Christ; and this Christ shall be the chief
Pattern of the Election of Grace: and next to Christ the Head, I intend a Body,
and this Body I will Predestinate to be made like, or to be conformed to the
Image of My Son. And now behold, I call Thee to the Office of Mediator; Thou
art My Son, to day (even in this Day of Eternity) have I begotten Thee; and to
day (even in this Day of Eternity) do I call Thee to this Honor, Heb. 10.7.
to be an High Priest for ever. And as the Father calls, so the Son from
Everlasting, accepts the Office to which He is designed by the Father: [q. d.
Come, Is that the Voice of My Everlasting Father? John 4.34.
Why, Lo I come; in the Volume of the Book, it is written of Me to do Thy
Will, O God: This is My Mind; yea, and this shall be My Mind for ever: John
5.30.
When I am Incarnate, this shall be My Meat, to do the Will of Him that sent
Me, to finish His Work. Glorious Father, Thy Will is My Will: I seek not Mine
own Will, (as if I had a Will distinct from Thine) but the Will of My Father.
Now therefore, I accept this Honor: Be it to Me, or be it with Me, even as
Thou please. This Call of the Father, Prove. 8.23.
and Answer of the Son, is fully confirmed by that Saying of Christ; I was set
up from Everlasting.

But concerning the Particular Passages of these Treaties betwixt God, and
Christ, to save Souls, I shall show: 1. The Project. 2. The Counsel. 3. The
Foreknowledge. 4. The Purpose. 5. The Decree. 6. The Covenant. We shall find
all these in our first Period, in that Eternity, before all Times, until the
Creation.

SECT. IV. The Project.
THe Project to save Souls, is diversely laid down by Dissenting Brethren. Some
give it in thus: 1. That there should be a Mediator and Redeemer unto Mankind,
considered as fallen in the State of Sin. 2. That all such should be received
into Favor, as shall Repent, and Believe, and Persevere unto the End. 3. That
sufficient and necessary Means of Grace should be offered and administered unto
all Men without Exception. 4. That certain singular Persons should be saved,
whom God foresaw would Repent, and Believe, and Persevere. This way is justly
opposed by Others, who deny God's Acts in Intention, to be in the same order as
we see them in Production: In order of Material Existing, it is granted, that
Christ is Revealed, Promised, and Exhibited after Sin; and that we Repent,
Believe, Persevere before we are Saved: But in order of God's Intention, Christ
is before Sin, and Salvation before Repentance, Faith, Perseverance. The
Apostle reckoned the Order, in which Things exist, thus: 1. The World. 2. You,
The Elect. 3. Christ. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
4. God, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. But he gives us to understand the Order of Intention
thus: As First, God intends His own Glory, then Christ, then the Elect, then
the World. Certainly, it is an hard thing to marshal the Eternal, Immanent Acts
of the Divine Understanding, or Will, into First, Second, Third, Fourth: All
God's Projects are like Himself, Tota simul and perfecta possessio sui.
who is a whole and perfect Possession of Himself together and at once; so as
in Him considered, there is no Prius nor Posterius in any of His acts; but
considered in Effects, or in respect of us, one thing may be said to be First,
Second, or Third in Nature, Time, and Being, before or after another. And thus
in respect of us, we say the End must be in Nature before the Means to the End:
Now the Permission of the Fall, Repentance, Faith, Perseverance, are used by
God as Means to bring some to Salvation: God therefore does first project our
Salvation, and then the Means; and both the End, and the Means, are the Product
of God's Election, or Predestination. Here then is the Project, That God will
glorify His Grace; and to this end He will predestinate Christ, and in Christ
He will choose some of the Sons of Men to Salvation; whom, Eccles. 1.4.
notwithstanding Sin, He will make holy, and without blame before Him in love.
This Project, or Plot, or Design of God, will be further enlarged in the next
Passage, viz. His Counsels.

SECT. V. The Counsel.
OF the Counsels of God concerning Man, before all Worlds, we read in several
Texts. Christ was delivered by the determinate Counsel of God. -- For of a
truth, Acts 2.23.
against thy Holy Child Jesus, whom Thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, Acts 4.27, 28.
and the People of Israel, were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy
Hand, and thy Counsel determined before to be done. Ephesians. 1.11.
And thus the Members of Christ are said to Obtain an Inheritance, being
Predestined according to the Purpose of Him, who works all Things after the
Counsel of His own Will. Of this Counsel of God's Will, we know but little now;
yet this will be made known, when we come to Glory; yea, it will be a great
Part of the Glory of Heaven, for the Lord to make known the Counsel of His
Will; we now know his Will, but we shall then know the Counsel of His Will, and
praise Him to all Eternity for it. This shall be the Glory of the Saints, that
they shall see into the Counsel of God's Will, in choosing them, and calling
them; and passing by others, and letting others go. In the meanwhile, thus far
we may know; for thus far He has revealed Himself, concerning His Counsels,
about Man from Everlasting.

1. That Man should be a Reasonable Creature; and because that very Creature is
unavoidably subject to the Creator, (for He made all things for Himself, Prove.
16.4.
and all is to return that Glory to Him, for which He made them) therefore Man
should serve Him as all other Creatures must; only his Service should be after
a reasonable manner, out of Judgment, Psalm. 119.30. Heb. 11.25, 26.
Discretion, and Election: Hence David is said to have chosen the Way of Truth;
and Moses to have Chosen the Afflictions of God's People, and the Reproaches of
Christ, before the Pleasures of Sin, or the Treasures of Egypt. And hence it
is, that Holiness, in the Phrase of Scripture, is called Judgment; He shall
convince the world of Judgment; John 16.11. Mat. 12.20.
and he shall bring forth Judgment unto Victory; and hence it is, that our
Service is called a Reasonable Service. God would not set any such
determinating Law over the Operations of Man, as over other Creatures, that so
he might truly work out of Judgment, and stand or fall by his own Election.

2. That if Man should deviate from this Reasonable Service, and break the Law
which God would give, and which he himself should have an Original Power to
perform, that then he should incur the Displeasure of God; and such a Curse,
and such a Penalty should be inflicted. And here comes in the Fall of Man into
God's Consideration; He looks upon it as a wilful transgression of his Law; and
by how much the Law was more just, and the obedience more easy, by so much he
judges the transgression more unreasonable, and the punishment more certain and
intolerable.

3. That Sin should not pass Unrevenged; and that for these reasons. 1. Because
of Gods infinite hatred thereof, Hab. 1.13.
He is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil; He cannot look on Iniquity; it
provokes a Nauseousness and Abhorrency in him; For all these are things which I
hate, Zach. 8.17.
says in the Lord, -- They are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. 2.
Because of his truth, Genesis 2.17.
he has said; In the day thou eatest thereof thou s^al^ surely die, or thou
shall dying die; die Temporally, and die Eternally; and surely God will in no
wise abolish this Law, Matthew. 5.8.
One jot or tittle shall in no wise pass from the ^aw till all be fulfilled. 3.
Because of his terror and fearful Majesty, for God will have Men always
tremble before him, and by his terror to be persuaded from sinning. 2 Cor.
5.11. Matthew. 10.28.
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men; and Fear him who is
able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell; I say unto you, Heb. 12.28, 29.
f^ar him: and Let us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with
Reverence and Godly Fear; for God is a Consuming Fire. Upon these Reasons God
is resolved, Sin shall not pass unrevenged, lest thereby His Justice should be
securely abused, his Hatred against Sin the less declared, His Truth
questioned, and His dreadful Majesty by Men neglected.

4. That every Man, notwithstanding Sin, should not be utterly destroyed; and
that for the^e Reasons: 1. Because of that infinite Delight, which the Lord
has in Mercy: Why this Delight is it that so disposes Him to pardon
abundantly, and to exercise Loving Kindness on the Sons of Men; Psalm. 103.8.
Who is a God like unto Thee, that pardonest Iniquity, and passest by the
Transgression of the Remnant of Thy Heritage? Thou retainest not Thy Anger for
ever, Jer. --
because Thou delightest in Mercy. And, I am the Lord, which exercise
Loving Kindness, Judgment, and Righteousness in the Earth; for in th^se things
I delight, says the Lord. 2. Because of that Delight, which God has to be
actively glorified by His Creatures, voluntary Service and Subjection: John
10.18. Ezekiel. 33.11.
Herein is My Father glorified, if ye bear much Fruit; and, I have no Pleasure
in the Death of the Wicked, but that he turn from his Way, and live. He
delights most in unbloody Conquests, when by His Patience, and Goodness, and
Forbearance, He subdueth the Hearts, Affections, and Conscienc^s of Men unto
Himself: He esteems Himself more glorified in the Services, than in the
Sufferings of Men; and therefore in this Eternity, he resolves not to destroy
all Men, lest there should be no Religion upon the Earth: When the Angels fell,
they fell not all, many were still left to glorify Him actively in their
Service of Him; but when Adam fell, all Mankind fell in him; so that there was
no Tree in all this Paradise lest to bring forth any Fruit unto God: And this
is most certain, that God would rather have His Trees for Fruit, than for
Fuel: Hence He resolves, that Mankind, notwithstanding Sin, should not be
utterly destroyed.

Hereupon the Trinity calls a Counsel; and the Question is, What is to be done
with poor Man? The Learned here frame a kind of Conflict in God's holy
Attributes, and by a Liberty, which the Holy Ghost from the Language of Holy
Scripture, does allow them, they speak of God after the manner of Men, as if he
were reduced unto some Straits and Difficulties, by the cross Demands of His
several Attributes. Justice calls upon Him for the Condemnation of a Sinful,
and therefore worthily Accursed Creature; which Demand is seconded by His
Truth, to make good that Threatening; In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall die the Death. Mercy, on the other side, pleads for Favor and Compassion
toward Man, woefully seduced, and overthrown by Satan; and this Plea is
seconded by Love and Goodness, and the like Attributes: at last, when the
Business comes to Determination, Wisdom finds out a way, which the Angels of
Heaven gaze on with Admiration and Astonishment, how to reconcile these
different Pleas of his Attributes together. A Jesus is resolved on, One of the
same Blessed Trinity, who by His Father's Ordination, His own voluntary
Susception, and the Holy Spirits Sanctification should be fitted for the
Business. To this purpose this Jesus should be both a Surety, and an Head over
sinful Men; a Surety to pay Men's Debts unto God, and an Head to restore God's
Image unto Man: And thus in Him Mercy and Truth have met together,
Righteousness and Peace have Kissed each other. Psalm. 83.10.


This is the great Mystery of the Gospel; this is that which the Angels (as I
tell you) pry into; nay, this is that which the Angels and Saints too shall
admire, and bless God for, to all Eternity; this is that which set the infinite
Wisdom of God on work from all Eternity. If all the Angels in Heaven, and all
the Men in the World, had been put to it to find out a way to answer this
question, how shall sin be pardoned, the sinner reconciled, and God glorify his
justice? they could never have done it; this cost God dear, it cost him the
heart-blood of his own Son, and that is a sure sign, that Gods heart was much in
it; and indeed we are not Christians, until in some measure we see, and have
our hearts taken with the glory of God in this mystery. O the wonder of Heaven
and Earth! here is the case, man is fallen through sin, and ever since the fall,
man and sin are as inseparably joined together as fire and heat; yet God will
have mercy on the man, and he will take vengeance on the sin; the Eternal
Wisdom of God, has found out a way to translate this man's sins on another
Person, who is able to bear them, and to interest this man's person in another
Righteousness, which is able to cover him; so that now all is one in regard of
man, as if the Law had been utterly abrogated; and all is one too, in regard of
God, as if the creature had been utterly condemned. And all this is done in our
Jesus; on him was executed the curse of the Law, by him was fulfilled the
righteousness of the Law, for him was remitted the sin of man, and through him
were all things made new again: the world was in Christ as in its Surety,
making satisfaction to the Justice of God; and God was in Christ as in his
Ambassador, Romans 11.33.
reconciling the world unto himself again. (...): O the depths of the riches
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God: how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out? You have seen the Project, and the counsels of
God for man's salvation, before all worlds, Romans 11.34.
it is but dimly, for who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his
Counselor?

SECT. VI. The foreknowledge.
OF the knowledge of God in this respect we read in Scriptures, Acts 2.23. Romans
8.29. Romans 11.2 1 Pet. 1.2.
Christ is said to be delivered by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledg of
God. And it is said of Christ's members, the called according to his purpose,
whom he did foreknow: and elsewhere in the same Epistle, God has not cast away
his people, which he foreknew. And Peter writes to the strangers Elect,
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father. Understand, that
foreknowledge is ascribed to God in respect of the creature properly; but in
respect of God there is nothing past, nothing to come; all things past, and all
things to come are present to him, and therefore in that sense he cannot be
said to foreknow any thing. Now the Lord in respect of us is said in Scripture
to foreknow things or persons two ways. Psalm. 139.16.


1. Generally, by a general knowledge, of which David's speaks; thine eyes did
see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my members were
written, which in continuance, were fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them.

2. Specially, by a more special foreknowledge, which is a knowledge with love
and approbation; the very same which barely comprehends that we call
Election; Romans 9.13. 2 Timothy 2.19 Romans 11.2.
so Gods choosing is expressed by loving: Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated. And this is that which the Apostle speaks of, the Lord knows who are
his, (i.e.) the Lord from everlasting knows his with love, and with
approbation, has God cast away his people which he foreknew? (i.) which he
before loved and approved? hence we gather that after the Project was laid, and
the Councels of God were agreed upon it, then God foreknew, or foresaw whom to
embrace in his eternal love as his own. At one act he foreknew whom he would
choose, and set apart of his own free love to life and salvation. And here you
have the cause of Gods predestinating his Saints to glory, it was only the
foreknowledge, and free love of God: the Lord from everlasting, and before the
foundation of the world, foreordained or fore-appointed some to salvation,
nothing moving him thereunto but his own good pleasure and his own free love.
This is it that in order of nature, and strictly goes before, and is the cause
of our Predestination; Romans 8.27.
for whom he did foreknow, he also did Predestinate; first he foreknew, and
then he did Predestinate; first he loved, and then he Elected; first he
embraced them as his own in the Arms of his eternal love, and then of his free
love he set them apart to life, and to salvation: hence the Apostle calls it
the Election of Grace, Romans 11.5
signifying that our Election springs out of the womb of love, free love, free
grace is the cause of our Election.

Some Object, that we are Predestined and Elected according to
foreknowledge, (i.e.) say they, according to the foreknowledge of our Faith,
and Repentance, and Perseverance; Romans 8.29
but if that were Paul's foreknowledge, why then would he say, that those whom
he did foreknow, he also did Predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his
Son? if God did foreknow them first conformed, why did he then Predestinate
them to be conformed? And if that were Peter's foreknowledg, why then would he
say, that they were Elect according to the fore-knowledg of God the Father --
unto Obedience? 2 Pet. 1, 2
if God did foreknow them first Obedient, how then did he foreknow them unto
Obedience? I know it is a question, whether God in foresight of belief, and
perseverance in Faith and Holiness, do choose us to Salvation? For my part, I
am for the Negative, upon these well-known grounds.

1. Because Election on Faith foreseen, makes God to go but of himself, looking
to this or that in the Creature, upon which his will may be determined to
Elect; now this is against the all sufficiency of Gods knowledge, as if he
should get knowledge from the things we know, and against the all sufficiency
of Gods Will; as if he must be beholding to something in us, before the
business of our Election can be determined.

2. Because Election on Faith or Love foreseen, it makes God to choose us when
we have chosen him, and to love us when we have loved him first; but this is
contrary to Scripture, 1 John 4.19. Verse 10.
We love him because he loved us first; -- and herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins.

3. Because Election on faith foreseen, stands not with the freedom of Gods
Will within himself, Romans 9.15
but God tells us plainly, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. John Goodwins exposition
on Romans 9.15, 16.
I know some would not have this Text understood of Election from Eternity, but
of Justification, Adoption, Salvation, and yet they grant the truth of it to be
alike, whether in reference to Election or Justification: the words, I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, are one and the same with those words
spoken by God to Moses, Exodus 33.19
I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious; Now to be gracious, as is
confessed, properly imports a propenseness of mind and will to do some signal
good without any motive or engagement thereunto from without, especially from
the person or persons to whom this good is done, or intended; which is a plain
Argument, that I will have mercy, is not of that kind of mercy, the exercise
whereof is drawn out, or procured by any thing whatsoever in those to whom it
is showed, but because it pleases it self, or him in whom it resideth so to
do; and in this respect mercy differs very little, or nothing at all from grace:
the Apostle exchanging Moses his words, was but his Interpreter.

4. Because Election on Faith foreseen, is all one as to say, we are ordained
to Eternal Life because we believe; Acts 13.48.
but the Scripture speaks contrary, as many as were ordained to Eternal Life
believed, and not as many as believed were Ordained to Eternal Life.

5. Because a prime and Eternal cause cannot depend upon the self-same temporal
effects which are thereby caused; Now, Election is the prime and eternal Cause
whence our Faith, Repentance, and Perseverance were derived; and therefore our
Faith, Repentance, and Perseverance cannot be imagined antecedent Causes,
Conditions or Motives unto the Divine Election.

6. Because Election on Faith foreseen, or Election of men believing and
persevering in Faith and Holiness unto the last gasp, brings with it many
absurdities. As, 1. This is to Elect men, not considered as in the State of
Innocence, nor of Misery, but as in state of Grace, contrary to their own
Tenets. 2. This is not to bring Faith, Holiness, Perseverance out of the
gracious benefit of Election, but to bring Election out of the foreseen Acts of
believing, E^cles. 1.4.
obeying, persevering, quite contrary to Scriptures; he has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in Love. 3. This were to say that Election or Predestination affords
no man any help at all, in the way unto Eternal Salvation; for how can that be
the cause leading infallibly in the way unto Eternal Life, which comes not so
much as into consideration, until a man have run out his Race (at least in Gods
foreknowledge) in Faith, and Godliness, and be arrived at Heavens Gates? Such
a falsely named Predestination might more truly and properly have been called a
Post-destination. But I have too long stood on this Controversy; 1 Timothy 1.4.
and indeed it is against my design, which is not to minister questions, but
rather, edifying, which is in Faith. I remember what I have Read, and indeed I
begin already to feel, that these Controversal Points will but discompose our
spirits, and wast our zeal, our love, our delight in Jesus (this lovely
subject, and object we are a viewing) even by the interruption and diversion of
our contemplations: not a word more in that Kind.

SECT. VII. The Purpose.
OF the Purpose of God concerning man's salvation before all worlds, we read in
Scriptures; we know that all things work together for good to them that love
God, Romans 8.28
to them who are called according to his purpose And it is said of Jacob and
Esau, that being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the
purpose of God according to Election might stand. And in Christ we are said to
obtain an inheritance, Romans 9 11
being predestinate according to the purpose of him who works all things
after the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11
And elsewhere the Apostle speaks of the manifold wisdom of God according to
the eternal purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. And again, he
has saved us and called us with an holy calling, Ephesians. 3 1 2 Timothy 1.1
not according to our works but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. All these hold forth this
truth, That God purposed in himself from all eternity to bring them, whom he
foreknew, to life, and to salvation. This purpose of God in order of nature
comes before predestination, Ephesians. 1.11
in that we are said to be predestinate according to his purpose, and yet it
must needs follow after his foreknowledg and counsel; for first, he loves
before he will purpose, and every purpose is established by counsel; yea
without counsel, purposes (says the wise man) are disappointed; why then,
first he counsels (I speak after the manner of men) and then he foreknows;
Prove. 20.18 P^ov. 15.22.
(i.e.) either he knows whom he will choose, for God does not blindly choose he
knows not whom; or else he sets his love to life on some, he knows them with a
knowledge of approbation, and then he settles a purpose to bring them to life,
whom he so foreknows in that especial and unspeakable way.

This purpose of God speaks our stability and certainty of salvation in Christ:
when God once purposes, it is past altering: Surely as I have thought, so
shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed (says God) so shall it stand;
Isa 14.24.
you may write upon it that Gods purposes are immutable. Would not Paul lightly
alter purposes taken up by him; when I therefore was thus minded (says he) did
I use lightness? or the thing that I purpose, 1 Cor. 1.1^
do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea,
and nay, nay? would not Paul (I say) alter his purpose? and will God think you
alter his? methinks this word speaks to me, as if I heard God say from all
eternity, it is my purpose to save a remnant of mankind; though all are lost by
sin, yet my wisdom has found out a way to choose out some; and though those
some, those few I have purposed to save, stand in very slippery places, yet I
will be the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Heb. 13 8
I foresee indeed many thousands of failings and exasperations, to alter the
purpose that I have toward my people, I foresee their daily provocations of my
justice; I foresee their many lusts within, and their many enemies without; I
foresee that grace inherent I will give them to be as mutable to all the
progeny as in their father Adam; and if I leave them in the hands of their own
council, they cannot but depart daily from me, even as water, though it could
be made as hot as fire, yet being left unto it self, it will quickly reduce,
and work it self to its own original coldness again: I foresee them in their
best condition, at full Sea, at their highest tide of grace, to be as
changeable and movable several ways as wheels; to be as perplexed, hindered,
and distracted in themselves, as cross wheels in one another; grace swaying one
way, and flesh another way, and what stability can I think in such? why yet
(says God) yet I purpose to bring this little flock to heaven; my purpose is
in, and from my self; and I am God and not man, and therefore I cannot repent,
nor call in the purpose which now I have; have I said, and shall not I do it?
have I spoken, Numb. 23.15
and shall I not make it good? yes, yes, my purposes must stand, and for this
purpose I will set my Son betwixt my people and my self; so that if they sin, I
will look on him, and by that means I will see no iniquity in Jacob, nor
transgression in Israel; and for this purpose I will join to the wheels the
living creatures, that when the living creatures go, the wheels shall go; Numb.
23.21
and when the living creatures stand, they shall stand; and when the living
creatures are lifted up from the earth, the wheels shall be lifted up against
them, Ezekiel 1.21
for the spirit of the living creatures shall be in the weels: my meaning is,
that my Saints shall not have their stability from themselves, for they are
like wheels: but they shall have it from me, and from my Son, unto whom by the
same spirit of life they shall be united. Thus may I imagine the Lord from all
eternity to say and speak, and purpose with himself, and surely his purposes
must stand upon this account, Rom 11.29
for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

SECT. VIII. The Decree.
THE Decree of God concerning man's salvation before the foundation of the
world, appears in these texts, I will declare the decree (says God); what was
that? why, concerning Christ, Psa 2.7, 8
and concerning the Church, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; ask
of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. It was Gods Decree to give out
of Jews and Gentiles a Church to Christ; and this Decree was made in that day
of eternity, when the Son of God was begotten of his Father. This Decree in
Scripture Phrase has several titles, 1. It is the very same with that which we
usually call predestination; for what is predestination but a Decree of God
concerning the different preparations of Grace, whereby some are guided
infallibly unto salvation? predestination is a Decree both of the means and
end; a Decree of giving Grace, effectual unto some persons here, and of
bringing the same persons unto glory hereafter. This Decree, this
predestination, this golden chain of the means and end, Romans 8 30
is set down by the Apostle, Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. As God has predestined some to life and glory, so he has
predestined them to be called, and justified before they be glorified;
whomsoever the Lord has decreed to save them has he also decreed to sanctify
before they come to enjoy that salvation. Eccles. 1.4
God have chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we
should be first holy, and then hapy. 2 These. 2 13.
See how these are twisted by the Apostle once and again, God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the truth. I have heard of some blasphemous reasonings, if we are
predestinate to be saved, we may live as we list; for howsoever we live though
never so wickedly, yet we shall be saved. O fearful! O devilish reasoning!
surely this comes from the Devil, and not from God, or his Word: Mark here one
of Satan's depths; in outward things he tempts men to distrust God, and to rely
altogether on means: but in heavenly things, and matters of salvation, he
tempts men to lay all on Gods Decrees and Gods purposes, without any regard had
to the means. Such men might as well say, the Lord has appointed that we shall
live to such a time, and till then we shall not die, and therefore what need we
food in health, or physic in sickness? Oh take heed of these reasonings! Gods
Decree does not remove the use of the means, but establish and confirm them. --
2. The Decree is the same with that book of life wherein are written the names
of the Elect; Phil. 4 3 Luke 12 20 Rev. 20.12
Paul tells us of some women, with Clement, and other fellow laborers, whose
names are in the book of life. And Christ bids his Disciples rejoice, because
their names are written in heaven. And John saw in his vision the dead, small
and great, stand before God, and the books were opened, and another book was
opened, which is the book of life. As Captains have a book wherein they write
the names of their Soldiers; and Citizens have a book wherein they record the
names of their Burgesses; So God has his Decree or book of life, in which he
registers all that belongs to him. Exodus 32.32, 33.
Some other texts speak of a book of life, as, blot me I pray thee out of thy
book which thou have written, said Moses in his zeal for Israel; to whom the
Lord answered whosoever sins against me, him will I blot out of my book. But
this was not the book (say some) of Gods eternal Decree, but the book of his
providence; God has a double book, and both in a figure he has a book of his
resolved Decrees, and a book of his acted providence; this latter is but a
transcript, or a copy of the former: those huge original volumes of love and
blessings which God has laid up in his heart for his own people from all
eternity is the book I mean: Indeed this book is writing out every day, by the
hand and pen of providence in the ordering of all those affairs which concern
our salvation. -- 3. This Decree is the very same also with Gods seal; the
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that
are his. A seal is used in three cases; 1. To keep things distinct. 2. To keep
things secret. 3. To keep things safe: In every of these respects Gods Decrees
are seals, but especially in the last; those souls that are sealed by God, they
are safe in the love and favor of God; as when Job tells us that God seals
up the stars, (i.e.) say some, he preserves the stars in their Orbs, in the
places where he has set them they shall never drop out; so God seals up his
Saints, (i.e.) he secures them of the eternal love of God, so that they shall
never drop out of his heart. All these titles speak the immutability of Gods
eternal emminent acts; q. d. I decree, I predestinate, I book it, seal it, that
such and such persons shall be eternally saved; and why all this? but to note
the certainty, and stability of the thing: shall great Monarchs of the earth do
thus? shall they decree, and book, and seal, to show their greatness, and
wisdom, that they could so resolve, as no person or power whatsoever should be
strong enough to cause them to change their resolutions? and shall not I much
more? do not I know, or foresee all that can or will follow? is there any
power, or ever shall be to take them out of my hands? Or is it possible that
ever I should have a relenting thought at the saving of th^se souls? Can any
thing fall out hereafter to make me more provident, more powerful, more wise,
more merciful then now I am? it may be in some things I may will a change, but
can I in any thing truly change my will? no, no, I am the Lord, I change not,
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Mal. 3,


SECT. IX. The Covenant.
THE Covenant concerning man's salvation is the last and main particular I
instanced in: I dare not be too curious to insist on the order of nature; and
the rather, because I believe the Covenant betwixt God and Christ from
everlasting is interwoven with the Decree, foreknowledge, and election above.
So the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world; mark that in
Christ: There was an eternal plot betwixt the Father and the Son; there was a
bargain made (I speak it with reverence) betwixt God and Christ, there was a
Covenant betwixt the Lord and his Son Jesus Christ for the salvation of the
Elect; and of this observe we especially these following Texts.

In Isaiah 49.1, 2, 3, 4. the Prophet seems to set it Dialogue-wise; one
expresses it thus; First Christ begins, and shows his commission, telling God
how he had called him, and fitted him for the work of redemption, and he would
know what reward he should have of him for so great an undertaking. The Lord
has called me from the womb, Isa. 19 1, 2.
from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of my name, and he has made
my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand has he hid me, and made
me a polished shaft; in his quiver has he bid me. Upon this God answers him,
and tells him what reward he should have for so great an undertaking; only at
first he offers low, viz. only the elect people of Israel. And he said unto
me, thou art my servant O Israel, Ver. 3.
in whom I will be glorified; or Israel it is in whom I will be glorified by
thee. Christ who stood now a making his bargain with him, thought these too
few, and not worth so great a labor and work, because few of the Jews would
come in, but would refuse him, and therefore he says he should labor in vain,
if this were all his recompense, then said I, ver. 4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain; and
yet withal he tells God, that seeing his heart was so much in saving sinners,
he would do it howsoever for those few, comforting himself with this, that his
work, or his reward was with the Lord. Upon this God comes off more freely, and
opens his heart more largely to him, as meaning more amply to content him for
his pains in dying; ver. 6.
it is a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribe of
Jacob and to restore the preserved of Israel: that is not worth the dying for,
I value thy sufferings more than so, I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles* that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth. Methinks
I imagine as if I heard God speak unto Christ from eternity: See here I have
loved a remnant of mankind both of Jews and Gentiles with an everlasting love,
I know they will sin and corrupt themselves, and so become enemies to me, and
liable unto eternal death; now thou art a mighty person, able to do what I
require of thee for them; if thou will take upon thee their nature and sins,
and undertake to satisfy my Justice and Law, and take away that hatred that is
in them toward me and my Law, and make them a believing holy people, then I
will pardon them, and adopt them in thee for my sons and daughters, and make
them coheirs with thee of an incorruptible crown of life. And then said
Christ, lo I come to do thy will O God; Heb 10.5.9.
then Christ as it were struck hands with God to take upon him the nature and
sin of man, and to do and suffer for him whatsoever God required of him.
Certainly, this was the whole business of our salvation first transacted
betwixt God the Father and Christ, before it was revealed to us. Hence we are
said, to be given unto Christ, I have manifested thy name (said Christ) unto
the men which thou gave me out of the world, John 17.6
thine they were, and thou gave them me, this very giving implies, as if the
Father in his Eternity should have said to the Son, these I take to be vessels
of mercy, and these thou shall bring unto me, for they will destroy themselves,
but thou shall save them out of their lost estate. And then the Son takes them
at his Fathers hand, and looking at his Fathers will; this is the Fathers will
which has sent me, J^hn 6.39,
that of all which he has given me, I should loose nothing; he thereupon takes
care of such; he would not for a world any of them should be lost which his
Father has given him, they are more dear than so.

In Isaiah 53.10, 11. and in Psalm. 40.7. Christ is brought in as a Surety --
offering himself for us, and readily accepting of Gods will in this very
matter: and hence it is that he is called Gods servant; and his ears are said
to be opened.

Isa. 5.11 Psalm. 40.6 Isa. 42.16
In Isa. 42.6. this very Covenant is expressly mentioned. Thus God speaks of
Christ, Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights:
-- I will give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.
Yea, this Covenant and agreement seems to be confirmed with an Oath, in Heb.
7.28. and for this service Christ is required to ask of God, Psalm. 2 8
and he will give him the heathen for his Inheritance. Observe how the Church
of God is given to Christ as a reward of that obedience which he showed in
accepting of the office of a Surety for us This stipulation some make to be
that counsel of peace spoken of by the prophet, Heb. 7.28
and the counsel of peace shall be between them both, Zach 6.13 ver. 12
(i.e.) between the Lord, and the man whose name is the Branch. And for this
agreement it is, that Christ is called the second Adam; for, as with the first
Adam God plighted a Covenant concerning him, and his posterity, so also he did
indent with Christ and his Seed, concerning eternal life to be obtained by him.
I deny not but that some promises were made only to Christ in his own person,
and not to descend to his children, as, Sit on my right hand until I make
thine enemies thy footstool; Heb. 1.13 Isa. 53.10 Psalm 2.8 Heb. 1.5 Jer. 32 38
and he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, the pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in his hands; and ask of me, and I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. But there are other promises made to him and his; as that grand
promise, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son; it is first
made to him, and then to us: and that special promise of spiritual grace, John
1.16. of justification, Isa. 50.8. of victory and dominion, Psalm. 110.2. of the
Kingdom of glory, Luke 24 26. they are every one first made to him, and then
to us; -- The business from eternity lay thus; here is man lost (said God to
his Son) but thou shall in fullness of time go and be born of flesh and blood,
and dye for them, and satisfy my justice, and they shall be thine for a
portion, and they shall be called the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord,
Isa. 62.12. This shall thou do (said the Father) and upon these terms they
shall live that believe. This was Gods Covenant with the Son of his Love for
us; to whom the Son answered (as it were) again; Psalm. 40.6, 7.
Content Father, I will go, and fulfill thy pleasure, and they shall be mine for
ever; I will in the fullness of time die for them, and they shall live in me;
burnt-offerings, and sin offerings thou have not required, (no, it was
self-offering) then said I, lo I Come, in the volume of the Book it is written
of me, to do thy will O my God. In what Book was it written, that Christ should
come to do the will of God? Not only in the Book of the Law and the Prophets,
but also in the Book of Gods decrees: In this sense the Lamb was slain from the
foundation of the world. Rev. 13.8
His Father from before all time appointed him to be our high Priest, and he
from all eternity subscribed to his Fathers pleasure in it.

In Galath. 3.15. G^l. 3.15.
Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; though it be but a man's Covenant,
yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereto. Now to Abraham
and his seed were the promises made; he says not, and to seeds, as of many,
but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ. There is a question whether
this Covenant here mentioned, was made only betwixt God and Christ, or only
betwixt God and us, or both betwixt God and Christ, and betwixt God and us. The
occasion of this question is in these words, Now to Abraham, Jer. 3.31
and his seed, were the promises made; he says not, and to seeds, as of many,
but as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ. 1. Some argue hence, that there
is no Covenant or promise made to us, but only to Christ, or with Christ;
Christ stood for us, and articled with God for us, and performed the conditions
for life and glory; so that the promises are made all to him: yet this indeed
is confessed, that because we are Christ's, and are concerned in the Covenant,
it is therefore sometimes called a Covenant made with us; I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not that the
Covenant is really made with us, but only with Christ for us; and when we feel
our selves under the Power of the promise, we begin then to know that we are in
that same Covenant. But this is rather (say they) to feel our selves in that
Covenant which God has made with Christ, than to enter into Covenant with God
our selves.

2. Others argue hence, that there is no Covenant or promise made with Christ
personal, but only with Christ mystical, such who are members of Christ, and so
united to Christ; for mark the Text say they) the promise is made first to
Abraham, and then to his seed; this seed is such a seed as comes to have right
to the promise in order from Abraham; now this cannot be Christ personal, but
Christ mystical: And whereas the Text says, the promise is not made to seeds,
but to one seed, which is Christ, John 8 37 Gal. 37.29
they distinguish of a double seed of Abraham; First, there is a carnal natural
seed according to the flesh, and in this sense Christ speaks to those wicked
unbelieving Jews, which went about to kill him. I know ye are Abraham's seed,
but ye seek to kill me. Secondly, there is a spiritual seed that walk in the
faith and steps of Abraham; know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the
same are the children of Abraham. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise; now the promise is made to Abraham
and his seed, not seeds; (i.e.) not to both seeds, both carnal and spiritual,
but only to the one, which is the spiritual, and this seed is Christ, (i.e.)
Christ mystical, the body of Christ, the faithful that are knit to Christ by a
true and lively faith.

3. Others argue hence, that this Covenant is made both betwixt God and Christ,
and betwixt God and us; First, betwixt God and Christ: all the work of
redemption and salvation was transacted betwixt God and Christ before the
foundation of the world, but this does not hinder, but that the same promise is
afterward in time made to us also: Look as it is in Covenants amongst men,
while the child is yet unborn the father takes conveyance of an inheritance for
his child, which he keeps in his own hand till the child be born and come to
years, and then he puts it into his own possession; so it is here, we are for a
time hid in the womb of Gods Election, till we are brought forth by the grace
of regeneration; now during this time we are not in our selves capable of
receiving any promise of life made to us; but it is made to Christ in our
behalf, and he receives the promise from the Father in our stead: but yet so
that when we come to be born anew, the promises are made unto our selves, and
then we are put into possession of them.

Here then is the meaning of the Text, the Covenant is made with Christ; (i.e.)
with Christ, and his heirs; principally with Christ, and with Abraham's nature
in Christ, and yet personally with believers, who are also the seed of Abraham.
All the difference is in that term Christ, what thereby is meant, whether
Christ personal, or Christ mystical, or Christ representative: And we say --

1. Not Christ personal, I mean not Christ's person singly considered, for that,
1. Would fight with the scope of Paul, whose bent it is to prove the promise of
eternal life to be made to all believers: and that, 2. ver. 17. ve^. 8. ver.
14. ver. 13.
Would conclude the promise of eternal life to be given only to Christ, and
not at all to those that are believers in Christ.

2. Not Christ Mystical, for 1. The promise is made to Christ, In whom the
Covenant was confirmed. 2. In whom the nations were blessed. 3. In whom we
receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. 4. Who was made a curse for
us. Now not any of these can agree to Christ mystical; Christ mystical did not
confirm the Covenant, nor bless the Nations, nor give the Spirit, nor was made
a curse.

3. It is Christ representative, Christ-Mediatour, Christ a public person, to
whom the promises were made, for Christ and his heirs, are but all of them one
confederate family; and as the Covenant of works was made with Adam, and all
his: and there were not two Covenants, so here, the Covenant is made with the
second Adam, and his children: But every man in his own order, Christ the
first fruits, 1 Cor. 15.23.
and afterward they that are Christ's.

I have now propounded the Object we are to look unto; it is Jesus in that
eternity before all time until the Creation. Our next business is to direct us
in the Art or Mystery of Grace, how we are to look unto him, in this respect.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus carrying on the Great work of our Salvation in that
Eternity.
LOoking comprehends knowing, considering, desiring, hoping, believing, loving,
joying, calling upon Jesus, and conforming to Jesus. If then we will have an
inward experimental Look upon Jesus, we must act, and exercise all these
particulars.

1. We must know Jesus, carrying on the great work of our salvation in that
eternity before all time. Come, learn what this Jesus is, 1. In his relation to
God, and so he is Gods Son, eternally begotten before all worlds. See above,
and learn it thoroughly, who it is that was begotten, for the person, when it
was for the time, how it was for the manner, and what was the mutual kindness
and love of him that begot, and of him that was begotten: O the height and
depth of this knowledge! 2. Come, learn what this Jesus is in his relation to
us before all worlds, and to that purpose study close that great transaction
betwixt God and Christ for our salvation. 1. Study that project of God, that he
would glorify his grace; and to this end, that he would predestinate Christ,
and in Christ he would choose some of the souls of men, and amongst the rest,
that he would choose thee, whom notwithstanding sin, he would make holy, and
without blame before him in love. 2. Study the counsels of God concerning man
before all worlds: O 'twas an hard question, how sin should be pardoned, the
sinner reconciled, and yet God glorify his justice? none but the wisdom of
God could ever find out a way to have had mercy on the man, and yet to take
vengeance on the sin; but herein appeared the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, he devised the way to translate this man's sin
(suppose thine own sins) on another person, who was able to bear them; and to
interest this man's person (suppose thine own self) in another righteousness,
who was able to cover him. 3. Study the foreknowledge of God, how the Lord knew
his from everlasting with a knowledge of love and approbation; after the
project was laid, and the counsels of God were agreed upon it, then God
fore-knew, or foresaw whom to embrace in his eternal love: And, O my soul, if
thou art one of his, if God in Christ has of his own free love set thee apart
to life and salvation, then know it for thy self, J^b 5 27.
it is inward experimental knowledge we speak of. 4. Study the purpose of God
concerning thy salvation; this purpose of God speaks the stability, and
certainty of they salvation in Christ; his purpose is in, and from himself, who
is God, and not man and therefore cannot repent; Numb. 23.19
has he said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall he not make it
good? 5. Study the decrees of God, they are all one with Predestination, the
book of life, the seal of God: what has the Lord decreed, predestined,
booked, sealed thee for salvation? Psalm. 89 15.
O how blessed is the people that know this joyful sound! they shall walk in
the light of they countenance, O Lord. 6. Study the Covenant of grace, remember
how the business of eternity lay thus: here is every man lost (said God to his
Son) but thou shall in fullness of time go, and be born of flesh and blood, and
die for some of them, and satisfy my Justice, and they shall be thine for a
portion,, and they shall be called the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord.
To whom the Son answered, be it so Lord, I will go and fulfill thy pleasure, and
they shall be mine for ever. Observe, and be acquainted with this Covenant in
that very Dialogue: first God demands of his Son that he lay down his life, and
for his labor he promises that he shall be his seed, and God shall give him
many children. Isa 53.10. Heb. 10.5, 9.
And secondly, the Son consents to lay down his life, and says, here I am to
do thy will O God, thou have given me a body. What, O my soul, that the Father
and Christ should transact a bargain from eternity concerning thee? that there
should be any communing betwixt the Father and the Son concerning thy happiness
and salvation? Surely this is worthy thy pains, Job 3.7.
and study; O hear it, and know thou it for thy good.

SECT. II. Of considering Jesus in that respect.
2. WE must consider Jesus, carrying on this work of salvation in that
eternity. It is not enough to study, and know him, but according to the measure
of Knowledge we have attained, we must ponder, and muse, and meditate and
consider of him: now consideration is an expatiating, and enlarging of the mind
and heart on this or that subject: consideration is a fixing of our thoughts, a
steadfast bending of our minds to some spiritual matter, till it work on the
affections, and conversation. We may know, and yet be inconsiderate of that we
do know; but when the intention of our mind and heart is taken up about some
one known object, and other things are not for the present taken notice of,
this is consideration. O that, if it were possible, we could so consider Jesus
in this first period of eternity, as that for a while at least we could forget
all other things! Christians! I beseech you be dead to the world, be insensible
of all other things, and look only on Jesus; it is said that men in a phrenzy
are insensible of what you do to them, because their minds are taken up about
that which they apprehend so strongly; and if ever there was any object made
known to take up the mind of a spiritual man, it is this, even this: not but
that other objects may be deeply and seriously minded of men; it is reported of
Archimedes, who was a great Mathematician, that when the City was taken wherein
he was, and the warlike instruments of death clattering about his ears, and all
was in a tumult, yet he was so busy about drawing his lines, that he heard no
noise, nor did he know there was any danger: but if such objects as those could
take up the intention of his mind, so as not to regard other things, how much
more should this consideration of Christ? If a carnal heart, a man that minds
earthly things, be so taken up about them, because they are an object suitable
to him, how much more should a gracious heart, that can see into the reality of
these things of God and Christ from everlasting, be so taken up with them as to
mind nothing else? come then, O my soul, and set thy consideration on work, as
thus. --

1. Consider Jesus: in his relation to God, how he was the eternal Son of the
Father: I know in some respects we have little reason thus to look on Jesus: as
we are sinners, and fallen from God, there is no looking on an absolute Deity:
alas, that Majesty (because perfectly and essentially good) is no other then an
enemy to sinners as sinners; so as we are sinners, and fallen from God, there
is no looking on the Son of God; I mean on the Son of God, considered in the
notion of his own eternal being, as coequal, and coessential to God the Father:
Alas! our sin has offended his justice, which is himself: and what have we to
do with that dreadful power, which we have provoked? But considering Jesus as
Jesus, which sounds a Savior to all sinners believing on him: and that this
Jesus contains the two natures of Christ, both the Godhead, and manhood; now
we that have our interest in him, may draw near, Heb, 1.3.
and (as we are capable) behold the brightness of his glory. To this purpose
the Scriptures have discovered to us God the Son, how he is the second person
in the Trinity, having the foundation of personal subsistence from the Father
alone, of whom by communication of his essence he is begotten from all
eternity; when there were no depths I was brought forth, -- before the
mountains were settled, and before the hills I was brought forth. Ante colles
genita eram, Prove. 8.24 25
before the mountains I was begotten, as some; or, ante colles filiata eram,
before the mountains I was sonned his son, as others translate it. -- why thus
O my soul, consider Jesus, the Son of God, but in this consideration be not too
curious; thou hear of the generation of the Son, and of the procession of
the Holy Ghost, but for the manner how the Father begets the Son, or how the
Father and Son do spire, and send forth the Holy spirit, be not too busy to
enquire; thou may know a little, and consider a little, but for the depth
and main of this great mystery of grace, let the generation of the Son of God
be honored with silence. I remember one being too curious, and too
inquisitive, Aug. lib 1 confess c. 12.
what God was doing on that long Evum of eternity before he made the world? it
was answered, he decreed to make hell for such curious inquisitors. Be not
therefore too nice in this consideration: keep within bounds of sobriety and
humility; and then as thou art able to comprehend, the Scriptures will discover
that before God made the world in that long-long Evum of eternity, he was doing
these things, -- 1. Some things in relation to himself. 2. Some things in
relation to his creatures.


1. Some things in relation to himself; and those things were either proper, or
common to the three persons. 1. The things proper to each of the persons were
those internal, incommunicable actions of God, as 1. To beget; and that belongs
only to the Father, who is neither made, nor created, nor begotten of any. 2.
To be begotten; and that belongs only to the Son, who is of the Father alone,
not made, nor created, but begotten. 3. To proceed from both; and that belongs
only to the Holy Ghost, who is of the Father, and the Son, neither made, nor
created, nor begotten, but proceeding. And these were Gods actions in that
eternity before all worlds: the Father was begetting God the Son: the Son was
begotten of God the Father, the Holy Ghost was proceeding from God the Father,
and God the Son. But what, were these actions of God, never in action during
all that eternity? yes; as they are called internal actions, so they are
permanent; look as the Sun does always beget his beams, and both Sun and beams
do send forth the heats: So the Father from all eternity ever did, and now
does, and ever will beget his Son, and both the Father and the Son ever did and
now do, and ever will aspire and breath forth the Holy Ghost: And therefore
Orig^n says well, O^^g h^^. ^in Je^^m. Heb..3 Prove. 8.25
Our Jesus is the brightness of Gods glory; now the brightness of glory is not
once begotten, and then afterward leaves to be begotten; but as often as the
glory rises from whence the brightness springs, so often does the brightness
of glory arise. Before the hills, was I brought forth. Some translate thus,
ante colles generat, and not as others, generavit me, before the mountains were
settled he begets me. Surely the Son of God is ever begetting, and the Holy
Spirit is ever proceeding.

2. The things common to the three persons in that eternity were those internal
actions of God, wherein the three persons did communicate: as 1. That one was
in another, and possessed one another; the Father remaining with the Son, the
Son with the Father, and the Holy Ghost in, P ov. 8.22 John 1.1 John 14.10
and with them both. Thus we read of Christ, the Lord possessed me, in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old. And in the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God. And I am in the Father, and the Father in me.
2. That one glorified another, John 17 5.
the Father glorified the Son, and the Son glorified the Father, and the holy
Ghost glorified both the Father and the Son: And now, O Father, glorify thou
me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was.

3. That one delighted in another, the Father delighted in the Son, the Son
delighted in the Father, Prove. 8.30
and the Holy Ghost delighted in them both; then I was by him, as one brought
up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. I was
daily his delight, in the Original, delights intimating that the Son was
variety of delights unto his Father: rejoicing always before him, Christ
speaks in terms very quaint and familiar, always rejoicing, q. d. greatly
sporting: it is a Metaphor or simile taken from little ones which sport and
play before their parents. O see how the Father and the Son rejoice in one
another fellowship: nay, see how they spend that long eternity before the
creation in nothing but rejoicing and delights: The Father delights in his Son,
and the Son rejoices in his Father. Consider O my Soul, thou have sometimes
had a tickling to know, what God was a doing before the Creation? why now be
sober, and satisfied with this knowledge: God spent all that time (if I may
call it time) in delighting himself in Jesus; why, this was Gods work to
delight in his Son, and he so delighted in him, that he desired no other
pleasure than the company and beholding of him; which accordingly he twice told
from heaven, while Christ was on earth, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased: -- in whom I am well pleased. The first sound was at his
Baptism, Matthew. 3.17. and the second at his transfiguration, Mat. 17.5.

2. Some other things God was a doing in relation to his creatures; they will
fall in at our next consideration: only this by the way. As God and Christ
rejoiced in the fruition of one another without communicating the notice
thereof to any creature; so in the next verse we find them rejoicing in the
salvation of men: Prove. 8.3^.
and my delights were with the sons of men. Amidst the other considerations, O
my soul think of this: what, that God from all eternity should delight in thy
salvation; why this consideration sets out to purpose the heart and desire of
God to save thy soul: for, 1. Delights arise out of the strongest and choycest
desires; men are pleased with many things in which they delight not. 2 God and
Christ are mentioned here to delight in this work, and in no other work of
theirs, not in the Angels, not in the world, nor in any thing in it. 3. This
their delight is mentioned next to their delighting in each other. 4. This
delight is aforehand, whilst Gods heart was only in the expectation, and his
mind but laying the plot of thy salvation, all these argue how great a matter
this was in Gods esteem, and how much his heart was in it, even from
everlasting. O let these fall into thy consideration?

2. Consider Jesus merely in his relation to us: consider him in that great
transaction betwixt God and him for our salvation. And that we may settle our
thoughts, and dwell here, --

1. Consider the Project. The great God having entertained thoughts within
himself, to communicate himself out of his aloneness everlasting, he lays this
plot, that all he would do in that respect, it should be to the praise of the
glory of his grace. Ephesians. 2.6
O my soul consider, meditate and muse on this plot of the Almighty; it is
contained by the Apostle in a very few words, do thou weigh them all: here is,
1. The Praise. 2. The glory. 3. Of his Grace. 1. Praise is a setting forth of
this or that, by word, or deed, or gesture; it contains in it reverend
respect, an high esteem, a strong admiration. 2. Glory is the glorious being,
or essence of God, the glory of God in himself. Sometimes we read of the glory
of his power, that is, his glorious essence which is most powerful, and
sometimes of the glory of his Majesty, that is, his glorious essence which is
most Majestical; 2 These. 1.9 Isa. 2.16 Ephesians. 1.6.
and sometimes of the glory of his grace, that is, his glorious essence, which
is most gracious and merciful; but, 3. Why the glory of his grace? mercy and
grace meet both in love, only they differ thus, mercy is love as it helps the
miserable, and grace is love as it gives good things, freely without desert;
here then is the great design which God from everlasting carried on, that the
glorious essence of his free love, free grace, should be especially manifested
to his Saints, that so thy might admire it, esteem it, honor it, and sound
forth the praises of it. All the other designs of God were but subservient
unto this. Some reckon up three great designs of the Almighty communicating
himself; as 1. The glory of his Saints. 2. The glory of Christ. 3. The glory of
himself, and especially the glory of his grace. 1. That his Saints should be
glorious, and to that purpose he made heaven and earth, and he makes them Lord
of all, 1 Cor. 3.21 verse 23. 2 These. 1.10
all things are yours. 2. That Christ should be glorious, and to that purpose
he makes the Saints, and gives them to Christ, all things are yours, and you
are Christ's. And certainly says the Apostle, at the last day, Christ shall
come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe.
3. That God himself should be glorified; he made all things for himself. --
Bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth, even
every one that is called by my name, for I have created him for my glory. Prove.
16.4 Isa. 43.6.7.
Now this is the high design of God, to which all the rest are subservient;
mark the steps, all things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods
(i.) For God, and for his glory: the two former designs are to which, but not
for which God works: he that builds an house, that he may lay a sure
foundation, and that he may raise the frame, he gives it the due filling which
belongs to it: but these are not his proper ends, his main design: but that he
may have an house for his habitation: So God works, many things to our glory,
and that in us Christ may be glorious; but the proper end, that high design
which he has in all, it is his own glory. And yet O my soul, consider a little
further, the plot of our salvation, of the Saints glory, and of Christ's glory,
as it aims at the glory of God, so especially at the glory of his grace: As if
we see that one does this or that in wisdom, it is the glory of his wisdom: if
he do it in strength or power, it is the glory of his power: if he do it out of
grace, it is the glory of his grace: so God designed the salvation of our
souls out of his mere grace, favor, love, he must needs intend to have his
grace notified in us, and to have it (being known) accordingly admired, and
praised, and honored by us; not but that God must be glorified in his wisdom,
power, justice, holiness, and his other attributes; ay, but especially in this,
it is the grace of God in which he most delights, even as virtuous Kings
affect, above all their other virtues, to be had in honor for their clemency,
and bounty. So it is with our God the King of Kings, Lord of Lords; all he does
is to this end, that his grace may be manifested to his greater glory. And to
this end is the glory of Christ, and the glory of Christians referred. Why
Lord, that this should be thy plot, to save my soul, that my soul should praise
the glory of thy grace? that thy grace should before all worlds think on me for
good? O how should I but think on thee, and thy free grace? How should I but
admire it, adore it, praise it, exalted it above Sun and Moon, and Stars? how
should I but cry out with the Apostle, Oh the depth of the riches of thy grace!
for of him, Romans 11.36
and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, and
ever, Amen.

2. Consider the counsels of God about thy salvation: Ephesians. 1.11
he works all things after the counsel of his own will: and with him is
counsel, and with him is understanding. This counsel (as we have discovered)
was primarily about that reconciliation of the riches of his grace, and the
glory of justice. Consider this, O my soul, thy sin put all the attributes of
God to a kind of conflict; hereupon was that great and mighty counsel* how God
should make way for his love and goodness, and yet satisfy his truth, and
justice? at last the wisdom of God found out that glorious and wonderful
expedient, the Lord Jesus Christ: Rom 3.25
is not this the meaning of the Apostle? whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his Blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins. Powder, and weigh these words! God sets not forth Christ to
be a propitiation to declare only his mercy in the forgiveness of sins: how?
is there any thing but mercy in the forgiveness of sins: yes, there is
something else, there is righteousness also, and therefore he has set forth
Christ to be a propitiation, that he might declare his righteousness; v rs. 26.
nay, see it repeated, to declare I say his righteousness, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus: not that he might be
merciful, but that he might be just in justifying him that believes in Jesus.
This Text Luther had a great deal ado to understand, and he prayed much, before
he could get the right meaning of it.

This is the great mystery of the Gospel; no wonder if a poor man could not
reach it: This is that which set the infinite wisdom of God on work from all
eternity, how to find a way to save sinners, and to be infinitely righteous
notwithstanding. -- Nay, yet O my soul consider, a little further; not only is
the mercy of God in this way glorified, but the glory of his justice is as
much, yea more then if the sinner were eternally damned: -- It is made good
thus. --

1. When God appointed a surety, his Son, and charged our debts upon him to
satisfy his justice: in that God would not spare his Son the least farthing
token, I mean, not the least degree of punishment; hereby the Lord shows a
stronger love to justice then if he had damned ten thousand, thousand
creatures. Suppose a Malefactor comes before a Judge, the Judge will not spare
the Malefactor, but commands satisfaction to the Law; this shows that the
Judge loves justice: but if the Judges own Son be a delinquent, and it appears
before all the Country, that the Judge will not spare him, the Judge now does
more honor justice in this, than in condemning a thousand others: So when the
Lord shall cast many thousands to Hell there to be tormented for ever, and
ever, and ever, this shows that God loves justice; but when his own Son shall
take our sins upon him, and God will not spare him, (that is the very word in
the Scripture, Romans 8.32
he spared not his own Son) this, surely this declares Gods love to
righteousness more than if all the World should be Damned.

2. Suppose the sinner that is reconciled had been Damned, then the justice of
God had been but in satisfying, and never had been fully satisfied: but in that
way that God has found out to save a sinner, his justice is not only
satisfying, but it comes fully to be satisfied, to have enough. As for
instance; suppose a man to be a creditor to one, who owes him 100000 l. this
man is poor, and the utmost he can pay is but a penny a day; suppose the
creditor should lay him in the Goal until he had paid the utmost farthing, it
is true he would be receiving day after day, but he would never be paid so long
as the debtor lives; now if another rich man should come, and lay down an
100000 l. at once, the creditor is presently satisfied. Why here is the
difference betwixt Gods satisfying his Justice upon sinners, and upon Jesus
Christ; God comes upon the sinner, and requires the debt of punishment, because
he did not pay the debt of obedience: God casts him into Prison, and the utmost
he can pay, is but (as it were) a penny a day; and hence the poor sinner must
still be paying, and paying, and paying to Eternity: this is the ground of
their Eternal punishment in Hell, because in any finite time they can never pay
enough: But now comes Jesus Christ, and he fully pays the debt at once, so
that justice says, I have enough, I am satisfied: Surely this is the greater
Glory to the very justice of God.

These were the counsels of God from all Eternity, how he should make way for
his love and goodness, and yet satisfy his Truth and Justice. O my soul,
consider and wonder! Jesus Christ was the Expedient, and in Christ not only
Gods mercy, but his justice is Exalted, yea more Exalted, and more Glorified in
thy salvation, then ever it could have been in thy Damnation.

3 Consider the foreknowledge of God; he knew from everlasting whom he would
set apart for life and salvation. All the Saints of God from first to last,
they were then present to him, and before him, and he did look on them in his
Beloved Christ. Before there was a World, or a man, or any creature in it, he
fore-knew Adam, and Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs, and
all the Prophets, and all the Apostles, and all the Disciples of Christ, and
Believers in Christ; And O my soul, if thou art one of Gods Elect, he foreknew
thee with a knowledge of love and approbation, he had thee in his Eye, Romans 9.11
and Heart: he had thoughts on Jacob, when he was yet unborn, and had done
neither good nor evil. Assure thy self, the Lord works not without prevision or
foreknowledge of the things effected; that cannot be in God, which is not to
be found in a wise and prudent man; he that builds an house has the frame of
it first in himself: and the Psalmist tells thee, that the eyes of God did see
thy substance yet being unperfect: Psalm. 139.16 Romans 9.13
in this Book of knowledge were all thy members written, when as yet there was
none of them! yea, he knew thee with a knowledge of singular love; he embraced
thee in his Eternal love, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated* ^ will not say, that this love was actually bestowed on thee till due
time, yet it was prepared for thee from all Eternity: and hence it is called,
an everlasting love; The Lord has appeared of old unto me, Jer. 31.3
saying, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn thee.

O muse, and meditate, and ponder on this love! it contains in it these
particulars: as, 1. The eternal good will of God: what else is the love of God
toward the Elect, but his everlasting good will to show them mercy, to do them
good, and to save their souls? hence the Angels sung that Antheam at Christ's
birth, Glory to God in the highest, Luke 2.14
and on earth peace, good will toward men. 2. The Eternal pleasure and delight
of God in the sons of men; the greatest delight that God has, or ever had, it
is in communicating himself to his Son firstly, and next unto his Saints: nay,
such delight he takes in letting out his mercy to his Saints: as that he was
well-pleased with the death of his own Son, as a means conducing thereunto. O
wonderful! one would think that the death of Christ should be the most
abhorring to the heart of God of any thing in the world, and yet says the
Scripture, It pleased the Lord to bruise him; Isa. 53.10
he took a pleasure and delight in the very bruising of Jesus Christ: the Lord
saw this was the way for him to communicate himself in the fullness of his grace
unto his Saints, and therefore though it cost him so dear as the death of his
own Son, yet he was well-pleased with it. 3. This love of God contains in it a
fore-knowledg and approbation of all those effects of his love, whether they be
temporal concerning this life, or Eternal concerning the life to come.
Concerning these effects of his love, says John, 1 John 3.1
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God. q. d. Behold it, stand amazed at it, that children of
wrath should become the sons of the most high God: for a beggar on the dunghill,
a vagabond, a runnagate from God, a prodigal, a stranger to God, whom the Lord
had no cause to think on, to be made a Son of God Almighty, O divine love!
Pause a while, and muse on this! O my soul, that God should foreknow thee from
all Eternity with a knowledge of love and approbation, it is admirable to
consider, I say it is admirable to consider.

4. Consider the purpose of God concerning thy salvation: 1 These. 5 9
God has not appointed (or purposed) us wrath, but to obtain salvation by our
Lord Jesus Christ. As when we have a will to do any thing, there follows upon
this in the mind a settled purpose to effect it; so when God has loved some to
life, there is in God a settled purpose of bringing them to it: that the purpose
of God according to Election might stand, or be sure; Romans 9.11
it imports Gods stability, and steadiness, and constancy, and firmness in
saving souls. There is much inconstancy and fickleness in the love of man, or
in the love of a woman, but the love of God to his people is a steady love; as
the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, Isa. 62.5
so shall thy God rejoice over thee; not only so does thy God, but so shall thy
God rejoice over thee. Gods purposes are without any alteration, the love of
Christ after thousands of years is still as the love of a Bridegroom upon the
wedding day; indeed then ordinarily love is hot, and appears much; so is
Christ's love, and so is Gods love ever hot; there is no moment of time from
Eternity to Eternity wherein God rejoices not over his Saints, as the
Bridgroom over his Bride; not only as an husband over his wife, but as a
Bridegroom over his Bride, we may say of this purpose of God, as it was in the
beginning, is now and ever shall be World without end.

O my soul, muse and meditate on this purpose of God, Isa. 55.3
and by consequence on the sure mercies of David; it may be it is not always
alike sure to thee; the love of God as the shining of the Sun does not always
in the fruits of it shining out so gloriously, but the Sun keeps his course in
a steady way: what though it be sometimes clouded? what though at times it
shine not so gloriously as at high-noon? yet the purpose of God according to
Election must stand. All the Devils in Hell cannot frustrate Gods purpose
concerning only one soul: John 6.39
this is the Fathers will which sent me (says Christ) that of all which he
has given me I should lose none.

5. Consider Gods decree concerning thy souls salvation, and the means to it.
As the purpose of God, so the decree of God speaks the stability and certainty
of the thing decreed. The foundation of God stands sure; 2 Timothy 2.16
(i) The decree of God touching man's Salvation is unchangable. If the Laws of
the Medes and Persians were so absolute, that they could not be reversed, then
much less can the decrees of God be reversed: no man that is not Elected can be
Elected; and no man that is Elected can possibly be damned. My sheep hear my
voice (says Christ) and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck t^^^ out of my hand. And it must needs be
so, for Gods decree is grounded on the Eternal and unchangable will of God; and
hence we say that there is a certain number of the Elect known only to God,
which cannot possibly be increased or diminished. John 13 18
I know whom I have chosen, says Christ. And yet thou can not, O my soul,
hence infer, that thou may be secure; for in this decree the end and the
means are joined together of God, and they cannot be separated by any man: if
thou be not godly, never expect to be happy: Gods decree of Predestination
is as well for the giving of grace, as for the giving of glory.

6. Consider the Covenant struck betwixt God and Christ for thy salvation. If
thou would fain be acquainted with the very Articles of it, go on then, take
Scripture along, and first on Gods part thou may observe, and meditate, and
consider of these particulars. --

1. That there was a designation and appointment of Christ from all Eternity to
the office of Mediatorship: John 6.27 Isa. 42 1
whence Christ is said to be sealed by the Father, for him has God the Father
sealed: and chosen of the Father, behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect,
or chosen one.

2. There was a commandment from the Father to the Son, which he must obey, and
submit unto. As first, he had a command what to teach his people, as the
Prophet of the Church, John 12.49.
for I have not spoken of my self (says Christ) but the Father which sent me,
he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. Secondly,
he had a commandment to lay down his life fore those that were given him, John
10.18
no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again; this Commandment have I received of my
Father.

3. There was a Promise from the Father to the Son: the Father covenants with
him in these things; Isa. 42.1.
first, that he will give him the Spirit in abundance. Behold my servant whom I
uphold; -- I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles. Isa 11.1, 2
-- And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge, and of
the fear of the Lord. Secondly, that he will give him assistance and help in
this great work of Redemption. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness,
Isa. 42.6
and will hold thy hand; what is that? why, I will strengthen thee with my
power, I will so hold thy hand that thou shall not be discouraged in the work;
Isa 42.4
He shall not fail, nor be discouraged tell he have set judgment upon the
Earth. Thirdly, that he will give him a blessed success, that he shall not
labor in vain, Isa. 53 10, 11
he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hands: he shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall
be satisfied. Christ's suffering were as a woman's travail, though she suffer
many pains and pangs, yet she sees her Child at last; so shall Christ see many
believing on his Name: they are the promise made by the Father to the Son, Isa.
55.5
that Nations that know him not shall run unto him. Fourthly, that he will give
him and his Redeemed ones everlasting glory; to Christ himself there is a
promise of glory, he has gloryfied thee. And to the Members of Christ there is
a promise of glory; and this promise of glory to them was made known to Christ
from everlasting: it was one of the secrets of God, and Christ brings out that
secret from the bosom of his Father, Luke 12.32
and reveals it to his Disciples. It is my Fathers pleasure (said he) to give
you the Kingdom; Christ knew his Fathers will by the Covenant passing betwixt
his Father and him, and this will of the Father concerning glory promised to
the Saints Christ does bring forth to light. These were the Articles of the
Covenant on Gods part; now O my soul, see them on Christ's part in these
particulars. --

1. There was an acceptance of the office to which he was designed by the
Father; he did not take the office of Mediatorship upon himself, but first the
Father calls him to it, Heb. 5.5 Heb. 1.10.7
and then the Son accepts it: Christ glorified not himself to be made an high
Priest, but he that said unto him, thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee; he called him, and then the Son answered, Lo I come.

2. There was a promise on Christ's part to depend and trust upon God for help:
And again I will put my trust in him, they are the words of Christ to his
Father. And Isaiah brings in Christ as looking for help from God, for the Lord
God will help me, Heb. 2.13. Isa. 50.7, 8, 9 Isa. 59.5
therefore shall I not be confounded -- And behold the Lord will help me, who
is he that shall condemn me? whereto agrees that other passage, and my God
shall be my strength.

3. There was a promise of submission to his Fathers will in bearing the
reproaches and injuries that should be done to him, and to lay down his life
for those, that were given to him by the Father: the Lord God opened my ear,
and I was not rebellious, Isa. 50.5, 6
neither turned away back, I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them
that plucked off the hair, I hid not my Face from shame and spitting, John 10.17
and therefore my Father loves me because I lay down my life. Christ first thus
Covenanted with his Father, and then he was careful to discharge the same, and
at last he tells God, John 17.4
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.

4. There was an earnest expectation of that glory which the Father promised
Christ and his members: And now O Father glorify thou me with thine own self,
John 17.5 John 17.24.
with the glory which I had with thee before the World was. And Father, I will
that they also whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me, for thou lovedst me before the
Foundation of the World. -- These were the Articles of the Covenant on Christ's
part, and hence it is that God is called the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, viz. by reason of the Covenant. Ephesians. 1.3


O my soul, with what delight may thou consider, muse, and ponder on these
Articles? what, that God should make a Covenant, and enter into these, and
these Articles with his own Son for thy good, and for thy Eternal good? what,
that God should bring in the second person in the Trinity to be the head of the
Covenant as on thy part? what a mercy is this? O run over and over this
meditation, a thousand, and a thousand times! O consider thy hope of Eternal
life, which God, that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2
promised before the world began! If thy soul question what promise was there
made before the World began? to whom was the promise made? who was there before
the World began for God to make any promise to? why now thou have learned it
was only to the Son of God, the second person in the Trinity. There was a most
blessed transaction between God the Father and God the Son, before the world
began, for thy everlasting good; and upon that transaction depends all thy
hope, and all thy salvation. O this is worthy of thy deep, and sad, and
serious, and inmost meditation. I have been particular and large in this
passage of Looking unto, or considering Jesus, but I shall be brief in the rest.

SECT. III. Of desiring after Jesus in that respect.
3. WE must desire after Jesus carrying on the great work of our salvation in
that Eternity. It is not enough to know and consider, but we must desire. Now,
desire is a passion looking after the attainment of some good which we enjoy
not, and which we imagine to be fitting for us. In this respect we cannot
desire after Jesus, as now to carry on that work of our salvation before the
World began, for that work is already perfectly done; But these things we may
desire after, as, 1. After the manifestation of that work in us. 2. After God
and Christ the complotters and actors of that great work for us. 3. After the
full and utmost execution, whereby God effectually works in time according to
all his workings, or decrees before time.

1. We must desire after the manifestation of this work in us. We have heard of
mavelous, excellent, glorious things done by Jesus Christ for his Saints from
all Eternity; and oh what desires now should be in us to know that we are of
that number? when I hear and consider that there was such a project, and such
counsels, and such love, and such a purpose, and such decrees, and such a
Covenant betwixt God and Christ for salvation of souls; and withal, that they
are but few in comparison concerning whom God and Christ has all this care,
will not this whet on my desires? and make me cry, and cry again, Oh that these
loves were mine! how happy were I, if I had a share in these eternal thoughts
of God? Methinks we should not hear of such transactions, but it should stir up
our hearts in infinite desires; methinks we should pant after assurance, and
still be wishing, Oh what is truth? and what is Christ? and what did Christ for
me before I was, or before the World was? I would I knew him, I would I could
enjoy him, I would I were assured that he had one good thought of me in that
Eternity! Christians! if you have any share in those transactions, sooner or
later you will feel these desires? nay, if my sinful heart deceive me not, upon
the very consideration of these things I feel my self another creature in my
desires then I was before. Tell me, you that have took a full view of God and
Christ, and of all these wonders of Eternity: do you not sensibly differ from
your selves in your affections? Is not the world, worldly pleasures, worldly
profits, and worldly honors fallen too; yea, ten in an hundred with you? have
they not lost their price? would you not rather be assured that your names are
written in the Book of Life, then to have all the world yours; yea, and all the
Devils in Hell subject to your commands? Certainly, if these revelations work
nothing in your hearts, if your affections be so strong and hearty to the
world, and the vanities of it; if your desires be so impure, and strongly
working downwards, that Gods ancient loves, and everlasting workings, have no
power on your hearts, it is a very sad condition. If David may have his wish,
it runs thus, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us; he would
have the manifestation of Gods Eternal love; Psa. 4.6
one smile of his countenance (as an image of that countenance which God had
toward him before the world began) was more gladness to his heart, then all
that which the men of the world had, in the time that their corn, and their
wine increased.

2. We may and must desire after God and Christ, the complotters and actors of
that great work for us; what, has the Gospel revealed this truth, that before
the Creation God and Christ were busied about our good? yea, and has Christ
especially, that came out of the bosom of his Father, and brought the treasures
of his Fathers counsel to the world, discovered such love to men? how then
should our desires be after God in Christ? Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psa.
73.35
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. A right beholding of
Christ in his eternal workings, will cause a desire of Christ above all
desires; the heart now thirsts for nothing but him that is all, all power, all
love, all holiness, all happiness: tell such a soul of the world, and gold, and
glory; O what are these? the soul will quickly tell you, Phil. 3.8
the world is dung, and gold is dung, and glory is dung, all is but loss and
dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Give me God,
and Christ, says the soul, or I die; Oh my desires are to him who has done
all this for me. Is not this the period still of thy expression at the end of
every discourse, would Christ were mine? thou hear it may be, some worldings
talk, such a one, and such a one has got so much in these times; he that was
yesterday as poor as Lazarus, he is this day like that nameless rich man,
clothed in purple, Luke 16.19.
and fine linen, and faring sumptuously every day; ay, but do not thou reply
either in word or heart, would Christ were mine, and then I had got more then
he? Poor soul, do thou not gasp only after Christ, when thou fetchest (as I
may say) the very deepest breath? can thou read over the generation of Jesus
the Son of God, the time when he was begotten, the manner of his begetting, the
mutual kindness and love of him that begets, and of him that is begotten? and
do not thou pant, and breath, and gasp after Jesus at every period? can
thou read over Jesus his acts and decrees in reference to thy self? can thou
turn over those many leaves, in every of which is discovered those everlasting
loves of God in his projects, counsels, foreknowledg, purpose, decree, covenant
for thy souls happiness? and art thou not ready at every discovery to sing
David's Psalm, Psa. 42.1, 2
as the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O
God; my soul thirsts for God, for the living God, O when shall I come and
appear before God? O my soul, had thou but these pantings, thirstings,
breathings after God and Christ, thou might comfortably conclude, these are
the fruits of Gods Spirit, it is the Spirit of the Lord Jesus which makes those
sighs and groans in thee, Romans 8.26
which cannot be expressed. He and thee sigh together, one in another, and one
after another; O therefore look, Look unto Jesus, and sigh, and desire after
him.

3. We may and must desire after the full and utmost execution whereby God
effectually Works in time according to all his workings or decrees before
time. God that purposed and decreed from all Eternity, he will not have done
the full execution of that purpose or decree till that after-Eternity, in that
world without end. Indeed some part is a fulfilling now, but the main, the
great part is yet to come: why then as we see the Plot, Phil. 1.23
let us desire after the full accomplishment, let us desire after the glory
without end, to which we were predestined before the beginning. It was Paul's
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. As men burdened, so should we
desire and groan after the enjoyments of God in the world to come. O my soul,
that thou were but cast in the Apostles mould, that they affections were but on
the wing, that they might take flight and steer their course toward heaven,
and thereupon that thou might say, yond is the glorious house, the goodly
building, made without hands, which God from all Eternity, decreed to be my
home, my rest, my dwelling place to all Eternity; and in yond stately Fabric,
is many an heavenly Inhabitant before I come: there are Angels, and there are
all the souls of Sain^s, that from Adam to this day have had their pass out of
this sinful world: yea, there is Jesus the Son of God; and there is God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; and if I am predestined to this
fellowship, Lord, when shall I have run through the means that I may come to
this end? O my end! where is my end? where is my Lord, my God, my Comforter?
where is my rest? where is my end? I cannot be at rest without my end, and
therefore come Lord Jesus, come quickly, be like a Roe, Cant. 8.14
or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices. Christians! why are not your
Spirits always breathing thus after the glory, to which you are predestined?
why do not you long after full enjoyment? the utmost execution of Gods decree?
why are not your hearts, your souls, your spirits already in heaven? Surely
there be your relations; your Father is there, your elder brother is there, and
there are many, I dare say most of your other younger brethren: again, there is
your interest, your estate is there, if you believe: and therefore, Where
should your hearts be, but where your treasure is? come then, come, set in tune
those desires of your souls, set your affections on things above, especially on
that one thing Jesus Christ: Looking unto Jesus.

SECT. IV. Of hoping in Jesus in that respect.
4. WE must hope in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for
us in that Eternity. It is not enough to know and consider, and desire; but we
must hope, and maintain our hope as to our own interest. Now hope is a passion,
whereby we expect, probably or certainly some future good. All the question is,
whether that salvation, concerning which the great transaction was betwixt God
and Christ, belongs now to me? and what are the grounds and foundations on
which my hope is built? I know some exceedingly abuse this Doctrine; If God had
before all worlds appointed me to salvation, why then I may live as I list; I
need not hear, or pray, or confer, or perform any holy Duty, for I am sure I
shall be saved. And thus at once they take away all grounds of hope. It is
true, Gods decrees are unchangeable, but they do not afford any such inferences
or deductions as these: you might as well say, the Lord has appointed me to
live to such a time, and before that time I shall not, cannot die, and
therefore I need no meat nor drink, nor clothes, nor any other thing: Ah
silly, foolish, devilish, arguing! Gods decree is for the means, as well as for
the end; whom God has decreed to save, them also has he decreed to call, to
justify, to sanctify, before he save: O my Soul, look to the grounds whereon
they hope is built: if those be weak, thy hope is weak: but if those be strong,
thy hope will prove most strong; and certain, and prudent.

In the disquisition of these grounds, say not in thine heart who shall ascend
into Heaven? Romans 10.16
or who shall descend into the deep? seek not above or below: it is not
possible for thee to go bodily into Heaven, to see the Records of Eternity, and
to read thy name in the Book of Life, but search into these fruits and effects
of thy election As --

1. If thou be within Gods decrees for salvation, then, sooner or later, God
will cause the power of his Word to come with authority and conviction upon thy
conscience: knowing brethren, beloved your election of God, for our Gospel came
not unto you in Word only, but also in power. The Apostle speaks thus of
others; 1 These. 1.4, 5
he might know they were the Elected of God, either by his judgment of charity,
or by a spirit of discerning, which was vouchsafed to some in the Apostles
times; but how comes he immediately to know this truth? by this glorious
effe^t, our Gospel came not in Word only, but also in power. Oh it is good to
consider with what power the Word preached falls into thy heart; does it
convince thee, humble thee, mollie thee, soften thee? this argues thou
belongest to God. The Word preached will be more than the word of a man, more
than a mere human Oration, or verbal declamation, where it comes in power: Oh!
it will be like fire in thy bowels, like a two edged Sword in the secret places
of thy heart; thou will cry out, verily God is here: Oh the power! the
conviction, the meltings of my soul that I feel within me!

2. If God has ordained thee to Salvation, then, sooner or later God will
effectually call thee. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called;
Romans 8.30.
this calling is a calling of the Soul from sin, from amongst the rest of the
World unto Jesus Christ; it is such a call as enables the soul to follow
Christ; as Matthew being called by Christ, he arose and followed Christ. These
two are linked together in Paul's golden chain, predestination and effectual
vocation. Mat. 9.9.
We are bound to give thanks always unto God for you, brethren, ^ These. ^ ^3, 14.
beloved of the Lord; and why so? because God has from the beginning chosen
you to salvation. -- Whereunto he called you by the Gospel to the obtaining of
the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. All those that belong to Gods election, are
sometime or other effectually called by the Word and Spirit of Christ; and it
must needs be so, because as the Lord has put a difference betwixt his Elect
and others before the world was, and he will make a final difference betwixt
them and others, after the end of the World; so he will have them differenced
and distinguished whilst thy are in this World by this inward, effectual,
operative calling; they are men of other minds, wills, affections,
dispositions, Acts 26 18 Ephesians. 5.7, 8
conversations; they are called from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God. As the Apostle, ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light
in the Lord. -- Be not ye therefore partakers with them.

3. If thou art chosen for salvation, then sooner or later thou shall have true
soul-saving justifying faith; Acts 13.48.
As many as were ordained to eternal life believed. When God has a people to
call home to himself, he either brings them to the means, or the means to them,
and those that belong to the Election of Grace believe; O my soul, have thou
this saving faith? not a fancied faith, a dead faith, an easy faith, but
saving faith; such a faith as was wrought in thee by the Word and Spirit with
power; such a faith as was not in any power to give, nor in any power to
receive, until God enable thee by his Spirit; Rom 8 ^0 Romans 5 1
then here is thy ground that thou art ordained to eternal life: for whom he
calls he justifies; and we are justified by faith. Not that the essence of
faith justifies, but faith justifies instrumentally, in that it lays hold upon
that which justifies, even the righteousness of Christ Jesus.

4. If thou art decreed for salvation, then sooner or later the Lord will beget
and increase in thee, grace, holiness, sanctification: Elect according to the
foreknowledg of God the Father, 1 Pet. 1.2.
through sanctification of the Spirit. God predestinates his people unto
holiness; Ephesians. 1.4
he chose us in Christ before the foundation of the World, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him. If God appoint thee to eternal life, he
does here in this World appoint thee to an holy gracious life. No
sanctification, no election; no grace, no glory; thou art to be a precious
Jewel here, ere God will make thee up at that great day. Observe the chain,
Romans 8.29. If I be sanctified, with the Divine Nature, in which glory is begun,
then I am justified; if justified, then I have been called according to
purpose; if called, then I was predestined; and if predestined to means,
then I was foreknown, as one whom God would choose to the end, even
immarcessible and eternal glory.

5. If thou art appointed and prepared for glory, then God will give thee a
thankful heart for so great a mercy: thou can no more keep in the heart from
overflowing, when thou art sensible of this everlasting love, then thou can
put bounds to the Sea: See Paul praising God for the Election of himself and
others, after I heard of your faith and love, Ephesians. 1.15 1^. Ephesians. 1.3, 4
I cease not to give thnaks; and Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ, according as he has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world. And what glorious triumphs does Paul in the person of all the
Elect make over all kind of enemies that can be thought of? he challenges
every adversary to put forth his sting, and why? even because God has Elected,
Romans 8.33.39
and nothing can separate them from this unchangeable love; and this was it
that begot his thanksgiving, Romans 7.25
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. O my soul, how is thy heart
affected with praise and thankfulness in this matter? he that bestows great
things, looks for great return of thanks, especially this being all thou can
do.

6. If the project, counsel, love, purpose, decree, and Covenant of God with
Christ concerned thee, and thy souls happiness, then God will crown thee with
perseverance, and a steadfast continuance in the way of grace thou wast first
set in: final apostasy, and total backsliding from the ways of God, can never
befall those that are thus chosen, they went from us, 1 John 2.19. Mat. 24 ^4.
Jer. 32.40
because they were not of us, said the Apostle; and if it were possible they
should deceive the very Elect, said Christ; but it is certainly impossible, and
why? I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me.
Oh what a blessed mercy is this, when there are so many hours of temptation in
the world, so many blustering storms and tempests that are able to raise up the
very roots, did not that immortal seed preserve them. Of this sign we are sure,
if any of the former belongs to us; but to this we cannot actually seal till
the end of our life.

Come now, are these, O my soul, the grounds of thy hopes? has Gods word come
with power on thy heart? has the Lord so effectually called thee, that thou
have left all to follow Christ? do thou believe on the Lord Jesus for life
and for salvation? art thou holy? is thy life holy? do thou walk exactly, as
the grace of God which brings to salvation teaches? Can thou with enlarged
thankfulness amplify the love and grace of God in thy election; surely these
effects are the very fuel of hope, they are the blessed and clear evidences so
thy souls election; and therefore hope well, take strong consolation; it is
clear as the Sun, that God has predestined thee to life, and that thy name
is written in the Book of Life, and that none in Heaven, or on Earth, or in
Hell, shall be able to blot it out again. Away with all sad, dumpish, dejected
thoughts: Look unto Jesus: hope in Christ, that, that very salvation concerning
which that great transaction was betwixt God and Christ, belongs even to thee,
and that one day thou shall see it, and enjoy the happiness of it to all
Eternity

SECT. V. Of believing in Jesus in that respect.
5. WE must believe in Jesus, as carrying on that great work of salvation for
us in that Eternity. It is not enough to know, and consider, and desire, and
hope, but we must believe. Now this is the nature and property of faith, to
apply all these ancient and future doings and dealings of God to our selves, as
if they were now present. Some difference there is betwixt hope and faith; as
hope has respect to that which the Word pomiseth, rem verbi; but faith
respects the word it self, verbum rei; hope eyes chiefly the mercy and goodness
of the promise, but faith eyes mainly the authority and truth of the promiser;
hope looks upon its object as future, but faith only looks upon the object as
present; both make a particular application to themselves, but hope in a
waiting for it; and faith in a way of now enjoying it. Hence faith is called,
the substance of things hoped for; it is the substance, or confidence of things
hoped for, Heb. 11.1
as if we had them already in hand: faith gives the soul a present interest in
God, in Christ, in all those glorious things in the Gospel of Christ; even in
the things of eternal life. Faith is an appropriating, an applying, an uniting
grace; it is a blessed thing to have the sight of God, there is much power in
it; but to see God in his Glory as my God, to see all the Majesty, greatness,
and goodness of God, as those things that my soul has an interest in; to see
how the eternal counsels of God wrought for me to make me happy, why this is of
the nature of Faith; And herein lies the sweetness of faith, in that we believe
not Christ only to be a Savior, and righteousness, but my Savior, and my
righteousness; And therefore Luther affirmed that the sweetness of Christianity
lay in pronounes; when a man can say, my Lord, and my God, and my Jesus. I live
by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.
who loved me, and gave himself for me.

O my soul! believe for thy self; believe, and be confident of it that those
Eternal projects, counsels, love, purpose, decree, and covenant betwixt God and
Christ were all for thee: have not thou a promise? Nay, was there not a promise
before the world began? and that very promise the promise of eternal life? Mark
the words, Titus 1.2
in hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World
began. Here Is a promise, and a promise of Eternal life, and a promise of
Eternal life made by God, by God that cannot lie, and that before there was a
World, or any man in the World; If thou inquire, to whom then was this
promise made? Sweet soul, it was made to Christ for thee; many promises thou
have in Scripture made more immediately to thy self, but this was the grand
promise, and all the other promises they are but a draught of that grand
promise that God the Father made to his Son before the World began.

O cries the Soul, I cannot believe: what? is it possible that God in his
Eternity should have any thought of me? What, of me, being not yet born, Romans
9.11
neither having done any good or evil? What, of me, born in these last times of
the world, the least of Saints, the greatest of Sinners, less then the least of
all Gods mercies? that of such a one the great God, the Majesty of Heaven and
Earth should have a thought, a project, a counsel, a knowledge of approbation,
a purpose, a decree: Nay, enter into a Covenant with his Son for my salvation?
I cannot believe it. Alas! What am I to God? or what need has God of me? If
all the Nations of the Earth are to him, but as a drop of a bucket; Isa 40.15
and as the small dust of the Balance; O what a minime am I of that drop? or
what a little, little atome am I of that small dust; and is it probable that
the greatness of God the goodness of God, the power of God, the wisdom of God,
the Eternal Counsels of God, should work for me, to make me glorious, blessed,
happy, to make me one with himself, and one with his Son, and one with his
Spirit? what care take I of every dust of the Earth, or of every sand one the
Seashore? and yet these are my fellow creatures; there is a thousand times more
disproportion betwixt God and me, and would God take care of me before I was,
or before the World was? what, would he busy himself and his Son, about such a
worthless wretched worm? would he decree Christ to come from the Father for me,
to be my Redeemer, my Jesus, my Savior? I cannot, I dare not, I will not
believe.

O stay my soul; and be not faithless, but believing, I Will take thy argument in
pieces: As, Jer. 29 11
1. Thou say, has God any thoughts of me? Yes: says God, I know the
thoughts that I think toward you, thoughts of peace, and not of evil; and
before the World was, my thoughts, Prove. 8.3.
and my delights were with the Sons of men. 2. Thou say, I have no thoughts,
no care of my fellow creatures, Isa. 55.8
as of the dust, or sand, or atoms? and what then? my thoughts are not as your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord; for as the Heavens are
higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts
than your thoughts. What if thou have no thoughts or care of the smaller
creatures? yet God extends his thoughts, and care, and providence not only to
thee, but even to them: neither can a Sparrow fall to the ground, nor an hair
from thy head, nor a leaf from the tree, without the providence of our heavenly
Father? 3. Thou say, I dare not believe, I am astonished at, Mat. 10.29, 30.
confounded in these thoughts of Gods eternal love; it is too high for me, I
cannot believe it. I answer, herein thou say something: I know it is an hard
thing to believe these great things in reference to thy self: But see now how
God and Christ stoop and condescend to make thee believe: God stands much upon
this, that the hearts of Saints should confide in him: he accounts not himself
honored, except they believe, and therefore mark O my Soul, how Christ suits
himself to thy weakness; what is it that may beget this Faith, this confidence
in thy Son? what is it (says God) that you poor creatures do one to another,
when you would make things sure between your selves? why, thus; --

1. We engage our selves by promise one to another. And so will I, says God:
poor soul, thou have my promise, my faithful promise; I have made a promise
both to Jews and Gentiles, and thou art the one of these two sorts; the promise
is to you, and to your children, Acts 2 39.
and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Be
only satisfied in that ground of thy hope, that thou art called of God; and
then every promise of Eternal life is thine, even thine. Thou may find a
thousand promises scattered here and there in the book of God; and all these
promises are a draught of that promise which was made from all Eternity, and
therefore it is so much the more sure; it is as if Christ should say, will thou
have engagement by promise? this is past long ago; my Father has engaged
himself to me before the World began; yea, and I have made many, and many a
promise, since the World began? Read in the Volume, and thou will find here and
there a Promise, here and there a draught of the first Copy of that great
Promise, which my Father made unto me from all Eternity.

2. When we would make things sure to one another, we write it down; And so
will I, says God: thou have the Scripture, the Holy Writ, those Sacred Volumes
of Truth and Life, and therein thou have the golden Lines of many gracious
Promises; are they not as the Stars in the Firmament of the Scripture? thou
have my Bible, and in the Bible thou have many blessed glorious Truths: but of
all the Bible, methinks thou should not part with one of those promises, no,
not for a World. Luther observing the many promises writ down in Scripture,
expresses thus, the whole Scripture does especially aim at this, that we
should not doubt, but hope, confide, believe, that God is Merciful, Kind,
Patient, and has a purpose and a delight to save our souls.

3. When we would make things sure to one another, we set to our Seals. And so
will I, says God: thou have my Seal, the Broad-Seal of Heaven, my Sacraments,
the Seals of my Covenant; and thou have my privy Seal also, the Seal of my
Spirit. Grieve not the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30.
whereby ye are Sealed unto the day of Redemption.

4. When we would make things sure to one another, we take Witnesses. And so
will I, John 5.7, 8.
says God: thou shall have witnesses as many as thou will, witnesses of all
sorts, witnesses in heaven, and witnesses on earth, for there are three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and
the water, and the blood; and these three agree in one.

5. When we would make things sure to one another, we take an oath. And so will
I, says God: He. 6.17.
God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability
of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, q. d. there is no such need of an
oath, but I will be abundant to thee, because I would have thee trust me, and
confide in me thoroughly: and as I swear (says God) so will I swear the
greatest Oath that ever was, I swear by my self: God swears by God: he could
swear by no greater, and therefore he swear by himself: and why thus, but for
their sakes who are the heirs of promise? Heb. 6.13.
he knows our frame, and members, that we are but dust; and therefore to
succor our weakness, the Lord is pleased to swear, and to confirm all by his
Oath.

6. When we would make things sure to one another, we take a pawn. And I will
give thee a pawn says God: and such a pawn, as if thou never had any thing
more, thou should be happy: it is the pawn of my Spirit. Who also has
sealed us, 2 Cor. 1.22.
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, q. d. I will send my Spirit
into your hearts, and this Spirit shall be a pawn, an earnest in your hearts,
of all the good that I intend to do for you for ever.

7. When we would make things sure to one another, something it may be is
presently done, as an engagement of all that which is to come. And thus will I
deal with thee, says God, who live in these last of times: why thou see
the greatest part of thy Salvation already done, I made a promise from all
Eternity of sending my Son into the World to be made a curse for sin; yea, and
if thou believe, for thy sin; and this is the greatest work of all that is to
be done to all Eternity. Surely, if I would have failed thee in any thing, it
should have been in this; it is not so much for me now, to bring thee to
Heaven, to save thy Soul, as it was to send my Son into the World to be made a
curse for sin: but when I have done so great a work, and have been already
faithful in that Promise, how should thou but believe my faithfulness in
making good all other promises? If a man should owe thee a thousand pound, and
pay thee nine hundred, ninety, and nine, thou would think surely, he would
never break for the rest; why God has paid his nine hundred, ninety, and nine;
and all the Glory of Heaven is but as one in comparison of what he has done;
we may therefore well believe, that he who has done so much for us, will not
leave the little undone.

Come then, rouse up O my Soul, and believe thy interest in those eternal
transactions betwixt God and Christ: is not here ground enough for thy Faith?
if thou art but called, the promise of God is thine: or if thou dare not rely
on this promise (which God forbid) thou have his Indenture, his Seal and
Witnesses of all sorts, both in Heaven and Earth; or yet, if thou believe
not, thou have an Oath, a Pawn, and the greatest part of thy Salvation already
done to thy hand; nay, I Will tell thee more poor soul then thus; even Christ
himself from all Eternity has engaged for thee that thou shall believe; O then
put not Christ to be challenged of his engagement by refusing the Gospel!
surely when thou believe, thou make Christ's word good; he that believes
not makes God a liar; though in another sense, and for ought he knows, even
in this, that he frustrates Christ's undertakings in the Covenant. And therefore
believe; yea, and cry, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief; increase my
Faith, till I come to full assurance of Faith. Faith in this sense is the very
Eye of the Soul, reading is Name Written in the Book of Life; it is an
apprehension of our particular Election. O believe, till thou come up to this
fullness of persuasion of Gods Love in Christ.

SECT. VI. Of loving Jesus in that respect.
6. WE must love Jesus, as carrying on that great work of our Salvation in that
Eternity. And this is the fruit, or effect of Faith; if once we believe that
all those designs, and transactions were for us, even for us; O then how should
we but love that God, and love that Christ who thus firstly and freely loved
us? God loved us before we loved him; for he loved us in that Eternity before
all Worlds, surely then we are bound to love him: First, and above all things.
As the Diamond forms and fashioneth the Diamond, so love forms and
fashioneth Love; or as fire converteth Fuel into Fire, so this ancient love of
God and Christ may well cause our love again. O Christ! did not thou love us?
who doubts it, that but reads over the project, council, foreknowledge,
purpose, decree, and covenant of God and Christ? who doubts it that but reads
the eternal design of God, that Christ should go out of himself, and suffer an
ecstasy through the vehemence of his love? that Christ should so far abase his
Majesty as to dye for us, that we might not dye, but live with him? O then how
should this but kindle in our hearts a most ardent love toward God and Christ?
what more effectual motive to work man's love, then to be prevented by the love
and bounty of another? That this fruit does spring from the sense of our
Election, Bernard observes, who is righteous but he that requiteth the love of
God with love again? Bern. Epi. 107.
which is never done, except the holy Ghost reveal unto a man by faith, Gods
eternal purpose concerning his future salvation. And hence it is that the heart
is most in frame, when it is a considering the eternal love of God in Christ: 2
^am 1.26.
As David said of Jonathan, thou have been very pleasant to me, thy love to me
was wonderful; so a poor soul gathering up all the goodness of God in that
Eternity, and feeding upon it, and the variety of it, it breaths out in that
expression, thou have been very pleasant to me O God, thy love to me has been
wonderful. O my soul, that thou could so live by faith on these eternal
passages, as that thou might attain to the highest fruits of faith, not
only to love God and Christ, but to love them with a burning love, with a
mighty love, such a love as lies in the most vigorous prosecution after Jesus
Christ, and in the most faithful resignation of thy self to God; such a love as
works the most delightful aspect of God and Christ, as makes a man to behold
God and Christ with all cheerfulness; such a love as works a man to extol the
praises of God. O in these things lies the strength of love.

But alas! this is, or at least this should be thy grief, that thou can not
love so well, and so warmly as thou art beloved: Christ comes toward thee
Skipping like the Heart, or Roe on the Mountains of spices, Cant 8 14.
but thy love toward Christ is creeping like the worm in the unwholesome
valley. Indeed the best affections have their fits of swooning: it may be for
the present thy love is cold: O but come up to this fire, consider how God and
Christ loved thee in every of these. --

1. His project to save they soul sprung out of his love: love was the first
wheel that set all the eternal works of God a going; what was that great
design of God, but only an expression of his love? it was his pleasure to
communicate himself, and the rise of that communication was his love.

2. The Counsels of God were all in love; had not love been as President of the
Counsel, where had thou been? when all the attributes of God were at a stand,
it was the love of God in Christ that resolved the question for thy salvation.

3. The foreknowledge of God was a foreknowledge of love and approbation: in
his eternal love he embraced thee as his own; he foreknew thee, (i.) of his
free love he set thee apart to life and to salvation; God has chosen us in
Christ before the foundation of the World: Ephesians. 1.4.
he chose us in Christ, but not for Christ; nothing at all moved him to Elect
thee but his own good pleasure and free love.

4. The purpose of God was a resolution of love, it speaks his love to be a
constant, settled abiding love; John 13.1.
no unkindness shall alter it, for having loved his own, he loves them unto the
end, nay, he loves them without end, from everlasting to everlasting.

5. The decree of God was an order (as I may call it) or an act of love, to
give in time that grace unto his elect, which before all time he decreed should
be an effectual means to bring them unto glory.

6. The covenant betwixt God and Christ was an agreement of love: God and
Christ struck hands to save our souls; 2 Timothy 1, 9.
grace was given us in Christ Jesus before the World began. Grace was given us,
that is, the gracious love and favor of God in Christ was given us before all
secular times. This was Gods meaning from everlasting, this was the design,
yea the greatest design that ever God had, to set out the infinite glory, and
the riches of his love in Jesus Christ. No question but he had other great
designs in doing such great things as he has done; but above all the designs
that ever God had in all his works, this is the chief, to honor his mercy, to
glorify the riches of his love and grace: had it not been for this he would
never have made the World; and therefore in that World to come it will be the
delight of God to show his Saints and Angels what he is able to do for a
creature; yea, he will to all Eternity declare to them, to what an height of
excellency and glory his love and mercy is able to raise poor souls, so that
the very Saints and Angels shall admire, and adore, and magnify the name of
God everlastingly for it.

O my soul, can thou ponder on this, and not love him dearly who has thus
loved thee? Come, stir up the gift that is in thee; if thou art a Christian
thou have some sparks, though now (it may be) under the ashes: come, rub,
chase, and warm thy affections at this fire; love, like a watch, must be wound
up, or else it will fall downwards: what do thou? why stand'st thou idle in
the heat of the Day? Christ has fire in his hand, it is but looking up, and
reaching out thy hand to take it from him: O take it with both thy hands, and
be thankful for it. Prayer, ejaculation, contemplation, judicious observation
of the Spirits season, are thy best instruments to kindle this fire of love in
thee.

And methinks thy heart should begin now to melt, methinks it should receive
more easy impressions from the object before it, methinks these eternal works
and acts of God and Christ toward thy poor soul, should begin to overcome
thee, Cant. 6.5. Cant 8.6.
and to burn thy heart as with coals of Juniper. Why Lord, is it thus? was I
Elected from all Eternity in Christ? was I ordained to a glorious inheritance
before there was a World? was this business to make me happy, one of the cheef
deep counsels of God? was this one of the works of his wisdom that he was
exercised about before the World began? was this the great design of God in
making the World, and in making Heaven, the place of glory, to glorify
himself, and to glorify such a poor wretch as I am? O then how should this
but mightily inflame my heart with the love God, and love of Christ? how should
I choose but say as the Martyr did, Oh that I had as many lives, as I have
hairs on my head, to lay them down for Christ? Ah what flames of Divine
affection, what raptures of zeal, what ravishments of delight, what ecstasies of
obedience can be enough for my blessed God, and dearest Redeemer.

SECT. VII. Of joying in Jesus in that respect.
7. WE must joy in Jesus, as carrying on that great work of our salvation in
that Eternity. This joy is a passion arising from the sweetness of the Object
that we enjoy. O my soul, do thou believe? and art thou now cast into a pang
of love? how then should thy joy but come on? As Christ said to the 70. In this
rejoice not, Luke 10.20.
that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice because your names
are written in Heaven; so rejoice not thou in this, that the world is thine,
that riches are thine, that thou have subdued men and devils; but herein
rejoice, that thy name is written in the Book of life. O what a comfortable
point is this! that the Father and Christ should transact a bargain from
Eternity, concerning thee by name, that the Father and the Son should commune
together concerning thy heaven, as if their language had been thus; Father,
what shall be given to thy justice to ransom such a one, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Mary, Martha, Hannah, etc. why no more but
this, thou shall dye my Son, and whosoever believes in thee shall live for
ever. Why then says Christ, I will engage for such, and such a one; I will
enter into Bond for such and such a person; Abraham shall believe in time: See,
I have writ down his name in the Book of life. And who art thou that read?
art thou a believer? do thou believe in the Lord Jesus Christ? Christ said
the same of thee, and entered into a bond for thee, and entered they name in
the Book of life; See the certainty of this in Phil. 4.3. Phil. 4 3.
Thou Thomas, Andrew, Peter, Christ knows thee by name, and thy name is written
in the Book of life. O go thy way, and rejoice, and take strong consolation! is
there not cause? why, I tell thee thy name is in the Book of Heaven, and if
this may add to thy joy, know there is none in Heaven or Earth shall ever be
able to blot it out again. No, no poor soul, Romans 8.1.
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: God has decreed
thy salvation, and Gods decree shall stand, let Men and Devils say what they
will to the contrary, Psalm. 33.11.
The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations: it is as possible for God to deny himself, as it is possible for
thee a believer to perish. 1 Pet. 1.5.
We are kept (says the Apostle) by the power of God through faith to
salvation; and therefore rejoice, and again rejoice; yea, raise up thy joy to
that pitch of triumph, which is joy elevated; and elevated so high, that it
comes to victoriousness, and magnanimous conquest of heart over all things; say
with the Apostle, what, my name written in the Book of life? Romans 8.3^, 35, 38,
39.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? -- who then shall
separate me from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? nay, I am persuaded
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus my Lord.

SECT. VIII. Of calling on Jesus in that respect.
8. WE must call on Jesus, or on God the Father in and through Jesus. This
also is included in looking, as David while Praying, unto thee do I lift up
mine Eyes, Psa. 123.1.
O thou that dwell in the Heavens. Now this calling on God, or looking to
God, contains Prayer, and Praise. 1. We must pray that all these transactions
betwixt God and Christ, may be assuredly ours, and that God would clear up our
Titles more and more; yea, and seeing all good things tending to Salvation,
were from all Eternity prepared for us, we are therefore to pray; that by
prayer we may draw them down from Heaven; for what though our Evidences be
clear? Yet this must not cast out means; God does not use to bestow his saving
Graces on lazy sluggards; those therefore who from the certainty of
Predestination do pretend that the duty of Prayer is superfluous, do plainly
show that they have no certainty at all. Aquinas Aquinas part c q. art. 8.
was Orthodox in this, the Predestinate must Pray, because by these effects of
Predestination, the Salvation of Souls is best ascertained. The same Spirit
which Witnesses to our Spirit that we are his Chosen, is also the Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication; and therefore he that believes that he is one of Gods
Elect, he cannot but pray for those things which he believes, that God has
prepared for him before the foundation of the World. -- 2. We must praise God:
what, that God should look on us, and Predestinate us to Life? That he should
pass by so many on the right hand and on the left, and that I should be one
whom the Lord did Elect? what, such a vile, and sinful Wretch as I am? was
there ever like Love? was there ever like Mercy? may not Heaven and Earth stand
amazed at this? O what shall I do to be thankful enough to this dear God? Thus
thou that know thy interest in Christ, study praise and thankfulness. Say in
thy self, who made me to differ from those Castaway Souls? Alas! we were all
framed of the same Mould, hewed out of the same Rock, It is storied of one of
the late French Kings, that in a serious meditation, considering his own
condition of being King and Ruler of that Nation, Oh (said he) when I was born,
a Thousand other Souls were born in this Kingdom with me, and what have I done
to God more than they? O my Soul, what difference betwixt thee and those many
Thousands of Reprobates that live with thee in the world at this day? nothing,
surely nothing but the free mercy, goodness, and love of God in Jesus Christ. O
then praise this God, yea, sound forth the Praise of the Glory of his Grace.
Remember that was Gods design, and that is thy Duty.

SECT. IX. On conforming to Jesus in that Respect.
2. WE must Conform to Jesus: we must fix our Eyes on Jesus for our Imitation,
that also is the meaning of this looking in the Text. And in respect of our
Predestination the Apostle speaks expressly, Romans 8 29.
he did Predestinate us to be conformed to the Image of his Son: This is one
end of Predestination, and this is one end of looking unto Jesus, nay it is
included in it. A very look on Jesus has a Power in it to conform us to the
Image of Jesus. 2 Cor. 3.18.
We are changed by beholding, says the Apostle: Oh when I see Gods love in
Christ to me even from all Eternity, how should this but stir up my Soul to be
like Jesus Christ? where there is a dependence, there is a desire to be like
even among men; how much more considering my dependence on God in Christ,
should I desire to be like Christ in disposition? all the question is, what is
this Image of Christ, to which we must be conformed? I Answer, Holiness and
Happiness: but because the latter is our reward, and the former is our duty,
therefore look to that.

But wherein consists that? I Answer, in that resemblance, likeness, and
conformity to Christ in all the passages forementioned: And in every of those
must we conform to Christ. As --

1. Christ is the Son of God; so must we be Gods Sons. As many as received him,
to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God. Joh. 1.12. Mal. 1.6. 1 Pet.
1.17.
O what duty lies upon us in this respect; If I be your Father, where is mine
Honor? and if ye call on the Father, pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear. God looks for more honor, fear, reverence, duty, and obedience from a
Son than from the Rabble of the World: if thou art Gods Son, thy sins more
offend God then the sins of all the reprobates in the world; why alas, thy sins
are not mere transgressions of the Law, but committed against the mercy,
bounty, and goodness of God vouchsafed unto thee; thy sins have a world of
unthankfulness joined with them, and therefore how should God but visit? Amos
3.2
you only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I
visit you for all your Iniquities. O think of this, you that are Gods Sons; and
conform to Christ, for he was an Obedient Son.

2. Christ the Son of God delights in the Father, and his delight is also with
the Sons of men; so must we delight in the Father, and delight in his Children.
Psa. 37.4. Psa. 16.3.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desire of thy Heart.
And the Saints that are on the Earth are they, in whom is all my Delight, says
David. It is storied of Dr. Tailor, that being in prison he could delight in
God; and he rejoiced that ever he came into Prison, because of his acquaintance
with that Angel of God, as he called Mr. Bradford. O this is Heaven upon Earth!
not only God, but the very Saints of God are sweet Objects of delight. Mark
them, and if they be Saints indeed, they are savory in their Discourse, in
their Duties, in their Carriages; their Example is powerful, their society
profitable, how should we but delight in them?

3. God and Christ laid this Plot from all Eternity, that all he would do,
should be to the praise of the glory of his Grace: So must we purpose this as
the end of all our actions, whether we eat, or drink, or whatsoever we do, we
must do all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31
But especially if from God we receive any spiritual good, then give all again
to the glory of his grace. Dan. 2 20, 23
Blessed be the Name of God for ever and ever (said Daniel) for Wisdom and
might are his; -- and I thank thee, and praise thee O God of my Fathers, who
have given me Wisdom and Might: an excellent spirit of Wisdom and Might
wrought in Daniel, and he acknowledges all to the Giver: wisdom and might are
his. Christians! if you feel grace in your hearts, I beseech you acknowledge it
to Christ: He does all, he subdues Lusts, heals VVounds, stays inward Issues,
sets broken Bones, and makes them to rejoice; and therefore let him him the
glory of all; do you acknowledge grace in it is latitude to the God of all grace.

4. God and Christ counseled about our Salvation; there was a great conflict
in the Attributes of God; justice and mercy could not be reconciled, till the
Wisdom of God found out that glorious and wonderful expedient, the Lord Jesus
Christ: so let us Counsel about our Salvation: the flesh and the spirit whereof
we are compounded, draw several ways, the Flesh draws Hell-ward, and the
Spirit Heavenward; come then, call we in heavenly and spiritual Wisdom to
decide this Controversy; you may hear its Language in Job 28.28. Job 28.28
Behold the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from evil is
Understanding. If we would draw heavenward, and save our souls; come then, let
us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, fear God, and keep his
Commandments, Eccles. 12.13
for this is the whole duty of Man. Keep his Commandments in an Evangelical
sense (i) look at the expedient, Jesus Christ, who has kept them for us, and
in whom, and through whom, our imperfect Obedience is accepted with God.

5. God and Christ loved us with an everlasting Love. So must we love him who
has first loved us: this is the nature of spiritual Love: that it runs into
its own Ocean, O love the Lord all ye his Saints! who has more cause to love
him then you have? who has been loved so much? or who has so much come under
the power of love as you have? Ps. 31.23
has not Christ loved you, not only with a love of well-wishing, which is from
everlasting (some call it the love of Election, the fountain-love, the
wellhead of salvation) but also with a love of complacency? has not Christ
shed abroad his love into your hearts, and shall he lose by it; will not these
cords of love draw up your hearts to love him again? sure it is but reason to
love him, who has first loved you, yea, and loved you when you were unlovely,
and had nothing in you worthy of love. Christians! then it was that Christ
loved you in rags, it is meet therefore that you should love him in Robes.

6. God and Christ appointed, or purposed us unto salvation, his love was a
sure, and settled, and firm, and constant love: the purpose of God according to
Election must stand. Romans 9.11 Ps. 119 112.
So must we love him, and cleave unto him for ever: I have inclined my heart to
perform thy Statutes always even to the end. David's heart was much taken with
the Statutes of God, and therefore he gives this expression of the fullness of
his heart, always and even to the end. it is a kind of pleonasme, his
resolutions were such that he would never depart from his God.

7. God and Christ decreed, booked, and sealed our salvation: and so must we
put to our seal that God is true (i.) we must believe in Christ? for when we
believe, we make Christ's word good. He that believes not, makes God a liar, (as
you have heard) in that he frustrates, or endeavors to frustrate Christ's
undertaking in his predestination.

8. God and Christ entered into Covenant concerning our salvation: So must we
enter into Covenant with him; we must take him to be our God, and give up our
selves to be his people: -- Why thus we must in all particulars conform to
Christ. The sum of all is this, we must be like Christ in grace, and gracious
actings.

O my soul, see to this grace, see to this conformity to Jesus Christ in
gracious actings, and this will enable thee to read thy name written in the
Book of Life. O abhor, and repel that Devils dart, I am predestined, and
therefore I may live as I list; how contrary is this to the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4
he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the World, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in love? and as the Elect of God put on
bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering,
forgiving one another, -- Even as Christ forgave you? this conformity to Christ
in grace is the very effect of our predestination: Colos. 3 12, 13. Ps. 45 21
O look unto Jesus, and be in grace like unto Jesus: why, Christ is full of
grace, a vessel filled up to the lip, or very brim, thou art fairer than the
children of men, and grace is poured into thy lips. Christ was as it were grace
speaking, Luk 4.22. Grace sighing, weeping, dying, Heb. 2.9. Grace living
again, and now dropping, or rather raining down floods of grace on his living
members, Ephesians. 4.11. Christ is the great Apple Tree, dropping down Apples of
Life, Cant. 2.3. and all that falls from this tree, as apples, leaves, shadows,
smell, blossoms, are but pieces of grace fallen down from him, who is the
fullness of all, Cant. 2.1
and has filled all things. Christ is the rose of Sharon, and every leaf of
this rose is an Heaven; every white and red in it is grace and glory, every act
of breathing out it is smell from everlasting to everlasting is Spotless and
unmixed grace; why then my soul, if thou will conform to Christ, conform in
this: Be holy as he is holy; John 1.16.
of that fullness of grace that is in him, do thou receive even grace for grace.

Christians! where are we? O that ever men should hear of so much grace, and of
such acts of grace in that eternity before all worlds, and yet no impression of
grace upon their hearts! O that God and Christ should both be in that business
of Eternity: that heaven, hell, justice, mercy, souls, and deep wisdom, should
be all in that rare piece, and yet that men should think more of a Farm, an
Ox, an house, a pin, a straw, or of the bones of a crazy livelihood; O look up,
look up, if thou art Christ's, Consider what he has done for thy soul; why,
thou art predestinate to be conformed to the Image of Christ.

Thus far we have Looked on Jesus as our Jesus, in that Eternity before all
time until the creation: Our next work is to Look on Jesus, carrying on the
great work of man's salvation in the Creation, the beginning of time, until his
first coming.

LOOKING UNTO JESUS, From the Creation until his first coming. The Third Book.
Revel. 1.8, 11. The Lord will give thee for a Covenant of the People. --
Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see.

CHAP. I.
SECT. I. Of Christ Promised by degrees.
IN this period, as in the former, we shall first lay down the Object; and then
direct you how to look upon it.

The Object is Jesus, carrying on the work of man's salvation in that dark time
before his coming in the flesh.

No sooner is the world made, and the things therein; but man was created, that
way might be made for God to show his grace in the salvation of his Elect. And
now was it that Gods eternal project, and counsel, and foreknowledge, and
purpose, and decree, and Covenant with Christ was to come into execution.
Indeed at the first there was no need of Christ; for man at first was made in
holiness, the image of God, and to bear rule over the rest of the visible
creatures; though this his state was but of a little standing. It was the
received opinion in in former times, that our first parents fell the very same
day in which they were created. Augustine amongst the rest writes, that they
stood but six hours: but though we cannot describe the certain time, very
probable it is, that it was but short: This we find, that Moses having set
down the creation of man, without the interposition of any thing else, he comes
immediately to the fall; and the Devil no doubt took the first occasion he
possibly could, to bring man to the same damnation with himself. Well then,
long it was not but Adam by his sin deprived himself, and all his posterity of
the image of God: All mankind was in his loins, so by the order and
appointment of God all mankind partake with him in the guilt of his sins: Hence
is the daily and continual cry, not only of Adam, Abraham, David, Paul, but of
every Saint, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? But sweet souls, stay your complaints, here is Gospel-news. --

In this sad hour of temptation God stepped in: he will not leave man without
hope; he tells the Devil who begun this mischief; I will put enmity between
thee, and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy
head, and thou shall bruise his heel. At the very instant, when God was
pronouncing judgment upon the several delinquents in the fall; nay, before
judgment was pronounced on the persons tempted, Jesus is hinred, the Covenant
of grace is proclaimed. O the infinite riches of the mercy of God in Christ!

But you will say, how comes Jesus in? how carried he on the great work of our
salvation in this dark time?

I answer, 1. By assuming and taking upon him the form and shape of man, and so
discharging some special offices in that respect: We read often of Christ's
apparition before his Incarnation, and then especially when he had to do with
this great Nego^iation of man's Eternal happiness. Some think it not improbable
that Christ assumed the form of man when he first created man; and so he made
man, not only in his own image which he had as God, In holiness, and true
righteousness, but in respect of that form which he had assumed. Howsoever this
we find, that after man had sinned, Christ then appeared, first to Adam, then
to Abraham, then to Isaac, then to Jacob, then to Moses, etc. -- first, he
appeared to Adam in the garden, and they heard the voice of the Lord God,
walking in the garden in the cool of the day. God as he is God has neither
voice to speak, nor seet to walk, but assuming the form and shape of a man he
exercised both: and so he was the first that published that first promise to
the World, It shall bruise thy head. -- 2. He appeared to Abraham in the plain
of Mamre, where the Lord talked with Abraham, and Abraham calls him the Judge
of all the Earth, which can be ascribed to none but Christ the Judge of quick
and dead. Some from that saying of Christ, your Father Abraham rejoiced to see
my day, and he saw it, and was glad, do gather that Abraham saw Christ, not
only with the eyes of faith (as all the rest of the Patriarchs and Prophets
did) but also in a visible shape which he assumed, like unto that whereunto he
was afterward to be united; And so it was Christ that renewed the Covenant
with Abraham, saying, I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. -- 3. He appeared to Isaac, Genesis 26.2.
and to Jacob, Genesis 32.24, 30. and to Moses, Exodus 20.1, 2, 3. and to many
others, of which I shall comment in order. And these apparitions of Christ were
as praeludiums of his Incarnation. But this is not the way I shall insist upon.

2. Christ carried on the great work of our salvation in that dark time, not by
himself exhibited (as when he was Incarnate) but only promised. The great King
would first have his Harbingers to lead the way, before he himself would come
in person. As the Lord had observed this method in creating the World, that
first he would have darkness, and then light, and as still he observes this
method in upholding the world, that first he will have dawning, and then clear
day; so in the framing and upholding of his Church, he will first have Christ
held forth in Ceremonies, Rites, Figures, Types, Promises, Covenants; and then
like a glorious Sun, or like the dayspring from on high he would visit the
world, to give light to them that sit in darkness. To this purpose we read,
that as Christ, so the Covenant of grace (which applies Christ to us) was first
promised, and then promulgated: the Covenant of promise was that Covenant,
which God made with Adam, and Abraham, and Moses, and David, and all Israel in
Jesus Christ; to be Incarnate, crucified, and risen from the dead; and it was
meet that the promise should go before the Gospel, and be fulfilled in the
Gospel, that so a great good might earnestly be desired, before it was
bestowed. In a time of darkness men desire light; as the morning-watch watches
and longs for the morning, so the obscure revelation of Christ in a promise,
raised the hearts of the Patriarchs to an earnest desire of Christ his coming
in the flesh. But in this obscurity we may observe some degrees; before the Law
given by Moses the promise was more obscure; the Law being given, even to the
time of the Prophets, the promise was a little more clear; in the time of the
Prophets, even to John the Baptist, it was clearer yet; as the coming of the
messiah did approach nearer and nearer, so was the promise clearer and clearer
still: Just as the approach of the Sun is nearer or further off, so is the
light that goes before it greater or lesser. In like manner was the Revelation
that went before Christ more dim or clear, as the rising of the Sun of
righteousness was more remote, or nigh at hand. It was the good pleasure of God
to manifest the riches of his grace by degrees, and not all at once; we see to
this very day, that God in his several approaches of mercy and goodness draws
nearer and nearer to his Church: Even now in this mavelous light of the
Gospel we have our divine Ceremonies and Sacraments, we see him afar off, we
know but in part; but time shall come (even before his second coming) that we,
or our children shall see him more clearly, perfectly, immediately. My present
business is to hold forth Jesus in the Covenant of grace as promised, and
because the promise receives distinction of degrees according to the several
breakings out of it to the dark world, we will consider it as it was manifested.

1. From Adam till Abraham. 2. From Abraham till Moses. 3. From Moses till
David. 4. From David till the Babylonish Captivity, or thereabout. 5. From the
Captivity, or thereabout, till Christ.
In every of these periods will appear some further and further discoveries of
Gods mercy in Christ, of the Covenant of grace, of our Jesus carrying on the
great work of man's Eternal salvation in that dark time.

You heard before of the Covenant betwixt God and Christ concerning our
salvation; but that was not the Covenant of grace which God immediately made
with man as fallen; but a particular Covenant with Christ to be the Mediator.
Or so far as it was a Covenant of grace, it was then made betwixt God and
Christ, and after to be made betwixt God and us: for a time we were hid in the
womb of Gods Election, and not being then capable to enter into Covenant with
God, Christ undertook for us, but yet so that when we come to be regenerate, we
are then to strike Covenant our selves. And hence we read expressly of Gods
Covenanting with sundry particular persons, as with Adam, and Abraham, and
Moses, and David, etc. Of which in the next Sections.

SECT. II. Of the Covenant of promise as manifested to Adam.
THe Covenant of grace in this sense is nothing else but a compact made betwixt
God and man, touching reconciliation, and life Eternal by Christ. Now the first
breaking forth of this gracious Covenant was to Adam and Eve, immediately after
the fall, expressed in these words, I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, Gen 3 19.
and between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel.

This promise as it is the first; so the hardest to be understood: it contains
in it good news of the overthrow of Satan's Kingdom, and of man's freedom by the
death of Christ. But the obscurity is such, that Luther exceedingly complains,
Textus qui omnibus debebat esse notissimus, a nemine quod ego sciam, diligentor
and accurate explicatus, etc. Luther. Genesis 3.14.
the Text which of all men should rightly be known, is of no man that I know
(says he) especially and accurately unfolded: amongst the Ancients there is
not one that has explicated this Text according to the dignity of it.

The occasion was this. The Lord looking down from heaven, and seeing how Satan
had prevailed against man, and in some sort undone the whole fabric of the
creation, he resolves upon Satan's ruin, and man's preservation; And the Lord
God said unto the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art cursed. This
literally is understood of the Serpent, but Spiritually of the Devil; both were
as means to draw man unto sin, and therefore they are joined as one in the
punishment; The Lord cut off the feet of the Serpent (say the Rabbis) and
cursed him; R. Eliezer. c. 14.
and he cast Samael (the Devil) and his company out of heaven, and cursed them.
Indeed man being in the transgression, must also have his punnishment, as it
follows verse. 17, 18, 19. and yet that God might manifest the riches of his
grace, he includes in the Serpents malediction this everlasting Gospel. I will
put enmity between thee and the woman, etc.

For the sense of the Words we shall open these terms, as, 1. Who is the
Serpent? 2. Who is the woman? 3. What is the seed of the Serpent? 4, What is
the seed of the woman? 5. What is that Hu [in our Bible translated it?] 6. What
is the Serpents head, and the bruising of it? 7. What is the heel of the seed
of the woman, and the bruising of it? 8. Amongst whom was the enmity, or rather
enmities? for in the Text we find many Armies; I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, etc.

1. Who is the Serpent? I find diversity of opinions among Interpreters: Some
say, it was only the Serpent, and that which belongs unto Satan is but
mystically understood: others say, it was only Satan under the notion of a
Serpent, as sometimes he is called the great Dragon, And the great Dragon was
cast out, that old Serpent called the Devil, Rev. 12.9.
and Satan, which deceived the whole world. Others say, it was both Satan and
the Serpent; as men are said to be possessed of Satan, so was the Serpent
possessed of the Devil. Satan could not provoke our first parents to sin by any
inward temptation, as now he does by the help of our corruption: nor could he
enter into their bodies or minds, because of the holiness and glory that was in
them; and therefore he presumed to take a beast of the earth, and by disposing
of his Tongue he speaks within him. But what? must the Serpent have punishment,
that was only Satan's instrument in the temptation? yes:

Such was Gods love to man, that he condemns both the Author and instrument of
that that evil: as one that in anger breaks the sword wherewith his son, or his
friend was wounded; so Gods breaks Satan's sword: the Serpent is punnished
according to the letter of the Text, and Satan is punished in the spiritual
meaning of the Lord.

Who is the woman? Some are all for Allegories, and thy will tell you, that the
Serpent and the Woman are the superior and inferior faculties of the Soul;
and that ever since the Fall there has been a continual War betwixt these: but
I look at this Commentary as vain and trifling, though it be fathered on some
of the Ancients, and of no small note; others say, this Woman is the Blessed
Virgin, in relation to which, they read the last words thus, she shall bruise
thy head; this reading is not only allowed, but confirmed by the Council of
Trent, and in some of their Prayer-books, thy call her The Mother of the Lord,
the Tree of Life, the breaker of the Serpents head, and the Gate of Heaven. But
I look on this Commentary as ignorant and Idolatrous, Antiphona de domina
nostra secundum usum Eccles Hildenshem.
and wholly derogatory to the Kingdom of Christ. Others are not so easily
mislead, and therefore say, that the Woman wheresoever mentioned in this Text,
is Eve, and none but Eve; she it was whom the tempter had seduced, and in just
judgment for her familiarity with the tempter, God meets with her, I will put
enmity (says God) between thee and the Woman.

3. What is the Seed of the Serpent? in Scripture phrase Seed is sometimes
taken collectively, for many at once; as when the Lord said to Abraham, I will
be thy God, and the God of thy Seed: Genesis 17 17, 18
and to thee and thy Seed will I give this Land: and I will multiply thy Seed
as the sand of the Sea: and sometimes it is taken singularly for one only
person; thus Eve called her Son Seth, for God, said she, has appointed me
another Seed instead of Abel: Genesis 4.25 Genesis 22.18
and so it is said of Christ, in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed. Now in this place the Seed of the Serpent is taken collectively, for
all the families of Devils, Mat. 25.4
for the Devil and his Angels (as Christ calls them) and for all the Sons of
the Devil (i.) for all reprobate men whose Father and Prince is the Devil; as
Christ told the Jews, ye are of your Father the Devil, John 8 44
and the lusts of your Father ye will do: and as John tells us, 1 John 3 8, 10
he that commits sin is of the Devil -- in this the children of God are
manifest, and the children of the Devil: and thus both Devils and reprobates
are reckoned as the seed of the Serpent.

4. What is the Seed of the Woman? -- The Seed of the Woman is that posterity
of the Woman which do not degenerate into the Seed of the Serpent: that is the
meaning of the first sentence, I will put enmity; -- and then it follows,
between thy Seed and her Seed: and for this sense we have these arguments. 1.
The opposition of the Seeds, for as the Seed of the Serpent is taken
collectively, so the Seed of the Woman must be taken collectively, that the
opposition may be fit. 2. The enmities fore-spoken do strongly evince it: now
the enmities pertain both to Eve and to all her posterity (if godly) to the end
of the world; hence all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution, says the Apostle; 2 Timothy 3.18.
And I will put enmity (says God) between thee and the woman; is that all? no,
but also between thy Seed and her Seed: and who can deny but these enmities
have been ever since betwixt Satan's brood and the Saints? we are all wrestlers
against Principalities and Powers, and Rulers of the darkness of this World,
Ephesians. 6.12:
and against spiritual wickednesses in high places.

5. What is that Hu] in our Bible translated, it?] it shall bruise thy head?
Some observe this Hu, it] is of the masculine gender; and Zera, Seed, is of the
masculine gender; and Jesaphera, shall bruise, is of the masculine gender,
which confutes the Translation, that renders it thus, she shall bruise thy head:
and which confirms our Translation which is thus, he, or it, or that same Seed,
(i.) one singular person of that same Seed, shall bruise thy head. Well then,
who is this he? or what one is he?] even Jesus the Son of the Living God. Here
is the first hint of Jesus that ever was read, or heard of in this world. This
was the Proto-evangel, or first Gospel that ever was published after the
Creation. O blessed news, fit for Gods mouth to speak, and to break first to
the world now fallen! O dear parents! how would you have dispaired, if before
sentence you had not heard this blessed tidings! O our first Parents upon
Earth! where had you and we been, if this blessed Text had not been? Come, set
a Star upon it, write it in letters of Gold, or rather write it on the very
Tables of our Hearts: here is the blessedst news that ever was, or ever shall
be; but for this we had been all Firebrarnds of Hell; yea, but for this, Adam
and Eve, and all their Sons and Daughters that are now gone out of this World,
had been smoking and frying in Hellfire. Away with all gross mistakes,
Erroneous conceits, and as you love your Souls, yield to this blessed sense!
This it] or he] is one of that same Seed, and this one of that same seed is
Jesus, and only Jesus, and none but Jesus; and for this sense we have these
arguments.

1. Some observe that this Sentence is separated from the former with a Period
or great stop: however God goes on to speak of the Seed of the Woman, yet he
says not, and that Seed shall bruise thy head, for so we might have thought he
had spoken of that Seed collectively as he did before; but stopping there, and
not repeating the same word again, he gives it thus; it or he shall bruise thy
head; (i.) some individual person of that same Seed, some singular one of that
same common Seed of the Woman shall bruise thy head; as David alone of all the
Host of Israel goes forth to fight with Goliath, and overcomes him; so Christ
alone of all the Seed of the Woman was so to fight with the Serpent by his own
power as to overcome him, and to bruise his head.

2. The Seventy in their Translations of this place (with which agrees the
Chaldee Paraphrast) renders it (...), he] which needs most denote some singular
person, or Son of the woman; and the rather because the Seed spoken of before
is rendered (...), to which if the relative had rightly agreed, it should have
been (...), or (...), and not (...); Hereto we may add, that to this it] or he]
the Seed of the Serpent is not opposed as it was in the former sentence; but
the Serpent it self, one singular Antagonist; here is singularis (...), a duel,
or a combat of two, hand to hand, only Christand the Serpent; he shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

3. The bruising of the head does plainly discover this it, or he is Jesus
Christ: for non can bruise the Serpents head but only God: the God of peace
(says the Apostle) shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. Now there was
none of the Seed of the Woman, Romans 16.10.
that was ever God but only Christ, God-Man, Man-God, blessed for ever; and
therefore it must needs be Christ; and only Christ that can bruise this
Serpents head: O there is a Divine Power, a power and virtue of God in it to
bruise the Serpents head; observe but the manner of this Duel: Christ treads on
the Serpent; and by this means he comes to have a bruise in the heel, whilst
with his heel he bruiseth the Serpents head; a wonderful thing that Christ
should lay at the Serpents head with no other weapon but only with his heel; it
were much for any man to strike at any common Serpent with a bare and naked
foot: rather would he take a dart, or club, or any other Weapon; but with a
foot to bruise Satan's head (that great and fierce, and monsterous Serpent) this
exceeds any man's power or any man's daring to attempt: hence it is that some one
person of more than human strength must do this deed, and who is that of the
Seed of the Woman but only Jesus Christ?

4. God himself in other places of Scripture does expressly declare that this
Seed here promised is Christ, and only Christ: mark but where this promise is
repeated to the Patriarchs, as when the Lord said to Abraham, Genesis 22.18.
in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed: and when the Lord
said to David, I will raise up thy Seed after thee, which shall be of thy Sons,
and I will establish his Kingdom; 1 Chro. 17.11.
and you may see it clear that this Seed is Christ, and only Christ, concerning
that promise to Abraham, the Apostle so interprets it, now to Abraham and his
seed were the promises made; he says not, Gal. 3.16
and to Seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ: and
concerning that promise to David, the Prophet so interprets it, He shall sit
upon the Throne of David, Isa. 9.6, 7
and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it, -- who is that? in the
former verse, his name is Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, (i.) Christ and none but Christ; for
unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given, etc. and who is that but
Jesus Christ?

5. The accomplishment of this Promise in Christ is expressly and clearly made
out in the New Testament. Was not Jesus Christ of the Seed of the Woman, born
of a Virgin? was not his heel bruised, himself Crucified? and did he not bruise
the Serpents head, break the Power and Dominion of Satan? What says the
Gospel? 1 John 3.8 Luk 10 17, 18, 19.
for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil. -- And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord,
even the Devils are subject unto us, through thy Name: and he said unto them, I
beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven; behold I give unto you power to
tread on Serpents, and Scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and
nothing shall by any means hurt you. Joh. 12.31 Heb. 2.14
-- And now is the judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this world
be cast out. -- And for as much as children are partakers of flesh and blood,
He also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil. In these and many
other places we find this very promise fulfilled in Christ, and only in Christ;
and therefore he, and only he is the Seed of the Woman (that Hu, it, or he)
that shall bruise the Serpents head. Yet I will not deny, but by way of
participation this promise may pertain to the whole Body of Christ; Romans 8 37
Through him that loved us we are more than Conquerours, says the Apostle; we
may Conquer Satan, though not in our own strength, but Christ's; and so in a
secondary sense, by way of communication with Christ, under this Seed all the
faithful are and may be contained; 1. Because the Head and Members are all one
Body, Heb. 2.11 Isa 53.10.
both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are all one. 2. Because
the faithful are called the seed of Christ, when thou shall make his Soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed. 3. Because Satan does not only bruise
the heel of Christ, but of all the faithful, 2 Timothy ^.12. Romans 16.20.
all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. 4. Because
Satan's overthrow by Christ our Head is diffused to all the Members, and the God
of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. In this sense many of the
ancient and modern Divines do extend this seed to the whole Body of Christ: but
primarily, originally, especially, and properly, it belongs only to Christ, and
to none but the Lord Jesus Christ. He only is the seed by whom the promise is
accomplished, though the faithful also are the seed to whom and for whom the
promise was made.

6. What is the Serpents head, and the bruising of it? 1. For the Serpents
head, it is the power, rage, reign and Kingdom of Satan: It is observed that
in the head of a Serpent lies the strength, power, and life of a Serpent; so by
a phraise of speech fitted to the condition of this Serpent that was Satan's
instrument, God tells the Devil of the danger of his head, (i.e.) of his power
and Kingdom: now this power and Kingdom of Satan consists more especially in
sin and death; for the sting of death is sin, and the power of death is in
Satan. 2 Cor. 15.26 Heb. 2.14
Hence sin and death are usually called the works and wages of Satan; they are
his own, he owns them, and carries them at his girdle. 2. For the bruising of
this head, it is the overthrowing of Satan's power; he shall bruise thy head,
(i.e.) Christ shall break thy power; Christ shall destroy sin, and death, and
him that had the power of death, that is the Devil. 1 John 2.13.
I say Christ shall do it, though as I have said in a secondary sense the
faithful shall do it; Christ overcomes by his own power, and the faithful
overcome by the power of Christ; the victory is common to all the seed, but the
Author of victory is only Christ the Head and chief of all the seed: Romans 16.20.
ye have overcome the evil one, but how? not of your selves, no, it is the God
of peace that bruiseth Satan. Well then, here is the sense, the Serpents head
is bruised, (i.e.) the Devil, and sin, and death, and hell are overthrown; not
only the Devil in his person, but the works of the Devil, which by the fall he
had planted in our natures, as pride, vain glory, ignorance, lust, etc. nor
only Satan's works, but the fruits and effects of his works, as Death and Hell;
so that all the faithful may sing with Paul; O death where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory? thanks be to God which gives us victory through
Jesus Christ our Lord. 1 Cor. 15.5^, 57.


7. What is the heel of the seed of the woman, and the bruising of it? 1. For
the heel, it is the humanity of Christ, according to which properly Christ has
an heel: Or (as others) it is the ways of Christ, which Satan, by all the
means he could possibly would seek to suppress. 2. For the bruising of his
heel, it is the miseries, mockings, woundings, Death and Burial of Christ, all
which he endured in his heel (i.e.) in his humanity; or it extends further, to
all the hurts, reproaches, afflictions, persecutions of the faithful by the
Devil and his agents: all which are but as a bruise in the heel, which cannot
endanger the spiritual life of their souls. It is observed, that the Serpent
has but one head, but the seed of the woman has two heels; so that the one
may be some help, while the other is hurt; besides, an hurt in the heel is far
from the head and heart; and though it may be painful, it is not mortal.
Indeed, Christ's heel was bruised (i.e.) He was delivered to death, even to the
death of the Cross; yet he rose again from the dead; neither had the Devil any
advantage by his death; for as angry Bees stinging once, make themselves
droanes, so the Devil, now he may hiss at us, but he cannot hurt us; by that
wound which Christ received at his death, he wounded all his enemies
irrecoverably; the very sight it self was Christ's triumph; even then was the
Kingdom of darkness utterly overthrown; sin, death, and Satan were conquered,
and taken captive, and whatsoever might be brought against us, was taken away,
as the least bill, or scroll. O blessed riddle! Judge. 14.14
Out of the Eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness.
In reference to the promise, thou shall bruise his heel, Rev. 13.8.
Christ is said to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. Here Is
good news betimes.

8. Amongst whom was the enmity, or this hostile war? we find in the Text three
Hosts, and three battles: As --

1. Betwixt Satan and the woman; I will put enmity between thee and the woman:
(i.e.) Betwixt thee the seducer, and her whom thou have seduced. This enmity is
opposed to the amity and familiarity, which had been between the woman and the
Serpent, and upon that account the woman, and not the man is named; not but
that enmity must be betwixt the Devil and man, as well as betwixt the Devil and
the woman: but because the woman had more tampered with Satan, and being
deceived by Satan, was first in the transgression, therefore is she only
named, I will put enmity between thee and the woman.

2. Betwixt Satan's seed, and the seed of the woman: I will put enmity, not
only between thee, and the woman, but also between thy seed, and her seed,
q.d. This enmity shall not cease with the death of the woman, but it shall
continue to her seed, and to her seeds seed, even to the end of the World. We
see to this day how the Serpent and Serpents seed are striving and warring
against the Church; and a wonder it is (considering the malice of the enemy)
that there is a Church upon Earth, but only that we have Christ's promise, The
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and lo I am with you always, even
to the end of the World.

3. Betwixt Christ and the Serpent. O this a bloody conflict on both sides, he
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. 1. He shall bruise thy
head; Christ shall break thy power, thy power, (i.e.) the power of the Serpent,
or of the Devil himself: he fights not so much with the seed, as with the
Serpent; if Satan be overthrown, his seed cannot stand. 2. Thou shall bruise
his heel; thou shall afflict him and his, thou shall cast out of thy mouth a
flood of persecutions: thou shall make war with him, Rev. 12.17.
and all them which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ.

I have held you a while in the explication of this first promise, and the
rather because of the darkness of it, and the much sweetness that is contained
in it; it is full of Gospel Truths: strike but the flint, and there will fly
out these glorious sparkles. 1. That a Savior was promised from the beginning
of the world. 2. That this Savior should free all his Saints from sin, death,
and hell; the head and power of the Devil. 3. That to this end this Savior
should be a Mediator; for God would not grant an immediate pardon, but the
promised seed must first intervene. 4. That this Mediator should be of the seed
of the woman, that is, a man; and yet stronger then the Devil, endued with a
Divine power, and so he is God. 5. That this Man-God should according to his
Priestly office be a Sacrifice for sin, the Serpent should bruise his heel, he
should suffer and dye for the people; and yet accordingly to his Kingly office
he should overcome Satan; for he should bruise his head, overthrow his Kingdom,
and make us more than Conquerors in him that loved us. 6. That this promise of
Christ and of our justification is free; God of mere mercy, and free grace
brings forth this promise, there could be now after the fall no merit in man;
and even now he promises remission of sins, and life Eternal in, for, and
through the Lord Jesus Christ. No question but in belief of this promise the
Patriarchs and Fathers of old obtained life, glory, and immortality: By faith
the Elders obtained a good report: by faith Abel obtained witness that he was
righteous: by faith Enoch was translated that he should not see Death: by faith
Noah became heir of the righteousness of Christ; and how should it but revive
us in these last times, to hear, that the first thing that ever God did after
the World was fallen, it was this act of mercy, to make a promise of Christ,
and to reconcile lost man to himself through the same Jesus Christ? surely he
began to do that soon, which he meant to be always a doing, even to the end of
the World. Thus far of the promise, as it was manifested from Adam to Abraham.

SECT. III. Of the Covenant of promise as manifested to Abraham
THe second breaking forth of this gracious Covenant, was to Abraham; and now
it shines in a more glorious light then it did before: at first it was
propounded in very dark and cloudy terms, not easy to be understood, and most
things sparingly expressed; but in this second rise and manifestation, we have
it laid down in plainer terms, I will establish my Covenant between me and
thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generation, Genesis 17 1^.
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee.
-- For the right understanding of this, we shall examine these particulars. --

1. What a Covenant is? 2. What is the establishing of this Covenant? 3.
Betwixt whom is the Covenant to be established? 4. For what time is the
established Covenant to endure? 5. What are the privileges of this Covenant?
6. What is the condition of this Covenant? 7. Who is the head, both as
undertaker, and purchaser, and treasurer, upon whom this Covenant is
established?
1. What is a Covenant? It is a contract of mutual peace and good will,
obliging parties on both hands to the performing of mutual benefits and
offices. Thus was the Covenant betwixt God and Abraham, there was a mutual
stipulation in it, on Gods part to perform his promises of temporal,
spiritual, and Eternal grace; and on Abraham's part to receive this grace by
faith, and to perform due obedience and thankfulness to God. Hence a little
nearer, we say the Covenant is a mutual compact, or agreement betwixt God and
man, whereby God promises all good things, especially Eternal happiness unto
man; and man does promise to walk before God in all acceptable, free, and
willing obedience, expecting all good from God, and happiness in God, according
to his promise, for the praise and glory of his grace. Others, describing the
Covenant of grace (for with the Covenant of works we will not meddle) they give
it thus, The Covenant of grace is a free and gracious compact, which God of his
mere mercy in Jesus Christ has made with sinful man, promising unto him pardon
of sins and eternal happiness; If he will but repent of sin, and embrace mercy
reached forth by faith unfeigned; and walk before God in willing, faithful, and
sincere obedience. -- In this description many things are considerable. As, 1.
That the Author of this Covenant is God; not as our Creator, but as our
merciful God and Father in Christ Jesus. 2. That the cause of this Covenant is
not any worth, or dignity or merit in man, but the mere mercy, love, and favor
of God. 3. That the foundation of this Covenant is Jesus Christ, in and through
whom we are reconciled unto God; for since God and man were separated by sin,
no Covenant can pass betwixt them, no reconciliation can be expected, nor
pardon obtained, but in and through a Mediator. 4. That the party Covenanted
with, is sinful man; the fall of our first Parents was the occasion of this
Covenant, and God was pleased to permit the fall, that he might manifest the
riches of his mercy in man's recovery. 5. That the form of this Covenant stands
on Gods part in gracious and free promises of forgiveness, holiness, happiness;
and on man's part in a restipulation of such Duties as will stand with the free
grace and mercy of God in Christ. 6. That the stipulation on man's part
required, is repentance for sin, belief in the promises; and a yielding of
fear, reverence, worship, and obedience to God according to his word. These I
might insist on, but my purposed brevity will not permit.

2. What is the establishing of this Covenant? Some say, this speaks the
duration of it, of which anon; I suppose it intends also the confirmation of
it. We find that the Lord had before made a Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 15.4,
5. Genesis 15.4, 5
And now he does not abolish the former, and make another; but rather, he
renews, confirms, and establishes the former. It may be there was some
hesitation or doubting in Abraham; so we see Genesis 15.1, 2. Gen 15.1, ^.3
But now God would assure him infallibly of his will and purpose: O when a man
hears that God will vouchsafe so much favor as to enter into a covenant with
him; he is ready to say as Gideon did, Judge. 6.15.
alas, my family is poor in Manasses, and I am the least in all my Fathers
house; and who am I that I should be raised up hitherto? that God should make
such promises as these to me? And hence, to prevent such Objections, the Lord
will confirm and establish his Covenant; as sometimes by his Promises;
sometimes by an oath, sometimes by the blood of Christ himself; sometimes by
seals. So here in this very place, God adds the seal of Circumcision, Ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin (says God) and it shall be a token of
the Covenant betwixt me and you. Genesis 17.11. Genesis 9.13.15, 16.
As sometimes he said of the Rainbow, I do set my Bow in the cloud, and it
shall be for a token of a Covenant between me and the Earth; -- That the waters
shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh -- For I will look upon the
Bow, that I may Remember the everlasting Covenant. After this manner are the
signs and seals of the Covenant? Circumcise your selves says God, and when I
see the Circumcision, I will remember my Covenant, and I will make good to you
all the promises thereof. -- But what is Circumcision to the Covenant? much
every way; Circumcision was not without shedding of blood, because the Covenant
was not yet established in the Blood of the Messiah, sure there was much in
this, howsoever the rite of it self was nothing, yet as it led the faithful
Patriarchs to the Blood of Christ, and as it assured the purging away of sin by
the Blood of Christ, and as it signed the Circumcision of the heart by the
Spirit of Christ, so it found acceptance with God; no sooner he looks on it,
but he remembers his Covenant, and confirms it, and makes it good to Abraham,
and to his seed after him.

3. Betwixt whom is the Covenant to be established? between me and thee, (says
God) and thy seed after thee The two heads of this Covenant are God and
Abraham; on Gods part are the whole Trinity of persons, the blessed Angels, and
all the Host of Heaven; on Abraham's part are all his seed, and his posterity,
yet with this limitation, Romans 9.6, 7, 8.
that all are not Israel, which are of Israel; neither because they are the
seed of Abraham, are they all children of Abraham; but in Isaac shall thy seed
be called; that is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not the
Children of God, but the Children of the promise are counted for the seed. No
question this Covenant was not to be extended to the Ishmaelites, Idumeans, or
Kethureans. Abraham's carnal seed; these quickly departed both out of Abraham's
family, and Abraham's faith; No, no, says God, I will establish my Covenant
with Isaac for an everlasting Covenant, and with his seed after him, wi^h
Isaac, Genesis 17.19.
and with his seed (i.) with the spiritual seed of Abraham; now under the seed,
1. all believing Jews, and 2. All Gentil s are comprehended, all may be called
the spiritual seed of Abraham that walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham;
and indeed thus runs the Promise, in thee shall all the families of the earth
he blessed. Gen 12.3. And in thee shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed, Gen 8.18. these families and Nat^ons must needs comprehend the
Gentiles; the Apostle is very plain: As it is written, I have made thee a
Father of many Nations. -- That he might be the father of all them that
believe, Romans 4.17.11. Gal. 3.14.
though they be not circumcised. -- That the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the
spirit through faith. Christians I here is our happiness the Covenant was not
written for Abraham's sake alone, but for us also, Romans 4.23, 24.
if we believe in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. You may
think all this while we are only discovering the privileges of Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and of the Jews; no, blessed be God, Heaven is no freer to a Jew, than
to a Gentile; there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
male nor female, etc. But if ye be Christ's, Gal. 3.28, 29.
then are ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to the promise.

4 For what time is the established Covenant to endure? it is not for a few
days, or months, or years, but for ever and ever; it is an everlasting
Covenant; and indeed the word established sounds this way; I will establish my
Covenant, Ps. 89.3. Ps. 89.28.
that is (say some) I will have it stand and continue for ever; as it was said
of David, I have made a Covenant with my crosen, I have sworn unto David my
servant, thy seed will I establish for ever; and again, my mercy will I keep
for him for evermore, my Covenant shall stand fast with him. --

Now this Covenant is said to be everlasting, a part ante. (as we say) and a
part post. 1. A part ante, as being from everlasting, in respect of the
promise made to Christ for us, which was done (as you have heard) before the
foundation of the world; it is not an infant of days; this Covenant bears the
same date with the divine being it self; As the mercy of God is from
everlasting, so the Covenant of grace is from everlasting; the Writs, Ps.
103.17*
Evidences, and Charters of our Salvation were concluded, and passed the sign
and seal of the blessed Trinity from eternity; the Gospel and this Covenant is
not of yesterday, no, no, it is an old counsel of the infinite wisdom of God.

2. A part post, as continuing from everlasting to everlasting. Hence it is
called a Covenant of salt, because it corrupts not, it fails not: 1 Chronicles.
13.5.
hence all the blessings of the Covenant are said to be everlasting;
forgiveness of sins is everlasting, being once forgiven they are never
remembered any more; peace and joy is everlasting, your heart shall rejoice, and
your joy no man takes from you; Jer. 31.13. Joh. 16.22. Isa. 45.17.
salvation is everlasting. Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an
everlasting salvation; decretal Covenant-mercy was not a lease, but a making
the fee-simple (as we call it) of grace and glory to the Saints for ever: death
may put an end to other Covenants, as betwixt man and man, or betwixt man and
wife: but this Covenant betwixt God and us stands fast for ever; though Abraham
be dead, yet God is Abraham's God still, and by virtue of this Covenant Abraham
shall be raised up at the last day.

5. What are the privileges of the Covenant? I answer, the privileges of the
Covenant are many, as they are great things, and great blessings which our
great God promises, so they are very many and numerous; the Covenant is full
of blessings, it is a rich storehouse, replenished with all manner of
blessings; it is not dry, nor barren, but like the fat Olive or fruitful Vine,
it is a Well of salvation, a fountain of good things, a treasure full of goods,
or unsearchable riches, which can never be emptied, nor come to an end. Hence
it is that our finite narrow capacities can never apprehend the infinite grace
that this Covenant contains, yet as we may see things darkly in a Map, so let
us endeavor as we are able to view them in some Map, or brief compendium; that
by the little we do see, we may be raised up to the consideration of things not
seen, which shall be revealed in due time.

The privileges of the Covenant are folded and wrapped up in the promises of
it; every promise contains a privilege, but the time of unfolding every
promise is not yet come; then only shall the promises of all sorts be unfolded,
when the heavens as a vesture shall be folded up. Heb. 1.12.
In the mean time we have a right and interest in the privileges of eternity
by virtue of the promise; and hence the very terms of Covenant and promise are
taken for the same, Ephesians. 2.12. Romans 9.4. I shall for the present confine my
self only to those promises and privileges of the Covenant which were
manifested to Abraham. And they were, Of things Temporal. Spiritual.


Genesis 12.2, 3, 7.
1. Of things Temporal. Thus we read God promises Abraham, I will make of thee
a great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall
be a blessing, and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that
curses thee, and unto thy seed will I give this Land. We may add hereto the
repetitions that God makes of these promises over and over; Genesis 13.14, 15, 16.
lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, Northward,
and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward, for all the Land which thou
see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever. And I will make thy
seed as the dust of the Earth, so that if a man can number the dust of the
Earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered. -- And the Lord brought forth
Abraham abroad, and said, look now toward Heaven, and tell the stars, if thou
be able to number them; and he said unto him, so shall thy seed be. -- And the
Lord again appeared to Abraham, Genesis 15.5. Genesis 17.2.4, 5, 6.
and said, -- I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and will multiply
thee exceedingly, -- and thou shall be a Father of many Nations, neither shall
thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham, for a Father
of many Nations have I made thee; and I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and
I will make Nations of thee, 8.
and Kings shall come out of thee, -- and I will give unto thee, and thy seed
after thee, Genesis 22.16, 17.
the Land wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession. -- By my self have I sworn says the Lord, that in
blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the
Stars of the Heaven, and as the sand upon the Seashore, and thy seed shall
possess the gate of his enemies. See here the temporal blessings that God
promises Abraham; Genesis 12.2, 3, 7.
they are heaped together in Genesis 12.2, 3. -- As,

1. I will make of thee a great Nation, and this he promises once and again;
it seemed a thing incredible, because Abraham was old, and Sarah was barren and
old, and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women; yet for all this
God is all-sufficient; Abraham shall have his desire, he shall be a Father, not
only of a few Children, but of a numerous Nation, yea of many Nations;
Ishmaelites, and Midianites, and that famous Nation of the Jews (of whom it is
said, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8.
what Nation is so great) must all descend from Abraham: Scripture and heathen
Authors use three things proverbially, to signify an huge and exceeding great
number, the dust of the Earth, the sands of the Sea, and the Stars of Heaven:
and all these are brought in to resemble the number into which the Seed of
Abraham should break forth.

2. I will bless thee, says God; and this blessing had relation to his wealth
and riches, Abraham was very rich in cattle, in silver and in gold. Genesis 13.2
No question those riches came from this blessing; the blessing of the Lord it
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. This was Gods care of the
children of Abraham, that he would give them riches, but lest their hearts
should be lifted up, and they should forget the Lord in the midst of their
riches, he learns them and bids them remember this lesson; Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18
say not in thine heart, my power and the might of my hand has gotten me this
wealth; but remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to
get wealth; that he may establish his covenant, which he swear unto thy
fathers, as it is this day. True riches come from God, and by virtue of this
covenant; O that none of us had any wealth, but such as comes by virtue of a
promise, and of the covenant of grace!

3. I will make thy name great, says God; no Monarch was ever so famous in
conquering nations, or the whole world, as Abraham for his faith and obedience;
God has magnified his name amongst the Hebrews, who for these three thousand
years and upwards have acknowledged none (except Moses) greater than Abraham;
the Jews could say to very Christ, art thou greater then our father Abraham?
John 8.53
-- whom make thou thy self? and God has so magnified his name amongst
Christians, that all believers look upon it as a glory to be called children of
Abraham; nay, we cannot be Christ's, we have no part in Christ, unless we are
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. Gal. 3.29


4. Unto thy seed I will give this Land, says God, as an everlasting
possession, Genesis 17.8. Genesis 17.8
but how should that which the Israelites possessed only for a time, be called
an everlasting possession? The answer is, that the word translated everlasting,
does not ever signify that which shall have no end, but an age, a term, or
continuance; as it was said of Samuel, he should appear before the Lord, and
there abide for ever, 1 Samuel 1.22 Ps. 145.1, 2 Ps. 146.2 Jer. 25.9
(i.) as long as he lived: and I will praise the Lord (said David) for ever and
ever, (i.) whiles I live will I praise the Lord, as long as I shall have any
being I will sing praises unto my God. And the desolations of the captivity
were called perpetual desolations, (i.) long desolations, even for seventy
years.

Touching these blessings, or privileges, I have no more to say but this, that
God gave more of the temporal, less of the spiritual, to the natural seed in
the first ages; but in the latter ages more of the spiritual privileges, and
less of the temporal; yea, and thus it is this day for the most-what among the
Christian seed of the Gentiles; 1 Cor. 1.26
for ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called.

2. Of things spiritual, thus we read, fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and
thy exceeding great reward; I am God all-sufficient or omnipotent, the almighty
God, Genesis 15.1 Genesis 17.1-17.7
and I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. O what precious
promises are these? 1. I am thy shield, to keep thee from all evil; such a
shield that no creature can pry through, such a shield as shall cover thee
over; nay, such a shield as shall cover thee about; as sometimes God spoke of
Jerusalem, I, says the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about. So
here, Zach. 2.3
I will be a shield, a wall of fire round about; not only a wall to keep thee
safe, but a wall of fire to consume all them that are against thee; as a fire
which stands about like a wall, does not only defend those that are within, but
it burns those without that come near unto it; so is God to his people. 2. I am
thy exceeding great reward; I am the almighty God; I will be a God unto thee.
This is the very soul of the covenant, and of all the promises of God: q. d.
quantus, quantus sim vester ero; all I am is thine, my self, my goods, my
grace, my glory; whatsoever is in me, all that I have, and all my attributes
are thine; my power, my wisdom, my counsel, my goodness, my riches, whatsoever
is mine in the whole world; I will give it thee for thy portion; I, and all
that I have are thine, for thy use; Christians! was not this an exceeding great
reward? who can understand the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of
this reward? surely happy is the people that is in such a case, yea, happy is
that people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15
but more of this hereafter.

6. What is the condition of this covenant? I answer, the condition of the
covenant of grace is faith, and only faith; to this purpose it is said of
Abraham, he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness.
This text is often alleged by the Apostles; Genesis 15.6 Romans 4.3 Gal. 3.6. Jam.
2.23 Gen 45.25, 26
the word believed imports, that he thought the Word of God to be sure,
certain, stable, and constant; it is such a belief as is opposed to fainting,
as it is said of Jacob when he heard the report of his sons that Joseph was
alive, his heart fainted, because he believed not; but when he believed, his
heart revived; and David says of himself, I had fainted, unless I had
believed. So that it is a lively motion of the heart, assenting unto, and
trusting in God, psalm. 27 13
and in the word of God as firm and constant. This was the very condition of
the covenant which God required of Abraham; q. d. Abraham, do thou believe
that such a Messiah shall be sent into the world? art thou able to believe?
yes, I believe Lord, said Abraham; well says God, I will put thee to the
trial; I will give thee a Son, though thou art as a dead man, and Sarah as a
dead woman; yet I will promise thee a son, art thou able to believe? again,
thou see the land of Canaan, thou have not one foot in it, yet I will give
thee this land in the length and breadth of it for thy possession, art thou able
to believe this? you will say, what are these to the condition of the covenant,
which is only to believe in God, and to believe in Jesus Christ? O yes, 1.
These were shaddows of the great promise, Christ; and therefore that act of
faith, whereby Abraham believed that he should have a son, and that his
Children should possess the land of Canaan was likewise a branch, a shadow, a
pledge of that main act of faith whereby he believed the promised seed, in whom
himself and all the Nations of the earth should be blessed. But 2. Let this be
remembered that Abraham did not only believe the temporal promises, but every
promise; as I will be thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward; now who is
our shield but Christ; and who is our reward but Christ? but especially he
believed the promise of the seed, and who is the head of the seed but Christ?
yea, he believed in that promised seed in whom all the nations of the earth
should be blessed; and who was that but Christ? your father Abraham (says
Christ) rejoiced to see my day, J^hn 8.56
and he saw it, and was glad. He saw it? how could he see it? thou art not yet
fifty years old (said the Jews) and have thou seen Abraham? or could Abraham
see thee, or thy day? yes, even then he saw it when he believed in Christ? he
could see it no other ways but by an eye of faith? and therefore no question he
believed in Christ, and that was counted to him for righteousness.

But (may some say) if faith alone be the condition of the covenant, then what
need is there of any obedience, or works of holiness? -- this was the old plea
of loose libertines in the Apostles times, Jam. 8.20
to whom James gave answer, But will thou know, O vain man, that faith without
works is dead: a good tree (says Christ) is known by its fruits; and so is
right and sound faith; let a man believe in truth, and he cannot but love; and
if he love, he cannot but be full of good works; thus Abraham was justified by
faith, Abraham believed God (says the Apostle) and it was imputed to him for
righteousness; but was not this faith accompanied with works; observe but
(says the Apostle) when God bade him offer his son, Jam. 2.23. compared with
21.22
did he not do it? and was not that an exceeding great work, surely his faith
wrought with his works, and by faith was his works made perfect.

7. Who is the head both as undertaker, and purchaser, and treasurer upon whom
this Covenant is established? 2 Cor. 1.20
I answer, Christ, and none but Christ. All the promises of God in him are Yea,
and Amen, unto the glory of God by us. This was very darkly held forth in the
first manifestation of the Covenant to Adam, but now in this second breaking
forth of it, it is very fully expressed and often repeated; thus Genesis 12.3.
Genesis 12 3
in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed; and Genesis 18.18. Genesis
18.18
all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in Abraham, and Gen, 22.18. Genesis
22.18 See the same in Genesis 26.4 and 28.14
in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. In comparing these
texts we have a clear understanding thereof; in thee, in Abraham shall all the
families, and nations of the earth be blessed; but lest Abraham himself should
be thought author of this universal blessing, therefore is the explication, in
thee, (i.) in thy seed; Gal. 3 16
and this seed, says the Apostle very expressly, is Jesus Christ; now to
Abraham and his seed were the promises made; he says not, and to seeds, as of
many, but as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ. So then here is the
sense; out of thy posterity shall spring the Messiah, by whom not only thy
posterity, but all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. You may remember
in the first promise Christ was called the seed of the woman; but now the seed
of Abraham; Christ was the Son of Eve, or (if you will) the Son of Mary, and so
the seed of the woman; and Mary was a daughter of Abraham, and so Christ, and
Mary, and all upwards were of the seed of Abraham. But where shall we find
mention of the passion of Christ in this expressure of his Covenant to Abraham?
in the first manifestation it was included in that phrase of bruising his heel,
and surely this is essential to the covenant of grace in any overture of it:
some answer that this is thrice put on in the passage of this covenant with
Abraham: Genesis 15.17.
first, in the federal confirmation by the sm^aking furnace, and burning lamp,
that passed between those pieces of the sacrifice: as the sacrifice was
divided, so was Christ's body torn: and as the smoking furnace, and burning
lamp passed between the divided pieces, so the wrath of God run betwixt (as I
may say) and yet did not consume the rent and torn nature of Christ. Genesis
17.10, 11
2. In that federal confirmation by the sign of circumcision: there could not
be circumcision without shedding of blood, and where God commands shedding of
blood in any of his ancient ordinances, it does certainly reach to the blood of
Christ, and his everlasting testament. 3. In the resolved Sacrifice of Isaac,
which was a plain type of the death of Christ. See it in these particulars. 1.
Isaac was Abraham's son, his only son; his innocent son, Genesis 2^.10.
the beloved son of his Father, and yet Abraham freely offers up his son; so
Christ was the son of God, his only Son, his innocent son, like to us in all
things, sin only excepted; and the beloved son of his Father, this is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and yet God more freely offers up his
Son out of his own bosom. 2. Abraham by Gods commission rose early in the
morning to sacrifice his Son; and the Jews by Gods permission rise early in the
morning to condemn the Son of God: and hence he is called the Hind of the
morning, Psa. 22.1
compassed with dogs that hunted and pursued his life. 3. Abraham must offer
his Son upon the Mount, the very Mount on which Solomon's Temple was built,
John 2.19
which typified the body of Jesus Christ, Joh. 2.19. So God offered his Son
upon the Mount, if not on the same Mount (as Augustine thinks) yet on a Mount
not far distant from it; Golgotha was the very skirt of Moriah; the one being
within the gate of the City, and the other not far without, the very nearest to
the City of all. 4. Abraham first laid the wood on Isaac, and then he laid
Isaac on the wood; so God first lays the Cross on Christ, Joh. 19.17, 18
He bearing his Cross, went forth into a place called the place of a skul, and
then he lays Christ on the Cross, there they crucified him says John; or
there they bound him to the Cross, and fastened his hands and feet thereto with
nails. 5. Isaac must be offered alone, the servants must stay at the foot of
the hill, little knowing the business and sorrow in hand; Isa. 63.3
so Christ must tread the wine press alone: the disciples fear and fly, and
little consider the agony of their Master. 6. Abraham carries in his hand the
sword and fire against his Son, so God carries in his hand the sword and fire;
the sword signifying the Justice of God, the fire his burning wrath against the
sins of men; and both these were bent against Christ, in whom the justice of
God is satisfied, and the flame of his wrath extinct and quenched. Genesis ^2.16,
17, 18.
That this was a plain type of Christ's passion is hinted at in the blessing
that God speaks to Abraham after this trial, by my self have I sworn, says the
Lord, for because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son,
thine only Son, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed. All believers are blessed in the death of
Christ, who was that seed of Abraham, typified by Isaac, Abraham's Son; for as
Abraham intended, so God truly sacrificed his Son, his only Son, to take away
sin.

Thus far of the Covenant of promise as it was manifested from Abraham to Moses.

SECT. IV. Of the Covenant of promise as manifested to Moses.
THe next breaking forth of this gracious Covenant was to Moses. The revenging
justice of God had now seized on mankind for many generations, even thousands
of years, so that now it was high time for God in the midst of wrath to
remember mercy, and to break out into a clearer expression of the promise, or
Covenant of grace. To this purpose the Lord calls up Moses to Mount Sinai, and
there of his infinite love and undeserved mercy he makes, or renews his
Covenant with him and the children of Israel. I am the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, Exodus 20.2
thou shall have no other gods before me.

For the right understanding of this, we shall examine these particulars.

1. whether the Law was delivered in a Covenant-way? 2. In what sense is the
Law a Covenant of grace? 3. How may it appear that the Law in any sense is a
Covenant of grace? 4. Why should God in the Law deal with us in a Covenant-way
rather then a mere absolute supreme way? 5. What are the good things promised
in this expressure of the Covenant? 6. What is the condition of this Covenant
on our part, as we may gather it hence? 7. Who was the Mediator of this
Covenant? 8. What of Christ, and his death, do we find in this manifestation of
the Covenant?
For the first, whether the Law was delivered in a Covenant-way? it is affirmed
on these grounds. 1. In that it has the name of a Covenant. 2. In that it has
the real properties of a Covenant. 1. The name of a Covenant as it appears in
these Texts. And the Lord said unto Moses, ^d 34.23,
write these words, for after the tenor of these words, I have made a Covenant
with thee, and with Israel: and he was there with the Lord forty days, and
forty nights, he did neither eat bread, nor drink water, and he wrote upon the
tables the words of the Covenant, ^t 4 13
the ten Commandments. -- And he declared unto you his Covenant, which he
Commanded you to perform, even the ten Commandments, and he wrote them upon two
tables of stone. ^ut. 9 9
-- When I was gone (says Moses) up into the Mount to receive the two tables
of stone, even the tables of the Covenant which the Lord made with you, then I
abode in the Mount forty days and forty nights; ^. 11.
I neither did eat bread nor drink water. -- And it came to pass at the end of
forty days, and forty nights, that the Lord gave me the two tables of stone,
^. 15.
even the tables of the Covenant. -- So I turned and came down from the Mount,
and the mount burned with fire, and the two tables of the Covenant were in my
two hands. It appears plainly and expressly in these Texts that the Law is a
Covenant.

2. The Law has the real properties of a Covenant, which are the mutual
consent and stipulation on both sides. You may see a full relation of this in
Exodus 24.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. ^^od. 24 3, 4, 6, 7, 8.
And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all the
judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, all the words which the
Lord has said will we do: and Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose
up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve
pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel? and he sent young men of the
Children of Israel, which offered burnt-offerings, and sacrificed
peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord; and Moses took half of the blood, and
put it in basins, and half of the blood be sprinkled on the Altar, and he took
the book of the Covenant, and read in the audience of the people, and they
said, all that the Lord has said, will we do, and be obedient; and Moses took
the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the
Covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words. This
very passage is related in the Epistle to the Hebrews, ^eb. 9.19, 20
when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people, according to the Law,
he took the blood of calves and goats, with water and scarlet-wooll, and
hissop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people, saying, this is the
blood of the Testament, (or Covenant) which God has enjoined unto you. In the
words you may observe these properties of a Covenant? 1. That God on his part
expresses his consent and willingness to be their God: this will appear in the
preface of the Law, of which hereafter. 2. That the people on their part give
their full consents, and ready willingness to be his servants. Both these
appear in that, 1. Moses writes down the Covenant Covenant-wise. 2. He Confirms
the Covenant by outward signs, as by the blood of Calves and Goats; whereof one
half he puts in basins, to sprinkle it on the people; and the other half of the
blood he sprinkles on the Altar; that sprinkling on the people signified their
voluntary Covenanting with God, and the blood sprinkled on the Altar signified
Gods entering into Covenant with the people. Thus we have real Covenanting
when the Law is given.

2. In what sense is the Law a Covenant of Grace? I answer, The Law may be
considered in several senses; as 1. Sometimes it signifies largely any heavenly
doctrine, whether it be promise or precept, ^om. 3, 27
and in this sense the Apostle tells us of the Law of works, and of the Law of
faith. 2. Sometimes it signifies any part of the old Testament in which sense
Jesus answered the Jews, ^h. 12 34 ^al. 82 6
Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are gods? Now where was that written
but in the book of the Psalms? 3. Sometimes it signifies the whole economy,
and peculiar dispensation of Gods worship unto the Jews, according to the moral
ceremonial, ^k* 16.16 ^al. 5.23
and Judicial Law, in which sense it is said to continue until John, the Law
and the Prophets were until John: but since that time the Kingdom of God is
preached. 4. Sometimes it is taken synechdochically for some acts of the Law
only. against such there is no Law. ^eb. 10.1
5. Sometimes it is taken only for the Ceremonial Law, the Law having a shadow
of good things to come. 6. Sometimes it is used in the sense of the Jews? as
sufficient to save without Christ; and thus the Apostle generally takes it in
his Epistle to the Romans, and Galathians. 7. Sometimes it is taken for that
part of the Moral Law which is merely mandative and preceptive, without any
promise at all. 8. Sometimes it is taken for the whole moral Law, with the
preface and promises added to it; and in this last sense we take it, when we
say it is a Covenant of grace?

^xod. 19 5, 6
3. How may it appear that the Law in this sense is a Covenant of grace? it
appears, 1. By that contract betwixt God and Israel before the promulgation of
the Law. If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall
be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, ^er. 11.4
for all the earth is mine? and ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests and an
holy nation. Whereunto the Prophet Jermy has reference, saying, obey my voice
and do them according to all which I command you, so shall you be my people,
and I will be your God. Both these Scriptures speak of the moral Law, or ten
Commandments, containing the preface and promises; and how should that Law, be
any other but a Covenant of grace, which runs in this tenor, I will be your
God, and you shall be my people; my peculiar treasure; a Kingdom of Priests, an
holy Nation, if you will but hear and obey my Commandments? Surely these
privileges could never have been obtained by a Covenant of works; what? to be
a Kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation, a peculiar treasure to the Lord? what? to
be beloved of God as a desirable treasure (for so it is in the original) which
a King delivers not into the hands of any of his Officers, but keeps it to
himself? this cannot be of works; No no, these are privileges vouchsafed of
mere grace in Jesus Christ; and therefore Peter applies this very promise to
the people of God under the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Pet. 2.9.


2. It appears by that contract betwixt God and Israel in the promulgation of
the Law; then it was that God proclaimed himself to be the God of Israel;
saying, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the House of bondage. Some hold this to be the affirmative part of the first
Commandment; in which the Gospel is preached, and the promises therein
contained are offered. We say it is a preface to the whole Law, prefixed as a
reason to persuade obedience to every Commandment. But all universally
acknowledge that it is a free Covenant, which promises pardon of sin, and
requires faith in the Messiah; when God says to Israel I am the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, does he not propound himself as
their King, Judge, Savior, and Redeemer? Yea, and spiritual Redeemer, from
their bondage of sin and Satan, whereof that temporal deliverance from Egypt
was truly a type? the Lord begins his commandments with an evangelical promise?
and it is very observable, that as these words, I am the Lord thy God, are
prefixed immediately to the first Commandment, so in sundry places of Scripture
they are annexed to all the rest; ye shall fear every man his Mother, and his
Father; and keep my Sabbaths, Lev. 19.3.11, 12.16, 18.
I am the Lord your God: ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie
one to another, and ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou
profane the Name of thy God; I am the Lord. -- Neither shall thou stand against
the blood of thy neigbour, I am the Lord. -- In a word thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, I am the Lord; or if that contain only the second Table,
therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them;
I am the Lord. Add we to this, 37.
that in the second Commandment God is described to be one showing mercy unto
thousands; all which must needs argue the Law to be a Covenant of grace.

3. It appears by the Contract betwixt God and Israel after the promulgation of
the Law: is it not plainly expressed by Moses, Thou have avouched the Lord this
day to be thy God; and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes and
Commandments. -- And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep his commandments?
Yea, and after this in the Land of Moah, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.
Moses was commanded by the Lord to make a Covenant with the children of
Israel, besides the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb; now this was the
very same that God made with them on Sinai, only it must be renewed, and it is
expressly said, ye stand this day to enter into a Covenant with the Lord your
God: Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13.
-- That he may establish you to be a people unto himself, and that he may be a
God unto you, as he had sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Surely this must
needs be a Covenant of grace, how should it be but of grace that God promised
to be the God of Israel? here are many sweet and precious promises, and they
are all free and gracious; and therefore we conclude the Law, in the sense
aforesaid, to be a Covenant of grace.

4. Why should God in the Law deal with us in a Covenant-way, rather than a
mere absolute supreme way? I answer, 1. In respect of God; it was his pleasure
in giving the Law not only to manifest his Wisdom, and Power, and Sovereignty,
but his faithfulness, and truth, and love, and the glory of his grace; Romans 9.
1 John 4.8.
that he might make known (as the Apostle speaks) the riches of his glory on
the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory. Gods love is
apart of his name, for God is love, and Gods faithfulness is a part of his
name, I saw Heaven opened (said John in a vision) and behold a white horse,
Rev. 19.11.
and he that sat upon him was called faithful and true: now, how should we
ever have known Gods love at least in such a measure? or how should we ever
have known Gods faithfulness and truth at all, if he had not entered into a
Covenant with us? it is true, if he had given the Law in a mere absolute
supreme way, if he had given the precept without any promise, he might fully
have discovered his illimited supreme power, but his so dear love and
faithfulness could not have been known: now therefore let the world take notice
of his singular love, and of his faithfulness; as Moses said to Israel, Because
the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto
your fathers, has the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed
you out of the hands of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh, ^t. 7.8, 9.
King of Egypt, Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful
God, which keeps Covenant and mercy with them that love him, and keep his
Commandments, to a thousand generations.

2. In respect of us, God would rather deal with us in a covenant-way, than in
a mere absolute supreme way, upon these grounds --

1. That he might bind us the faster to himself: a covenant binds on both
parts: the Lord does not bind himself to us, and leave us free; No, I will
bring you (says God) into the bond of the Covenant. ^. 20.37.
The Lord sees how slippery and unstable our hearts are, how apt we are to
start aside from our duty toward him, we love to wander; and therefore to
prevent this inconstancy and unsetledness in us, (...) 14.10.
and to keep our hearts more stable in our obedient walking before him, it
pleased the Lord to bind us in the bond of Covenant, that as we look for a
blessing from God, so we look to it to keep Covenant with God: you may say a
command binds as well as a Covenant; it is true, but a Covenant does as it were
twist the cords of the Law, and double the precept upon the soul; when it is
only a precept, then God alone commands it, but when I have made a promise to
it, then I command it and bind it upon my self.

2. That our obedience might be more willing and free; an absolute Law might
seem to extort obedience, but a Covenant and agreement makes it clearly to
appear more free and willing. This is of the nature of the Covenant of grace;
first, God promises mercy, to be our exceeding great reward; and then we
promise obedience, to be his free, and willing people; and thus we become gods,
not only by a property founded in his sovereign power and love, but by a
property growing out of our own vo^untary consents; we are not only his people,
but his willing people; we give him our hand, when we become his, and enter
into Covenant with him: See the expression, Ezekiel. 17.18. ^k. 17.18.
He despised the oath by breaking the Covenant, when lo he had given his hand.
We are his, as the wife is her husbands. ^k. 16.8.
I entered into Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine;
now in marriages, free and mutual consent you know is ever given, and so it is
here.

3. That our consolations might be stronger; that in all our difficulties and
distresses we might ever have recourse to the faithfulness and love of God. 1.
To the faithfulness of God. ^on. 17.27.
This was David's stay, and this may be ours; though friends be unfaithful, and
may deceive, yet the Lord is faithful, and cannot fail his people, his promises
are Yea, and Amen, ^r. 1.20.
we may build upon it. 2. That we might have recourse to the love of God: this
indeed was the prim end why God delivered his Law in way of a Covenent, that he
might sweeten and indear hinself to us, and so draw us to him with cords of
love; had God so pleased, he might have required all obedience from us, and
when we had done all, he might have reduced us into nothing, or at least not
have given us heaven for ^n inheritance, or himself for a portion; but his love
is such, that he will not only command, but he will Covenant, that he might
further express and communicate his love: how then should this but encourage us
to go to God in all distresses? O what thankful loving thoughts should we have
of God that would thus infinitely condescend to Covenant with us!

5. What are the good things Promised in this expressure of the Covenant? not
to reckon up the temporal Promises of riches, honor, victory, peace, and
protection in a land of Oil, Olive, and Honey, the great mercies of God are
expressed in these terms, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. This is the great Promise of the
Covenant, it is as great as God himself: That we may better see it, and know
it, I shall take it in pieces; the gold is so pure, that it is pity the least
filing should be lost. Here God describes himself by these notes. 1. By his
only eternal and Perfect Essence, I am the Lord. 2. By the Plurality of persons
in that one essence, I am the Lord God, Jehovah Elohim. 3. By the propriety his
people have in Jehovah Elohim, I am the Lord thy God. 4. By the fruit of that
Propriety in reference to Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Eygpt,
out of the house of bondage.

^d. 6.3.
1. I am Jehovah: we read that he appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by the
name of God Almighty, but now he was known to the Israelites by his name
Jehovah, I am the Lord. Why, was it not by that name that he appeared to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? no, no, says God; by my name Jehovah was I not
known to them. This has occasioned a question, how can this be? do we not read
expressly that God said to Abraham, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of
the Chaldees? and again; I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, and the God
of Isaac? Genesis 15.7. Genesis 28.13.
how then is it said that by his name Jehovah he was not known unto them? This
place has perplexed many of the learned: but the meaning seems to be this,
that though he was known to the Patriarchs by his name Jehovah, as it consists
of letters, syllables, and sounds; yet he was not experimentally known unto
them in his constancy to perform his promise in bringing them out of the land
of Egypt until now. This name Jehovah denotes both his being in himself and his
giving of being, or performance to his word, and promise; thus indeed he was
not known, or manifested to the Patriarchs: they only were sustained by faith
in Gods almighty power, without receiving the thing promised; it is said of
Abraham, that while he was yet alive, Acts. 7.5.
God gave him no inheritance in Canaan, no not so much as to set his foot on,
yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed
after him; and now when his seed came to receive the Promise, and to have full
knowledge and experience of his Power and goodness, then they knew the efficacy
of his name Jehovah. So upon performance of further promises, he says, they
shall know him to be Jehovah, Isa. 49.2, 3. Isa. 52.6.
and thou shall know that I am the Lord. -- therefore my people shall know my
name, they shall know in that day that I am he that does sepak, behold it is I.

2. I am Jehovah Elohim, this denotes the plurallity of Persons; God in
delivering of the law, does not only show his being but the manner of his
being; that is, the three manners of subsisting in that one simple and eternal
being; or the Trinity of persons in that Unity of Essence, the word signifies
strong, potent, mighty; or if we express it plurally, it signifies the
Almighties, or Almighty powers; hence the Scriptures apply the general name,
God, to the Persons severally, the Father is God, Heb. 1.1, 2. the Son is God,
Act. 20.28. and the holy Ghost is God, Act 5.3, 4. Now God is said to be Author
of these Laws delivered in a Covenant-way by Moses, that so the greater
authority may be procured to them; and hence all Lawgivers have endeavored to
persuade the people, that they had their Laws from God.

3. I am the Lord thy God; herein is the propriety, and indeed here is the
mercy that God speaks thus to every faithful Soul, I am thy God, by this
appropriation God gives us a right in him, yea a possession of him. 1. A right
in him; as the woman may say of him to whom she is Married, this man is my
husband, so may every faithful soul say of the Lord, he is my God. 2. A
possession of him; God does not only show himself unto us, but he does
communicate himself unto us in his holiness, mercy, truth, grace, and goodness;
hence it is said, we have fellowship with the Father and with the Son Jesus
Christ, 1 John. 1.3. Rev. 3.20. Cant. 1.1, 2: Deuteronomy. 4.7.
and Christ is said to come and sup with us; and to kiss us with the kisses of
his mouth; and to be near to us in all that we call upon him for; surely this
is the highest happiness of the Saints, that God is their God; when they can
say this, they have enough; if we could say, this House is mine. this Town,
this City, this Kingdom, this World is mine, what is all this? O but when a
Christian comes at length, and says, this God that made all the world is mine,
this is enough, indeed this is the greatest promise that ever was made or ever
can be made to any creature. Angels or Men; herein (if we observe it) God gives
himself to be wholly ours, consider God essentially, or personally; Consider
Jehovah Elohim, all is ours; God in his essence, and glorious attributes
communicates himself to us for good, and God personally considered, as Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, they all enter into Covenant with us.

1. The Father enters into Covenant with us; he promises to be a father to us,
hence says the Lord, Israel is my Son, my first born; and again, is Ephraim my
dear Son? Exodus 4.22. Jer. 31.20. Psalm. 14.11. Psalm. 103.13.
is he a pleasant Child? the Lord speaks as through he were fond of his
Children; as delighting in them, for so it is said, the Lord takes pleasure in
them that fear him: or as pitying of them, for so it is said likewise, like as
a father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

2. The Son is in Covenant with us, and speaks to us in this language, thou art
mine; how comes that about? why, I have redeemed thee, I have called thee, by
thy name, Isa. 43.1.
and therefore thou art mine, this is Christ's Covenant with us; he brings us
back to his Father, from whose presence we were banished, and sets us before
his face for ever; he undertakes for us to take up all controversies which may
fall out between God and us; he promises to restore us to the Adoption of
Sons; and not only to the title, but to the inheritance of Sons, that we might
be where he is. Joh. 17.24.


Heb. 10.14, 15 16.
3. The Holy Ghost makes a Covenant with us. By one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified; whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness and
a worker. -- This is the Covenant that I will make with them, I will put my Law
into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them. I know the Father is
employed in this, yet here is the proper work of the Holy Ghost: what the Father
has purposed for us from all Eternity, and the Son has purchased for us in
his time, that the Holy Ghost effects in us, and for us as in our time, he
applies the blood of Christ for the remssion of Sins: he writes the Law in our
hearts: he comforts us in our sadness: he supports us in our faintings, and
guides us in our wanderings. Now he that effects these things for us, and in
our behalf he is therefore said to make a Covenant with us. Thus Elohim, God
personally considered, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are in Covenant with us.

4. This is the great promise, what can be greater? when God said to Abraham, I
will be thy God, Heb. 6.13.
what could he give more? so when God tells us, I am the Lord thy God, what
could he say more? God having no greater to swear by, (says the Apostle) he
swore by himself. So God being minded to do great things for his People; and
having no greater thing to give, he gives himself. O the goodness of God in
Christ! I am the Lord thy God.

5. Let us see the fruit of this in reference to Israel; which brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. This was God's promise long
before to Abraham, know of a surety, Genesis 15.13, 4.
that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and shall
serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years; and also that
Nation whom they shall serve will I judge, and afterward they shall come out
with great substance. See here Israel must be strangers in Egypt, and serve the
Egyptians four hundred years, but then he will bring them out of the land of
Egypt, and out of their servile bondage: why this argues that God is Jehovah:
now he has performed what he had foretold, and this argues that God in Christ
is our Redeemer: for what was this redemption from Egypt, but a type of our
freedom from sin, death, and hell? here is the work of redemption joined with
that great name Jehovah Elohim, to signify that such a redemption is a clear
testimony of a true and mighty God. Whether this were laid down only as a
peculiar argument to the Jews to keep the Commandments, or it belongs also to
us, being grafted in, and become of the same stock with them, I shall not
dispute: this is without any controversy that their bondage was typical, and
ours spiritual: you see the good things promised in this Covenant.

6. What is the condition of this covenant on our part as we may gather it
hence? The condition of this covenant is faith in Jesus, which is employed in
the promise, I will be thy God, or I am the Lord thy God: and commanded in the
precept built upon it, thou shall have me to be thy God, or thou shall have no
other Gods before me. But where is faith in Jesus Christ mentioned either in
promise or precept? I answer, if it be not expressed, it is very plainly
intended, or meant: God is not the God of Israel, but in and through the
Mediator: neither can Israel take God to be their God, but by faith in the
Messiah. In the prophets we read frequently these exhortations,: trust in the
Lord, commit thy self unto the Lord, lean upon the Lord, and roll, thy burden
upon the Lord: but what the Prophets exhort unto, that is commanded in this
expressure of the Covenant? and who can trust in the Lord, or commit himself to
the Lord, or lean upon the Lord, or roll his burden on the Lord, if he be a
sinner, unless it be in and through a Mediator? Israel must walk before God in
all well-pleasing; and the Apostle tells us, that without faith it is
impossible to please God. But to go further, what is the meaning of this first
commandment in the affirmative part, but to have one God in Christ to be our
God by faith? it is true, Heb. 11.6.
there is no mention made of Christ, or faith, but that is nothing; is there is
no mention of Love, and yet our Savior discovers and commands it there; when
the Lawyer tempted Christ, Master, which is the great Commandment in the Law?
you know Christ's answer, Mat. 22.36, 37, 38.
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, this is the first and great Commandment, Mat. 22, 36, 37,
38. Now as our Savior discovers love there, so in like manner is faith and
Christ there the necessary consequents. But you may object, what say we to
obedience? is not that rather the condition of this covenant thus shining in
the Law?

Indeed the Law and obedience are Correlatives. But in this case we are not to
look to the Law as merely mandatory; we gave you the sense of the word, and how
it is used as a covenant of grace? remember only this; the Law is considered
either more strictly, as it is an abstracted rule of righteousness, holding
forth life upon no other terms but perfect obedience; or more largely, as that
whole doctrine delivered on Mount Sinai, with the preface and promises
adjoined: in the former sense it is a Covenant of works? but in the latter
sense it is a covenant of grace. -- And yet I dare not say, that as the Law is
a covenant of grace, it does exclude obedience. In some sort obedience as well
as faith may be said to be a condition of the covenant of grace; I shall give
you my thoughts in this distinction, obedience to all Gods commandments, is
either considerable as a cause of life, or as a qualification of the subject;
in the former sense it cannot be a condition of the covenant of grace, but in
the latter sense it may, if by condition we understand whatsoever is required
on our part, as precedent concomitant, or subsequent to the Covenant of grace,
repentance, faith, and obedience are all conditions; but if by Condition we
understand whatsoever is required on our part as the cause of the good
promised, though only instrumental, why then faith, or belief in the promises
of the covenant is the only condition: faith and obedience are opposed in the
matter of justification and salvation in the Covenant, not that they cannot
stand together in one subject, for they are inseparable united; but because
they cannot concur and meet together in one court, as the cause of
justification or salvation. Now when we speak of the condition of the Covenant
of grace, we intend such a condition as is among the number of true causes;
indeed in the Covenant of works, obedience is required as the cause of life;
but in the Covenant of grace, though obedience must accompany faith, yet not
obedience, but only faith is the cause of life contained in the Covenant.

7. Who was the Mediator of this Covenant? to this we distinguish of a double
Mediator, viz. Typical, and Spiritual; Moses was a typical, but Christ was the
spiritual Mediator: and herein was Moses privileged above all before him; he
was the Mediator of the Old Testament, Christ reserving himself to be the
Mediator of a better Covenant, (i.) of the New Testament. Moses received the
Law from God, Heb. 8.6.
and delivered it to the people, and so he stood a Mediator between God and the
people; never was mortal man so near to God as Moses was; Abraham indeed was
called Gods friend; but Moses was Gods favorite; and never was mortal man
either in knowledge, love or authority so near unto the people as Moses was
(which makes the Jews (O wonder) to Idolize him to this very day. Moses was
called in as a Mediator on both parts. 1. On Gods part, when he called him up
to receive the Law, and all those messages which God sent by him to the people.
2. On the peoples part when they desired him to receive the Law; for they were
afraid by reason of the fire, and durst not go up into the Mount: Deuteronomy. 5.5.
mark how he styles himself as a Mediator: At that time (says he) I stood
between the Lord and you to show you the word of the Lord: He was Gods mouth to
them, and he was their mouth to God; and he was a prevailing Mediator on both
parts: he prevailed with God for the suspending of his Justice, that it should
not break out upon the people; and he prevailed with the people to bind them in
Covenant unto God, and to make profession of that Obedience which the Lord
required and called for; yet for all this, I call him not a Mediator of
Redemption, but Relation: A great deal of difference there is betwixt Moses and
Christ: as 1. Moses only received the Law, and delivered it to the people; but
Chirst our true Moses fulfilled it. 2. Moses broke the Tables, to show how we
in our Nature had broken the Law, but Christ our true Moses repairs it again.
3. Moses had the Law only writ in Tables of Stone, but Christ writes it in the
Tables of our hearts. 4. Moses was mere man, but Christ is God as well as man:
Moses was only a Servant in Gods House, but Christ is a Son; yea, Christ is
Lord of his own House the Church: Moses mediation was of this use, to show what
was the true manner of worshipping God, but he did not inspire force and power
to follow it; he could not reconcile men to God as of himself, and therefore it
appeared that there was need of another reconciler, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ.

8. What of Christ, and of his death do we find in this manifestation of the
Covenant? I answer, 1. In delivering the Law, we find something of Christ:
there is a question whether the Lord himself immediately in his own person
delivered the Law? Deuteronomy. 5.2^;
and some conclude affirmatively from the Preface, God spoke these words, and
said] and from that passage of Moses, these words the Lord spoke unto all your
Assembly in the Mount out of the midst of the fire, -- and wrote them on two
Tables of Stone, and delivered them unto me. But others are for the negative,
and say, this proves not that they were pronounced or delivered immediately by
God; for we find in Scripture, that when the Angels were the immediate persons,
yet the Lord himself is reported to have spoken unto men, Genesis 18.2, 13. Exodus
3.2, 6, 7. And Augustine is resolute, Aug. de Trin. l. 2. c. 15.
that Almighty God himself in the time of the Old Testament did not spoke to
the Jews with his own immediate voice, but only by Christ, or by his Angels, or
by his Prophets; and for this Ministerial voice of his Angels some produce
these Texts: ^cts 7.5. ^al. 3.19
who have received the Law by the Ordinance of Angels, and wherefore then
serves the Law? it was added because of transgressions till the seed should
come, to whom the promise was made, and it was ordained by Angels in the hand
of a mediator. ^eb. 2.2
And, if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, etc. For my part, it has
puzzled me at times, whether of these opinions to take; but others say (and I am
now as apt to join with them as with either of the former) that Jesus Christ
the second person of the Trinity, to be incarnate, who is called the Angel of
the Covenant, Mal 3.1. and the Angel of his presence, Isa. 63.9. was he that
uttered and delivered the Law unto Moses; ^cts 7.38 ^cts 7.39.
and to this purpose are produced these Texts, This Moses is he that was in the
Congregation with the Angel, which spoke to him in the Mount Sinai. Now this
Angel was Christ, as it is cleared in the following verse; whom (or which
Angel) our Fathers would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their
hearts turned back again into Egypt. They would not obey the Angel, but thrust
him from them, (i.) they tempted the Angel whom they should have obeyed; and
who was that but Jesus Christ? as it is cleared more fully and expressly by the
Apostle, Cor. 10.9
Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed
of Serpents. Some of the Learned are of opinion that Christ the Son of God did
in the shape of a man deliver the Law. But I leave that.

2. In the Law it self, as it is a Covenant of Grace, we find something of
Christ; in the preface he proclaims himself to be our God; and in the first
Commandment we are bound to take this God to be our God; and in the second, he
gives us a double Reason or Motive to obey; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous
God, I show mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments.
And in the fifth Commandment he gives a promise of long life in Canaan, which
is either to be looked at as a type of Heaven, or literally, for a prosperous
condition here on earth; but howsoever it is by virtue of the Covenant, and as
a testimony of Gods love; now all these promises are made in Christ: God is not
our God but in and through Jesus Christ; God will not show mercy unto
thousands, nor unto one of all the thousands of his Saints, but as they are in
Jesus Christ: God will not give us long life here, or eternal life hereafter,
but in, for, and through the Lord Jesus Christ: what if Moses writ not down the
word Christ] yet certainly Moses writ of Christ] his words imply Christ, as
Christ himself told the Jews, John 5.46
Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me; for Moses wrote of me; and
as Philip told Nathanael, we have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the
Prophets did write, John. 1.45
Jesus of Nazareth, John 1.45. Surely Christ was, if not the only subject, yet
the only scope of all the writings of Moses; and therefore in the Law it self
you see we find something of Christ.

3. In the Exposition of the Law, as Moses gives it here and there, we find
something of Christ. Yea if we observe it, Moses brought something more to the
expression of Christ, and of the Covenant of Grace, than ever was before: in
the first promise it was revealed that Christ should be the Seed of the woman;
in the second manifestation of the promise, it was revealed that Christ should
be of the Seed of Abraham; but in Moses writings, and Moses time, we learn more
expressly that Christ was to be incarnate, and to have his Conversation amongst
men: Ex. 29.45, 46
The promise runs thus; And I will dwell among the Children of Israel, and will
be their God, and they shall know that I am the Lord their God, that brought
them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell amongst them; Lev. 26.11,
12
I am the Lord their God. The same promise is renewed or repeated; and I will
set my Tabernacle amongst you, and my Soul shall not abhor you; and I will walk
among you, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people; this promise was
punctually fulfilled when Christ was incarnate; for then was the Word made
flesh, and dwelt amongst us, John 1.14. John 1.14
or if it be referred to the habitation of God by his Spirit amongst the
spiritual seed of Abraham, then it implies the incarnation of Christ, because
that was to go before the plentiful habitation of Christ's Spirit in the Saints.
Again, Moses writing of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
The Lord thy God (says he) will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst
of thee, of thy Brethren like unto Me, unto him shall ye hearken. Was not this
a plain expression? Peter in his Sermon to the Jews, preaches Jesus Christ,
and he tells the Jews that this Jesus Christ was preached unto them before:
when before? even in Moses time; and for proof he cites this very Text, Acts
3.20, 22
For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise
up unto you, of your Brethren, like unto Me, him shall ye hear in all things,
whatsoever he shall say unto you.

4. In the confirmation of the Law we find something of Christ. It was
confirmed by Seals and Sacrifices, etc. What, were all these but a type of
Christ, in the formed expression of the Covenant we found the Seal of
Circumcision, but now it pleased God to add unto the former another Seal for
Confirmation of their Faith, sc, the Passover: and was not this a type of
Christ, the immaculate Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world?
Again, in this manifestation Moses brought in the Priesthood as a settled
Ordinance to offer sacrifices for the people: and was not this a type of
Christ, our true and unchangeable High Priest? I have sometimes seen the
Articles of a believing Jews Creed, collected out of Moses Law; as thus, I
believe that the Messiah should die to make satisfaction for sin: this they saw
in their continued bloody Sacrifices, and their deliverance from Egypt by the
death of a Lamb, taught them no less. 2. I believe that he shall not die for
his own sins, but for the sins of others: this they might easily observe in
every sacrifice, when (according to Law) they saw the most harmless birds and
Beasts were offered. 3. I believe to be saved by laying hold upon his merits:
this they might gather by laying their right hand upon the head of every Beast
that they brought to be offered up, and by laying hold on the horns of the
Altar, being a Sanctuary or Refuge from pursuing vengeance. Thus we might go
on: No question the Death and Resurrection of Christ, the Priesthood and
Kingdom of Christ were prefigured and typed by the Sacrifices, and the Brazen
Serpent, and the Priesthood of Aaron, and the Kingdom of Israel: And I cannot
but think that the godly spiritual Jews understood this very well; and that
these did not rest in Sacrifices or Sacraments, but that by faith they did
really enjoy Christ in every of them.

5. In the intention of Gods giving the Law we find something of Christ. The
very end of God in holding forth the Law, was, that upon the sense of our
impossibility to keep it, and of our danger to break it, we should desire
earnestly, and seek out diligently for Jesus Christ: to this purpose says the
Apostle, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes. Christ is the end of the Law (i.) Christ is the end of intention;
God by giving so holy a Law, and by requiring such perfect obedience, he would
thereby humble and debase the Israelites, so that they should earnestly fly to
Christ: in this sense the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that
we might be justified by faith. A Schoolmaster (you know) does not only whip
or correct, but also teach and direct: so the Law does not only threaten and
curse if the work be not done, but it shows where power and help is to be had,
viz. from the Lord Jesus Christ. If this be so, how much to blame are they,
that under pretense of Free Grace and Christ, cry down the Law? Rather let us
cry it up, and this is the way to set up Free Grace and Christ. Surely he that
discovers his defects by the perfect rule of the Law, and whose Soul is
imbittered and humbled because of those defects, he must needs prize Christ,
desire Christ, advance Christ in his thoughts above all the men in the world.

And thus far of the Covenant of Promise as it was manifested from Moses to
David. SECT. V. Of the Covenant of Promise, as manifested to David.
THe next breaking forth of this Gracious Covenant was to David; and in this
manifestation, appears yet more of Christ; the expression of it is chiefly in
these words. Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. 2 Samuel 23.5


For the right understanding of this, we shall examine these Particulars. --

1. Who is the Author of this Covenant? 2. To whom is the Covenant made? 3.
What is this, that the Covenant is said to be made? 4. How is the Covenant
ordered? 5. Wherein is the Covenant sure? 6. Whether is Christ more clearly
manifested in this breaking forth of the Covenant, than in any of the former?
1. Who is the Author of this Covenant? David says, he has made it: he (i,)
God; the Rock of Israel, the everlasting Rock; The Rock of their Salvation,
Psalm. 19.5. The Rock of their Strength, Psalm. 62.7. The Rock of their Heart,
Psalm. 73.26. The Rock of their Refuge, Psalm. 94.22. Their Rock and their
Redeemer, Psalm. 19.14. The Psalmist is frequent and ordinary in this style, to
show that God is the mighty, stable and immutable foundation and defense of all
the faithful, who fly unto him, and will trust in him; he is such a Rock as
will not shrink nor fail his Creatures; man is unstable, but he is God, and not
man, who is the Author of this Covenant.

2. To whom is the Covenant made? why, says David, He has made with me an
everlasting Covenant; (i.) either with Christ the Antitype, or else with David
himself, the type of Christ. To the former sense we have spoken elsewhere; the
latter I suppose more genuine; the Covenant indeed was first made with Christ,
and then with David as a member of Jesus Christ. Some are wholly for a Covenant
betwixt God and Christ, and they deny any such thing as a Covenant betwixt God
and man; but are not the Testimonies express? Deuteronomy. 4.23. Je^. 31.31.
Take heed to your selves, lest you forget the Covenant which the Lord has
made with you. And, I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel; and
with the House of Judah. And by name do we not see God Covenanting with
Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob? Genesis 17.7. Genesis 26.2. Gen 35.12. Levit.
26.42. And here do we not see God Covenanting with David? I have made a
Covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David; Psa. 8^.313, 5. Psa. 132.11.
and once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David, and the
Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it. Oh take heed of
such Doctrines as tend unto Liberty and Licentiousness! the Covenant Gods makes
with us, binds us faster to God: and if there be no Covenant betwixt God and
us, it opens a gap to the looseness of our spirits; for how should we be
charged with unfaithfulness unto God, if we have not all entered into a Covenant
with God

3. What is this that the Covenant is said to be made? this holds forth to us
the freeness of Gods entering into Covenant with us: I will make my Covenant
between me and thee, says God: Genesis 17.2.
or, I will give my Covenant, I will dispose my Covenant between me and thee,
so it is in the Originial. And elsewhere it is plain, Behold I give unto him my
Covenant of peace: when God makes a Covenant, then he gives the Covenant of
Grace unto all that he takes into Covenant with him: The Lord set his love upon
you (said Moses to Isreal) to take you into Covenant with him, Number. 2^.12.
not because ye were more in number than other people, but because he loved
you, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
and chose your Fathers; as noting out the freeness of his love toward them:
he loved them: Why? He loved them because he loved them. This freeness of his
Grace in giving a Covenant, may appear in these Particulars.

1. In that God is the first that seeks after us, to draw us into Covenant with
him; we seek not him, but he seeks us; we choose not him, but he chooses us; he
loves us first; I am found of them that sought me not: 1 John 4.19. Isa. 65.1.
I said, behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my name.

2. In that there is nothing in us, to draw God into a Covenant with us: many a
man seeks first after the unmarried Virgin, but then there is Beauty, or there
is Dowry, or there is something or other which draws on the man; but there is
no such thing in us: this made David say, when he heard of Gods Covenant with
him and his, Who am I, O Lord God? 2 Samuel 7.18, 19
and what is my Fathers House that thou have brought me hitherto? -- and is
this the manner of man, O Lord God? q. d. O Lord God, thou dealest familiarly
with me as a man deals with man; 1 Chr. 17.17.
or as it is elsewhere, Thou have regarded me according to the estate of a man
of high degree. It would make any soul cry out, that deeply weighs the freeness
of this Covenant; Psalm. 8.4.
Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou
visitest him?

3. In that there is enough in us to keep off the Lord from ever owning us; we
are as contrary to God as darkness is to light, or as evil is to good: The
carnal mind is enmity against God (says the Apostle) it is not subject to the
Law of God, Romans 8 7.
neither indeed can it be. We are a crooked Generation, that cannot abide the
straight ways of the Lord; our whole nature is sinful and corrupt before him,
and for the most part when we are most averse and backward, and have least
thought of ever seeking after him, then it is that he seeks us, to take us unto
himself; thus the Lord called Saul when he was Persecuting, and raging, and
breathing out slaughter against the Lord, and against his Saints: and thus the
Lord called those Jews that mocked the Apostles when they spoke diverse
Languages, These men are full of new wine; ay but the next word that they
spoke, is, Acts. 9.4. Acts 2.13, 37.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? O the free and unexpected Grace of our God!

4. In that we are by nature no better than others that are without God, Ephesians.
2.12.
and without Covenant: what makes the difference betwixt us and them, but this
free Grace of God? Is there any reason in us why one is taken into a Covenant,
and another is not? Nay, I Will tell you a wonder; so it pleases the Lord, that
sometimes God chooses the worst, and leaves those that are better than they; We
read that Publicans and Harlots were taken in, and the righteous Generation
which justified themselves, and were justified by others, were passed by:
surely God respects none for any thing in them; his design is that the freeness
of his Grace might be seen in those whom he takes to himself. Hence the
Apostle, God chooses the foolish things of this world, and the weak things of
this world, base and despised things; 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29.
whilst in the mean time he passes by the wise and mighty, and things of high
esteem, that all men might see, it is the Grace of God, and not any thing in
man, by which we are taken into Covenant with him.

5. How is the Covenant said to be ordered? The word ordered will help us in
the Answer: it sets out to us a marshalling, and fit laying of things together,
in opposition to disorder and confusson; the Septuagint renders it (...), which
signifies marshalled, disposed, prepared, set forth, as an Army in comely
order: the same word is in Judge. 20.22. Judge. 20.22.
And the men of Israel encouraged themseves, and set their Battle again in
array. As we see in an Army, every one is set in rank and file; so is every
thing in this Covenant ranked, disposed, ordered, that it stands at best
advantage to receive and repel the enemy: a poor Christian that has a troubled
spirit, he sets himself against Free Grace and this everlasting Covenant, he
raises thousands of objections against it; but now the covenant is ordered, it
stands like a marshalled Army to receive him, and repel him. Come, let us see
how it is ordered in all things. I shall instance only in these particulars:
As, --

1. It is well ordered in respect of the Root out of which it grew: This (say
Divines) was the Infinite Sovereignty, and Wisdom, and Mercy of God. 1. It was
founded in Gods Sovereignty; he had a right to do what he would with his fallen
Creatures: he might damn or save whom he pleased: Has not the Potter Power
over the Clay, Romans 9.21.
of the same lump to make one Vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?
2. It was founded in wisdom: The Covenant of Grace was a result of Council; it
was no rash act, but a deliberate act with infinite wisdom: God being the
Sovereign of all his Creatures, and seeing mankind in a perishing condition, he
determined within himself deliberately to make such a Covenant of Peace, first
with Christ, and then with all the Elect in Christ. 3. It was founded in Mercy,
(i e.) in the goodness of God flowing out freely to one in misery: for mercy,
we say, is made up of these two Acts. 1. There must be an Object of Misery. 2.
There must be a free efflux of goodness on that Object. Now the Covenant of
Grace was founded on these; as, 1. There was an Object of Misery, lost man,
wretched man, undone by sin: and, 2. There was an efflux of Gods Goodness, his
very bowels moved within him, and they could not hold: I have loved thee, with
an everlasting love (says God) therefore with loving kindness have I drawn
thee. Jer. 31.3.
Surely this was well ordered; a perplexed soul may have his spirit up in arms
against the Covenant of Grace, O, cries the Soul, in its sad condition, I am
miserable, I shall not live, but die, my sins will damn me, I am lost for ever.
Why, but see how the Covenant is ordered in respect of the root or rise: it
stands like a well marshalled Army to receive, and to repel those doubts: as,
1. God acted in a way of Soveraginty, and cannot God save thee if he will? 2.
God acted in a way of Wisdom, and though thou see no way but one with thee,
Death and Damnation; yet cannot infinite wisdom contrive another way? 3. God
acted in a way of Mercy, and O thou afflicted tossed with tempests, Isa. 54.11.
and not comforted, is not infinite Mercy above all thy Misery? Why see, see
poor soul how the Covenant repels all thy oppositions in respect of its rise.

2. It is well ordered in respect of the persons interested in it from all
eternity, and they are God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his Son; as for the
Saints Elect, they were not then, and therefore the Covenant could not be
immediately struck with them; now there was great need of this order; for
should the Covenant have been made betwixt God the Father and the Elect from
all eternity, and that immediately, a troubled soul would have opposed it thus.
1. If it was from all eternity, how then shall I be capable of it? alas my
being was not so long since. 2. If it were made with me immediately, then I had
some part to perform of mine own Power and Strength; but alas I have failed, I
can do nothing: O but now the Covenant is a well ordered Covenant, in these
respects: For,

1. Christ has been from all eternity? and thou, as an Elect Vessel had thy
being in him, as he was thy Head. 2. Christ is able to perform the Covenant,
and being contractor, it lies upon his score to satisfy his Father; he that
first made the bargain, must look to fulfill it; and for thy part, if thou do
any thing, it must be through him. Without me ye can do nothing. John. 15.5.
Why, see now, see how the Covenant repels all thy oppositions in respect of
the Persons interested in it from all eternity; God has his place, and Christ
his place, and Faith his place, and the Sinner his place.

3. It is well ordered in respect of the method of the Articles in their
several workings? first God begins, then we come on: first, God, on his part,
gives Grace and Glory, and then we, on our parts, act Faith and Obedience: God
has ever the first work; as first, Jer. 31.33, Eze. 36, 26, 31 Ezekiel. 36.25,
Ezekiel. 36.27 Zech. 12.10,
I will be your God, and then ye shall be my People: first, I will take away
the stony heart, and give an heart of Flesh, and then you shall loath your
selves for your iniquities and for your abominations: first, I will sprinkle
water upon you, and then ye shall be clean from all your filthiness: first, I
will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and then ye
shall keep my Judgments and do them: first, I will pour out my Spirit of Grace
and supplication upon you, and then ye shall mourn as a man mourning for his
only Son: first, I will do all, and then ye shall do something: A perplexed
troubled spirit is apt to cry out, O! alas I can do nothing; I can as well
dissolve a Rock, as make my heart of stone a heart of flesh! Mark now how the
Covenant stands well ordered like an Army: I will do all, says God, and then
thou shall do something? I will strengthen and quicken you, and then ye shall
serve me, says the Lord.

4. It is well ordered in respect of the end and aim, to which all the parts of
the Covenant are referred; Ephesians. 1.6,
the end of the Covenant is the praise of the Glory of his Grace: the parts of
the Covenant are the Promise and the Stipulation; the Promise is either
Principal or Immediate, and that is God and Christ; or secondary and
consequential, and that is Pardon, Justification, Reconciliation,
Sanctification, Glorification; and the Stipulation on our parts are Faith and
Obedience: we must believe in him that Justifies the ungodly, and walk before
him in all well pleasing. Observe now the main design and aim of the Covenant,
and see but how all the streams run toward that Ocean: God gives himself to
the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, God gives Christ to the Praise of the
Glory of his Grace, God gives pardon, justification, sanctification, salvation
to the praise of the Glory of his Grace; and we Believe, we Obey to the Praise
of the Glory of his Grace; and good reason, for all is of Grace, and therefore
all must tend to the Praise of the glory of his grace: it is of Grace that God
has given himself, Christ, pardon, justification, reconciliation,
sanctification, salvation to any Soul; it is of grace that we believe; By grace
ye are saved through faith, Ephesians. 2.8,
not of your selves, it is the gift of God. O the sweet and comely order of
this Covenant! All is of Grace, and all tends to the praise and glory of this
grace, and therefore it is called a Covenant of grace: Many a sweet soul is
forced to cry, I cannot believe, I may as well reach heaven with a finger, as
lay hold on Christ by the hand of faith; but mark how the Covenant stands like
a well marshalled army to repel this doubt; Phil. 1.29,
if thou can not believe, God will enable thee to believe; to you it is given
to believe: O the Covenant of Grace is a gracious Covenant: God will not only
promise good things, but he helps us by his Spirit to perform the condition: He
works our hearts to believe in God, and to believe in Christ, all is of Grace,
that all may tend to the praise of the glory of his grace.

5. Wherein is the Covenant sure? I answer, it is sure in the performance and
accomplishment of it. Isa. 55.3,
Hence the promises of the Covenant are called the sure Mercies of David; not
because they are sure unto David alone, but because they are sure, and shall be
sure unto all the Seed of David, that are in Covenant with God, as David was:
the Promises of Gods Covenant are not Yea and Nay, various and uncertain, but
they are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.
sure to be fulfilled. Hence the stability of Gods Covenant is compared to the
firmness and unmovableness of the mighty Mountains; nay Mountains may depart,
and the hills be removed by a Miracle, but, my kindness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, Isa. 54.10,
says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Sooner shall the Rocks be removed,
the Fire cease to burn, the Sun be turned into darkness, and the very heavens
be confounded with the earth, than the promise of God shall fail. psalm. 19.7,
The testimony of the Lord is sure, says David: Christ made it, and writ it,
with his own blood; to this very end was Christ appointed, and it has been all
his work to ensure Heaven to his Saints. Some question whether it be in Gods
present power to blot a name out of the Book of Life? We say no; his deed was
at first free, but now it is necessary, not absolutely, but, ex Hypothesi, upon
supposition of his eternal Covenant. Hence it is, that the Apostle says; If we
confess our Sins, He is Faithful, 1 John 1.9.
and Just to forgive us our Sins: It is Justice with God, to pardon the Elect's
Sins, as the Case now stands. Indeed Mercy was all that saved us primarily; but
now Truth saves us, and stands engaged with Mercy, for our Heaven: And
therefore, David prays, Send forth Mercy and Truth, and save me. We find it
often in the Psalms, as a Prayer of David; Psalm. 57.3. Ps. 31.1. -- 3* 24. --
119.40.143.1.
Deliver me in Thy Righteousness; and, Judge me according to Thy Righteousness;
and, Quicken me in Thy Righteousness; and, In Thy Faithfulness answer me; and,
In Thy Righteousness. Now, if it had not been for the Covenant of Grace, surely
David durst not have said such a word. The Covenant is sure in every respect;
Isa. 55.3.
I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you (says God) even the sure Mercies
of David.

6. Whether is Christ more clearlier manifested in this Breaking-forth of the
Covenant, than in any of the Former? The Affirmative will appear, in that we
find in this Manifestation, these Particulars: --

1. That He was God, and Man, in One Person; David's Son, and yet David's Lord:
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My Right Hand, Psalm. 110.1.
until I make Thine Enemies Thy Footstool.

2. That He suffered for us; and in His Sufferings, How many Particulars are
discovered? As first, His Cry, My God, My God, Why have Thou forsaken Me?
Secondly, Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.46. Psalm. 22.8. Mat. 27.43. Ps. 22.16, 17, 18.
Mat. 27.35. Psalm. 16.10. Acts 2.31. Psalm. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8.
The Jews Taunts; He trusted on the Lord, that He would deliver Him; let Him
deliver Him if He delight in Him. Thirdly, The very Manner of His Death; They
pierced My Hands, and My Feet; I may tell all My Bones, they look and stare
upon Me: they part My Garments among them, and cast Lots upon My Vesture.

3. That He Rose again for us; Thou will not leave My Soul in Hell, neither
will Thou suffer Thine Holy One to see Corruption.

4. That He Ascended up into Heaven; Thou have Ascended on High, Thou have led
Captivity Captive, Thou have received Gifts for Men.

5. That He must be King over us, both to Rule and Govern His Elect, and to
bridle and subdue His Enemies: I have set My King upon My Holy Hill of Sion;
Psalm. 2.6, 7.
I will declare the Decree, the Lord has said unto Me, Thou art My Son, this
day have I begotten Thee. Acts 13.33.
-- The Lord said unto My Lord, Sit Thou at My Right Hand, Psalm. 110.1, 2. Heb.
1.13.
until I make Thine Enemies Thy Footstool. The Lord shall send the Rod of Thy
Strength out of Zion, Rule Thou in the midst of Thine Enemies.

6. That He must be Priest, as well as King; and Sacrifice, as well as Priest;
Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.6.
The Lord has Sworn, and will not Repent; Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the Order of Melchisedech. -- Thou love Righteousness, and hate Wickedness;
Psalm. 45.7.
therefore God, Thy God, has anointed Thee with the Oil of Gladness, above Thy
Fellows: (i.e.) Above all Christians, who are thy Fellows, Consorts, and
Partners, in the Anointing: Sacrifice and Burnt-Offering Thou would not have;
but mine Ear have Thou bored; Psalm. 40.6, 7. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
Burnt-Offering, and Sin-Offering have Thou not required. Then said I, Lo I
come: In the Volume of the Book it it written of me, That I should do Thy Will,
O God. Mine Ears have Thou bored, or dug open; The Septuagint, to make the
Sense plainer, say; But a Body have Thou fitted me, or prepared for me: Meaning
that His Body was ordained, and fitted to be a Sacrifice for the Sins of the
World, when other legal Sacrifices were refused as unprofitable. O see, how
clearly Christ is revealed in this Expressure of the Covenant! It was never
thus before.

And thus far of the Covenant of Promise, as it was manifested from David till
the Captivity. SECT. VI. Of the Covenant of Promise, as manifested to Israel,
about the Time of the Captivity.
THE great Breaking-forth of this Gracious Covenant was to Israel about the
Time of their Captivity. By reason of that Captivity of Babylon, Israel was
almost clean destroyed; and therefore, then it was high time, that the Lord
should appear like a Sun after a stormy Rain, and give them some clear Light of
Christ, and of this Covenant of Grace than ever yet. He does so, and it appears
especially in these words; Behold, the days come, says the Lord, Jer. 31.31.32.
that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, 33.34.
and with the House of Judah; not according to the Covenant which I made with
their Fathers, in the day that I took them by the Hand, to bring them out of
the Land of Egypt; which my Covenant they break, although I was an Husband unto
them, says the Lord; but this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the
House of Israel: After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their
Inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts; and I will be their God, and they
shall be My People; and they shall teach no more, every Man his Neighbor, and
every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know Me from
the Least of them unto the Greatest of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive
their Iniquity, and remember their Sin no more. In this Expressure of the
Covenant, we shall examine these Particulars: -- 1. Why it is called a
New Covenant? 2. Wherein the Expressure of this Covenant does excel the former,
which God made with their Fathers? 3. How does God put the Law into our inward
Parts? 4. What is it to have the Law written in our Hearts? 5. How are we
taught of God, so as not to need any other kind of Teaching comparatively? 6.
What is the Universality of this Knowledge, in that All shall know me, says
the Lord? 7. How is God said to forgive Iniquity, and never more to remember sin?


1. Why is it called a New Covenant? I answer; It is called New, either in
respect of the late and new Blessings, which God vouchsafed Israel, in bringing
back their Captivity with Joy, and planting them in their own Land again; or it
is called New, in respect of the Excellency of this Covenant: Thus the Hebrews
were wont to call any thing Excellent, Psalm. 96.1.
New. O sing unto the Lord a New Song, Psalm. 96.1. that is, an Excellent Song:
Or it is called New, in contradiction to the Covenant of Promise before Christ
came. In this latter Sense, the very same words here, are repeated in the
Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 8.8.13.
Behold the Dayss come, says the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant with
the House of Israel, and the House of Judah. -- In that He says a New
Covenant, He has made the First Old; now, that which decays, and waxes old,
is ready to vanish away. The New Covenant is usually understood in the latter
Sense; it is New, because diverse from that which God made with the Fathers
before Christ; it has a new Worship, new Adoration, a new Form of the Church,
new Witnesses, new Tables, new Sacraments and Ordinances; and these never to be
abrogated or disannulled, never to wax Old, as the Apostle speaks: Yet in
respect of those new Blessings, which God bestowed upon Israel immediately
after the Captivity, this very Manifestation may be called New: Jer. 23.7, 8.
And in reference to this; Behold the Days come, says the Lord, that they
shall no more say, The Lord lives, which brought up the Children of Israel out
of the Land of Egypt; but, The Lord lives, which brought up, and which led the
Seed of the House of Israel out of the North- Country, and from all Countries
whither I had driven them, and they shall dwell in their own Land.

2. Wherein does the Expressure of His Covenant excel the former, which God
made with their Fathers? I answer, --

1. It excels in the very Tenor, or outward Administration of the Covenant; for
this Covenant, after it once began, continued without Interruption until
Christ, whereas the Former was broken, or did expire. Hence God calls it a
New Covenant; -- Not according to the Covenant, which I made with their Fathers
in the Day that I took them by the Hand, to bring them out of the Land of
Egypt, which my Covenant they brake, although I was an Husband unto them, says
the Lord. In this respect it might be called New, or, at least it may be called
an Inchoation of the New, because it continued till Christ, which no other
Expressure of the Covenant did before, and so it excelled all the former.

2. It excels in the Spiritual Benefits and Graces of the Spirit. We find, that
under this Covenant they were more plentifully bestowed upon the Church, than
formerly. Mark the Promises: Jer. 24.6, 7.
I will set My Eye upon them for Good, and I will bring them again to this
Land; and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and
not bluck them up; and I will give them a Heart to know Me, that I am the Lord;
and they shall be My People, and I will be their God; for they shall return
unto Me with their whole Heart. Hag. 2.7, 8, 9.
-- Again, I will shake all Nations, and the Desire of the Nations shall come,
and I will fill this House with Glory, says the Lord of Hosts: The Silver is
mine, and the Gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts; the Glory of this latter
House shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of Hosts. And I will
put my Law in their inward parts, Jer. 31.33, 34.
and write it in their Hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
People, and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
Brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of
them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I will forgive their
iniquities, and I will remember their Sins no more.

3. It excels in the discovery and revelation of the Mediator, in and through
whom this Covenant was made: In the former expression we discovered much, yet
in none of them was so plainly revealed the time of his coming, the place of
his birth, his name, the passages of his nativity, his humiliation and kingdom,
as we find them in this. --

1. Concerning the time of his Coming; Dan. 9.24.
Seventy weeks shall be determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to
finish the Transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy.

2. Concerning the place of his Birth: But thou Bethlehem Ephrata, Mica. 5.2.
though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he
come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been
from of old, from everlasting.

3. Concerning his Name: Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, Isa.
9.6.
and the Government shall be upon his Shoulders; and his Name shall be called
Wonderful, Councellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace. Jer. 23.6.
-- In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this
his Name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness. -- Behold a
Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, Isa. 7.14.
and thou O Virgin shall call his Name Immanuel.

4. Concerning the passages of his Nativity, that he should be born of a
Virgin, Isa. 7.14. That at his Birth all the Infants round about Bethlehem
should be slain. Jer 31.15. That John the Baptist should be his Prodromus, or
forerunner, to prepare his way, Mal. 3.1. That he should flee into Egypt, and
be recalled thence again, Hos. 11.1. I might add many Particulars of this kind.

5. Concerning his Humiliation: Surely he has born our griefs and carried our
sorrows, Isa. 53.4.
yet we did not esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; but he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, 5.
and with his stripes were we healed. -- He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his Mouth. -- He was taken from Prison, and from
Judgment, 7.
and who shall declare his Generation? he was cut off out of from the Land of
the Living; 8.
for the transgression of my people was he stricken. -- It pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief. -- Therefore I will divide him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he has
poured out his Soul unto Death, and he was numbered with the transgressors, and
he bare the Sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. One would
think this were rather a History than a Prophecy of Christ's sufferings; you
may if you will take the pains, see the circumstances of his sufferings, as
that he was sold for thirty pieces of silver, Zech. 11.12. and that with those
thirty pieces of silver there was bought afterward a Potters field, Zech.
11.13. That he must ride into Jerusalem before his Passion on an Ass. Zech.
9.9. I might seem tedious if I should proceed.

6. Conc^rning his Kingdom. Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Zion, Zech. 9.9. Isa.
62.11. Mat. 21.5.
shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto thee; he is Just,
and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the Foal
of an Ass. Behold a King* behold thy King, behold thy King comes, and he comes
unto thee. 1. He is a King, and therefore able. 2. He is thy King, and
therefore willing; wonderful Love that he would come, but more wonderful was
the manner of his coming: He that before made man a Soul after the Image of
God, then made himself a Body after the Image of Man. And thus we see how this
Covenant excels the former in every of these respects.

3. How does God put the Law into our inward parts? I answer, God puts the Law
into our inward parts by enlivening or qualifying of a Man with the Graces of
Gods Spirit, suitable to his Commandment; first, there is the Law of God
without us, as we see it or read it in Scriptures; but when it is put within
us, then God has wrought an inward disposition in our minds, that answers to
that Law without us; for example, this is the Law without; Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Strength; Deuteronomy. 6.5. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
To Answer which, there is a promise; I will circumcise thy Heart, and the
Heart of thy Seed, to Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all my
soul; now when this promise is fulfilled, when God has put the affections and
grace of Love within our hearts, when the habit of Love is within, answerable
in all things to the command without, then is the Law put into our inward
parts. Deuteronomy. 13.4. Jer. 32.40.
Again, this is the Law without, Thou shall fear the Lord, and keep his
Ordinances, and his Statutes, and his Commandments to do them: to answer which,
there is a promise; I will make a Covenant with you, and I will not turn away
from you to do you good, but I will put my fear into your hearts, and you shall
not depart from Me; now when this promise is accomplished, when God has put
the affection and grace of fear within our hearts, when the habit of fear is
within, answerable to that Command without, then is the Law put into our
hearts. Surely this is Mercy that God says in his Covenant, I will put my Law
in their inward parts; many a time a poor Soul cries out, he is troubled with
such and such a lust, and he cannot keep this and that Commandment, he cannot
out-wrestle such and such strong inclinations to evil, O but then go to God,
and press him with this, Lord, it is a part of thy Covenant, thou have said,
thou will circumcise my heart; thou have said, thou will put thy Law in my
inward parts; thou have said, thou will dissolve these lusts, Lord, I beseech
thee do it for thy Covenants sake. -- But here is another Question:

How may we know this inward work of Grace, this Law in our inward parts? the
best way to satisfy our doubts in this, is to look within; open we the door and
closet of our hearts, and see what lies nearest and closest there; that we say
is intimate and within a man, Mat. 10.37.
which lies next to his heart: He that loves Father or Mother more than Me
(says Christ) is not worthy of Me: We know the love of Father and Mother is a
most natural thing; it comes not by teaching, but it is inbred in us as soon
as we are born; and yet if we love not Christ more than these, if Christ lie
not closer to our hearts than Father or Mother, we are not worthy of Christ;
our natural life is a most inward and deep thing in a man, Job. 2.4. Luke
14.26. Gal. 2.20.
it lies near the heart; Skin for Skin (said the Devil once truly) and all that
a man has will he give for his Life; but he that hates not Father and Mother
-- yea and his own life also said Christ) he cannot be my Disciple. Hence the
Apostle, to express this intimate, inward life of grace, he says, I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me; the life which I now live in the flesh, I live
by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. What an
emphatical strange expression is this? I live, yet not I but Christ lives in
me; q. d. I live not the life of sense, I breath not bodily breath, that is,
comparatively to the life of faith; his very natural life, though inward, is
said not to be lived, in respect of his life of grace, which is more inward.
And let this serve for resolution to that question.

4. What is it to have the Law written in our hearts? This writing contains the
former, and is something more; the Metaphor is expressed in these Particulars.
--

1. It is said to be written, that there might be something within, answerable
to the Law without; it was written without, and so it was written within. This
writing is the very same with copying or transcribing. The writing within is
every way answerable to the writing without: Oh what a mercy is this, that the
same God who writ the Law with his own finger in the Tables of Stone, should
also write the same Law with the finger of his Spirit in the Tables of our
Hearts! as you see in a Seal, when you have put the Seal on the Wax, and you
take it off again, you find in the Wax the same Impression that was on the
Seal: So it is in the hearts of the faithful, when the Spirit has once softened
them, then he writes the Law (i.e.) he stamps an inward aptness, an inward
disposition on the heart, answering to every particular of the Law; this is
that which the Apostle calls the Law of the mind, I see another Law in my
Members warring against the Law of my mind: Romans 7.23.
Now what is this Law in the mind, but a disposition within, to keep in some
measure every Commandment of the Law without? and this is the writing of the
Law (or if you will) the copying or transcribing of the Law within us.

2. It is said to be written, that it might be rooted and rivetted in the
heart, as when Letters are engraven in Marble; so is the manner of Gods
writing: if God write, it can never be obliterated or blotted out: Letters in
Marble are not easily worn out again; no more are the writings of Gods Spirit:
Some indeed would have them as writings in dust: but if Pilate could say, What
I have written, I have written; how much more may God? Hence are all those
promises of perseverance; My Covenant shall stand fast with him, Psalm. 89.28.
and, The root of the righteous shall not be moved, Prove. 12.3. and, Even to
your old Age I am he; and even to hoary hairs will I carry you, Isa. 46.4. I
deny not, but men of glorious gifts may fall away; but surely the poorest
Christian that has but the smallest measure of Grace, he shall never fall
away; if the Law be written in our hearts, it still remains there; Grace
habitual is not removeable: sooner will the Sun discard its own beams, than
Christ will desert or destroy the least measure of true Grace which is a Beam
from the Sun of Righteousness.

3. It is said to be written, that it might be as a thing legible to God, to
others, and to our selves. 1. To God, he writes it that he may read it, and
take notice of it; he exceedingly delights himself in the graces of his own
Spirit: and therefore the Spouse after this writing, after the planting of his
grace in her, Cant. 4.6.
she desires him to come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant Fruits; q. d.
Come, read what thou have written; come, and delight thy self in the graces of
thy own Spirit: the only delight that God has in the world is in his Garden, a
gracious soul; and that he might more delight in it, he makes it fruitful: and
those fruits are precious fruits; as growing from plants set by his own Hand,
relishing of his own Spirit, and so fitted for his own taste. 2. The Law is
written that it might be legible to others. So Paul tells the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 3.2, 3.
You are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ: How manifestly
declared? why, known and read of all Men. As we are able to read Letters graven
in stone, so may others read and see the fruits and effects of this Law written
in our Hearts. And good reason; for wheresoever God works the principles of
grace within, it cannot but show it self in the outward life and conversation:
it is Gods promise, first I will put my Spirit within them, Ezekiel. 36.27. Mat.
12.34.
and then I will cause them to walk in my statutes; and it is Gods truth, Out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. What the mind thinks, the
hand works. 3. The Law is written that it may be legible to our selves; a
gracious heart is privy to its own grace and sincerity, when it is in a right
temper: if others may read it by its fruits, How much more we our selves, who
both see the fruits, and feel that habitual disposition infused into us? Nor is
this without its blessed use; for by this means we come to have a comfortable
evidence both of Gods Love to us, and of our Love to God. You see now what we
mean by this writing of the Law within us.

5. How are we taught of God, so as not to need any other kind of teaching
comparatively? I answer. --

1. God teaches inwardly, In the hidden part thou have made me know wisdom,
Psalm. 51.6. Psalm. 16.17.
says David; and again, I thank the Lord that gave me counsel, my reins also
instruct me in the night season. The reins are the most inward part of the
Body, and the night season the most retired and private time; both express the
intimacy of divine teaching; man may teach the brains, but God only teaches
the reins: the knowledge which man teaches, is a swimming knowledge; but the
knowledge which God teaches, Cathedram habet in coelis qui corda doces Aug.
is a soaking knowledge. God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has
shined into our hearts. Man's light may shine into the head, but Gods light does
shine into the heart: His Chair is in Heaven that teaches hearts, says Austin.

2. God teaches clearly, Elihu offering himself instead of God to reason with
Job, he tells him, My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart, Job. 33.3.
and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly. If ever the Word come home to an
heart, it comes with a convincing clearness. So the Apostle, Our Gospel came
unto you, not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much
full assurance. The word has a treble Emphasis, 2 These. 1.5.
assurance, full assurance, and much full assurance; here is clear work.

3. God teaches experimentally; the soul that is taught of God can speak
experimentally of the Truths it knows. I know whom I have believed, says Paul;
2 Timothy 1.12.
I have experienced his faithfulness and all sufficiency, I dare trust my all
with him, I am sure he will keep it safe to that day. Common knowledge rests in
generals, but they that are taught of God, can say, As we have heard, so we
have seen; they can go along with every truth, and say, It is so indeed, I have
experienced this and that Word upon my own Heart. In this case the Scripture is
the Original, and their Heart is the Copy of it, as you have heard; they can
read over the Promises and Threatenings, and say Probatum est. David in his
Psalms, and Paul in his Epistles speaks their very Hearts, and feels their very
temptations, and makes their very objections: they can set to their Seal, John
3.33.
that God is true; they can solemnly declare by their lives and conversations
that God is true and faithful in his word and promises.

4. God teaches sweetly and comfortably: Thou have taught me, says David,
Psalm. 119.102.103.
and then it follows, How sweet are thy words unto my taste? Yea, sweeter than
the Honey to my Mouth? He rolled the word and promises as Sugar under his
Tongue, and sucked from thence more sweetness than Sampson did from his
Honeycomb: Luther said, he would not live in Paradise if he must live without
the Word; Cum v^rbo in i^s^rr^^e. ^^e est ^ie^re. Luth 4. tom, op^r. ^a^.
but with the Word (said he) I could live in Hell. When Christ put his hand by
the hole of the door to teach the heart, her bowels were moved, and then her
fingers drop upon the handles of the Lock sweet smelling myrrh, Cant. 5.5. The
teachings of Christ left such a blessing upon the first motions of the Spouses
heart, that with the very touch of them she is refreshed, her fingers drop
myrrh, and her bowels are moved as the very monuments of his gracious
teachings; So in Cant. 1.3. Cant. 1.3.
Because of the savor of thy Oynement, thy Name is as an Ointment poured
forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. Christ in Ordinances does as Mary,
open a Box of Ointments, which diffuseth a spiritual savor in
Church Assemblies, and this only the spiritual Christian feels. Hence the
Church is compared to a Garden shut up; a Fountain sealed; Cant. 4.12.
wicked men are not able to drink of her delicacies, or smell of her sweetness;
a spiritual Sermon is a Fountain sealed up, the spiritual administration of a
Sacrament is a Garden enclosed: Sometimes, O Lord, thou give me a strange
motion, or affection (said Augustine) which if it were but perfected in me,
Aug. l. 16. Confess. c. 40.
I could not imagine what it should be but eternal life. Christians! these are
the teachings of God, and in reference to this, we shall no more teach every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord. Gods
teaching is another kind of teaching than we can have from the hands of men,
there is no man in the world can teach thus; and therefore they whom God
teaches, need not any other kind of teaching respectively or comparatively.

6. What is the universality of this knowledge; They shall all know m^ from the
least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord? The meaning is, that all
that are in the Covenant of grace, shall be so taught of God, as that in some
measure or other they shall every one know God inwardly, clearly,
experimentally, sweetly and savingly. I know there are several degrees of this
knowledge; God has several Forms in his School: there are fathers for
experience, 1 John 2.12.
young men for strength, and babes for the truth and being of Grace: as one
Star differs from another in glory, so also is the School of Christ: But here
I am beset on both sides. 1. Many are apt to complain, alas they know little of
God! sweet babes consider, 1. It is free grace you are stars; though you are
not stars of the first and second magnitude: it is of the Covenant of grace,
that God has let into your souls a little glimmering, Case. Correc. instruct.
though not so much light as others possibly may have in point of holy
emulation (as one notes well) we should look at degrees of grace, but in point
of thankfulness and comfort, we should look at the truth* and being of grace.
2. If you know but a little, you may in time know more: God does not teach all
his lessons at first entrance; Psalm. 119.130.
it is true, The entrance of thy Word gives Light; but this is as true, that
God lets in his Light by degrees; it is not to be despised if God do but engage
the heart in holy desires and longings after knowledge, so that it can say in
sincerity, My Soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at
all times. Psalm. 119.20.


Others on the contrary, ground themselves so learned from this very promise,
that they exclude all teachings of men. The anointing (say they) teaches us
all things, and we need not that any man teach us: and they shall teach no more
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, 1 John 2.27. Jer. 31.34.
saying, know the Lord, for they shall all, etc. I answer, the words either
relate to the grounds of Religion, and so in Gospel Times Christians need not
to be taught in these fundamental points; for now all know the Lord, from the
least to the greatest; or else these words are an Hebraisme, which deny
positively, when they intend it only comparatively, or secundum quid, as when
God and men are compared together, man is vanity, lighter than vanity, and a
very nothing: here is a comparison of knowledge in Gospel Times with the
knowledge of Israel in those dark times when God brought them out of the Land
of Egypt; then all was dark, and they were fain to teach one another the very
Principles, the Rudiments of Religion, there was very little effusion of Gods
Spirit in those times; but in Gospel Times (says the Prophet) the Spirit of
grace and knowledge shall be so abundant, that rather God himself shall be the
teacher, than one man shall teach another. There shall be such exuberancy and
seas of knowledge under the new Covenant, above the Covenant made with his
people when he brought them out of Egypt, that men shall not need to teach one
another comparatively; for all shall know the Lord, who are taught of God from
the least to the greatest: An highway shall be there, Isa. 35.8.
and it shall be called the way of holiness -- the wayfaring men, though fools,
shall not err therein.

7. How is God said to forgive iniquity, and never more to remember Sin?

For the first, God is said to forgive iniquity when guilt of sin is taken
away; and for the second, God is said never more to remember Sin, in that the
Sinner, after pardon, is never more looked on as a Sinner. Is not this the
Covenant? q. d. I will remove thy Sins, and do them away, as if they had never
been; I will blot them out of the Book of my Memory; I will obliterate the
Writing, that none shall be able to read it. But you will say, If Sin remain
still in the Regenerate, How are they so forgiven, as to be remembered no more?
Divines tell us of Two Things in every Sin; there is macula and reatus; the
Filth, and the Guilt: This Guilt some again distinguish into the Guilt of Sin,
which they call the Inward Dignity, and Desert of Damnation; and the Guilt of
Punishment, which is the Actual Ordination of a Sinner unto Damnation. Now, in
different Respects we say, That Sin remains still in Believers, and Sin does
not remain in Believers: First, If we speak of the Filth of Sin, or of the
Desert of Damnation; so it remains still: but if we speak of the actual
Obligation of a Sinner to Condemnation, so it remains not after Pardon; but the
Sinner is as free as if he had never sinned.

But you will say, Is not the Filth of Sin done away, when Sin is remitted? I
answer, The Filth of Sin is not done away by Remission, but by Sanctification
and Renovation; and because in this Life we have not a perfect inherent
Holiness, (Sanctification at best being but Imperfect, and wrought in us by
degrees) therefore during this Life, there is something of the Filth of Sin,
and especially of the Effects of Original Sin, sticking and still cleaving to
us. But, here is our Comfort, and herein lies the sweet of the Promise, that
when God has pardoned Sin, He takes away the Guilt, as to Condemnation; He
acquits the Sinner of that Obligation; He now looks upon him not as a Sinner,
but as a Just Man; and so in this Sense He will forgive, and never more
remember his Sin. Ah Christians! Take heed of their Doctrine, who would have
Justification an Abolition of Sin in its real Essence, and Physical
in-dwelling; let us rather say with Scripture, that all justified Saints must
take down their Top-sail, and go to Heaven halting, and that they carry their
Bolts and Fetters of in-dwelling sin through the Field of Free Grace, even to
the Gates of Glory: Christ daily Washing, and we daily Defiling, to the end
that Grace may be Grace.

I have run through all the manifestations of the Covenant of Grace, as we have
them discovered in the Old Testament: And yet, that we may see the better how
these things concern us, I shall only propound these Two Queries more, and then
we have done. 1. Whether is the Covenant of Grace the same for Substance, in
all Ages of the World? We answer, Yea: The Fathers before Christ had but one
Covenant, and we another; but the same Covenant of Grace belongs to us both.
This appears, in that first, they had the same Promise; secondly, they had it
upon the same Grounds.

1. They had the same Promise; as, I will be your God, and you shall be My
People. Lev. 26.12. Deuteronomy. 33.20.
And Happy art thou, O Israel, saved by the Lord. And, The Lord is our King,
and He will save us. They had not only the Hopes of an Earthly Inheritance in
Canaan, (as some fondly imagine) but of an Heavenly Inheritance in the Kingdom
of God: And to this purpose, our Savior speaks expressly; Many shall come from
the East and West, Isa. 33.22. Mat. 8.11.
and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. As they had the same Promise, so they had it upon the same ground that we
have; John 8.56. Heb. 13.8.
even by Faith in Christ Jesus: Abraham saw My Day, said Christ; and, Christ is
the same Yesterday, and to Day, and for Ever: He is the same not only in regard
of Essence, but also in regard of the Efficacy of His Office, from the
Beginning to the End of the World. We believe (said Peter) that through the
Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 15.11. Heb. 4.2.
we shall be saved even as they: And, Unto us was the Gospel Preached (says
Paul) as unto them. Some may think they had no Gospel, but only the Law, before
Christ: But, What say you? Have we not observed a Thread of the Gospel, and of
the Covenant of Grace, to run through all the Old Testament, from First to
Last? And, How plain is the Apostle? For, this cause also was the Gospel
preached also to them that are Dead. Dead long since; for he speaks of them,
who lived in the Days of Noah. Nay, the Apostle to the Hebrews, 1 Pet. 4.6.
gives us a Catalogue of Old-Testament-Believers: By Faith, Heb. 11.4
Abel offered up unto God a more excellent Sacrifice, than Cain. -- By Faith,
Enoch was Translated, that he should not see Death. -- By Faith, Noah being
warned by God, prepared an Ark. -- By Faith, 5.7.8.13.
Abraham, when he was called to go into a Place which he should after receive
for an Inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither he went. --
These all died in Faith, not having received the Promises, but having seen them
afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them. Besides these, he
reckons up the Faith of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Moses, and
Rahab, and Gideon, and Barak, and Samson, and Jephtah, and David, and Samuel,
and of all the Prophets; who through Faith did mavelous things, as it there
appears. Surely they had the same Doctrine of Grace as we have; it is the very
same for Substance, without any difference.

2. Wherein is the Difference then betwixt the Old and New Testament, or
betwixt the Old and New Manner of the Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace?

They are one for Substance; but in regard of the manner of Dispensation, and
revealing in the several Times, Ages, States, and Conditions of the Church,
there is a difference. I shall reduce all to these Particulars: They are
distinguished, --

1. In the Object: In the Old Administration Christ was promised; but in the
New Covenant Christ is exhibited: It was meet, the Promise should go before the
Gospel, and be fulfilled in the Gospel, that so great a Good might earnestly be
desired before it was bestowed.

2. In the Federates: Under the Old Dispensation they are compared to an Heir
under Age, needing a Guardian, Tutor, or Schoolmaster; little differing from a
Servant: But in the New Testament they are compared to an Heir come to ripe
Years; see Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

3. In the Manner of their Worship: In the Old Testament they were held under
the Ceremonial Law; and Oh, What an heap of Ceremonies, Rites, Figures, and
Shadows did they use in their Worship! Certainly these declared the Infancy and
Nonage of the Jews, who being not capable of the high Mysteries of the Gospel,
they were taught by their Eyes, as well as their Ears. These Ceremonies were as
Rudiments, and Introductions fitted to the gross and weak Senses of that
Church, who were to be brought on by little and little, through such Shadows
and Figures, to the true Image, and thing signified: But in the New Covenant or
Testament, our Worship is more spiritual: Our Savior has told us, (...).
4.23, 24.
That as God is a Spirit; so, They that worship Him, must worship Him in Spirit
and Truth. The Hour comes, and now is (says Christ) when the true Worshippers
shall worship the Father in Spirit, and in Truth; for the Father seeks such
to worship Him.

^ts 15.10.
4. In the Burden of Ceremonies: Peter calls the Ceremonies of old, A Yoke,
which niether our Fathers nor we (says he) were able to bear. And no wonder,
if we consider. 1. The burden of their costly Sacrifices; if any had but
touched an unclean Thing, he must come and offer a Sacrifice; as sometimes a
Bullock, and sometimes a Lamb: You that think every thing too much for a
Minister of Christ, if for every Offense you were to offer such Sacrifices now,
you would count it an heavy Burden indeed. 2. They had long and tedious
Journeys to Jerusalem; the Land lay more in length than breadth, and Jerusalem
stood almost at one End of it; ^ut. 16.16.
and thither Thrice a Year all the Males were to go and appear before God. 3.
They were tied to the Observation of many Days, the New Moons, and many
Ceremonial Sabbaths; and they were restrained from many Liberties, as in Meats,
and the like: Oh, What Burdens were upon them! But in the New Covenant, or
Testament, the Yoke is made more easy: We are bound indeed to the Duties of
the moral Law, as well as they, yet a great Yoke is taken off from us; and
therefore Christ, inviting us to the Gospel, He gives it out thus; Take My Yoke
upon you, (says He) for My Yoke is easy, (...). 11.29.
and My Burden light.

5. In the Weakness of the Law of old: The Law then was unable to give Life, to
purge the Conscience, (...). 7.18.
to pacify God's Wrath; and therefore, says the Apostle, There is verily a
dis-annulling of the Commandment going before, for the Weakness and
Vnprofitableness thereof. Hence they are called weak and beggarly Rudiments;
(...) 4.9.
in comparison of the New Testament, there was then a less forcible Influence
of the Spirit accompanying that Dispensation of the Covenant: (...) 7.39.
The Spirit was not then given in that large Measure as now; Because Christ was
not then glorified. It appears in these Particulars:

1. There was less Power of Faith in the Saints, before Christ; when the
Doctrine of Faith was more fully revealed, then was Faith it self more fully
revealed in the hearts and lives of God's People. (...) 3.23.
Before Faith came (says the Apostle) we were kept under the Law, shut up unto
the Faith, which should afterward be revealed. Surely this implies there was a
Time, when there was less Faith in God's People; and that was the Time of the
Law.

2. There was less Power of Love in the Saints before Christ; according to the
measure of our Faith, so is our Love: The less they knew the Loving Kindness of
God toward them in Christ, the less they loved. It may be, they were more
drawn by the Terrors of the Law, than by the Promises of Grace; and therefore,
they had less Love in them.

3. They had a less Measure of Comfort to carry them on in all their Troubles.
Christ exibited, is called the Consolation of Israel: and therefore the more
Christ is imparted, Luk 2.25 Acts. 9 31
the more means of Comfort: Hence the Primitive Saints after Christ, are said
to walk in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.
Certainly the Spirit was poured in less plenty on the faithful in the Old
Testament, because that benefit was reserved to the times of Christ, who was
first to receive the Spirit above measure in his humane Nature, and thence to
derive Grace to his Saints.

6. In the darkness of that administration of Old, Christ was but shadowed out
to the Fathers in Types and Figures, and dark Prophesies, but now we see him
with open Face. 2 Co. 5.18
Observe the difference in reference to the person of Christ, and to the
Offices of Christ, and to the benefits that come by Christ. 1. Concerning the
Person of Christ; it was revealed to them that he should be God, Isa. 9, 6. And
that he should be man, Isa. 9.6. Isa. 9.6.
The same verse speaks of a Child that is born, and of a mighty God. But how he
should be God and man in one person, it was very darkly Revealed. 2. Concerning
the Offices of Christ; his Mediatorship was Typed out by Moses; his Priesthood
was Typed out by Melchizedeck among the Canaanites, and Aaron among the Jews;
his Prophetical Office was typed out by Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness; his
Kingly Office was typed out by David: but how dark these things were unto them,
we may guess by the Apostles, who knew not he should Die, who dreamed of an
earthly Kingdom; and till the Holy Ghost came, were ignorant of many things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God. 3. Concerning the Benefits that come by
Christ; Justification was signified by the sprinkling of Blood, and
Sanctification by the water of Purification, Heaven and glorification by their
Land flowing with Oil, Olive, and, Honey: Thus the Lord showed the Jews these
principal Mysteries, not in themselves, but in Types and Shadows, as they were
able to see them from day to day: But in the new Covenant Christ is offered to
be seen in a fuller view: the Truth, and Substance, and body of the things
themselves is now exhibited; Christ is clearly Revealed without any Type at all
to be our Wisdom, 2 Cor. 1.30
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

7. In the number of them that partake of the Covenant; at first the Covenant
was included in the Families of the Patriarchs, and then within the Confines of
Judea, but now is the partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile broken down, Romans
3.29.
and the Covenant of Grace is made with all Nations, He is the God of the
Gentiles also, and not of the Jews only. Christians! here comes in our
happiness; Oh how thankful should we be? that our Fathers for many Hundreds and
Thousands of years together should sit in darkness, and that we should partake
of this Grace! What? that we that were Dogs before, should now be set at the
Childrens Table? Acts 11.18
The very Jews themselves hearing of this, are said to glorify God. When they
heard these things, they held their peace and glorified God, saying, then has
God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life. If they praised God for
it, how much more should we do it our selves? But of that hereafter.

I have now propounded the Object we are to look unto; it is Jesus, as held
forth in a way of Promise or Covenant; in that dark time from the Creation,
till his first coming in the Flesh: Our next Business is to direct you in the
Art or Mystery of Grace, how you are to look to Him in this respect. CHAP. II.
SECT. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our Salvation from
the Creation until his first Coming.
LOoking comprehends knowing, considering, desiring, etc. as you have heard;
and accordingly that we may practice.

1. We must know Jesus carrying on the great work of our Salvation in the
beginning, and from the beginning of the World: Come let us learn what he did
for us so early in the morning of this World: He made it for us, and he made us
more especially for his own Glory; but presently after we were made, we sinned
and marred the Image wherein God made us; this was the saddest Act that ever
was; it was the undoing of man, and (without the mercy of God) the damning of
all Souls, both of men and women to all Eternity; and, O my Soul, know this for
thy self, thou wast in the loins of Adam at that same time, so that what he
did, thou did; thou wast partaker of his Sins, and thou wast to partake with
him in his punishment: but well may thou say, Blessed be God for Jesus
Christ; at the very instant when all should have been, damned, Christ
intervened; a Covenant of Grace is made with man, and Christ is the Foundation,
in and through whom we must be reconciled unto God: Come soul, and study this
Covenant of grace in reference to thy self; had not this been, where had thou
been? nay, where had all the World been at this day? Surely it concerns thee to
take notice of this great Transaction. After man had fallen by Sin, Christ is
promised; and that all the Saints might partake of Christ, a Covenant is
entered; this at the beginning of the World, was more dim, but the nearer to
Christ's coming in the Flesh, the more and more clearly it appeared: Howsoever
dimly, or clearly, thus it pleased God in Christ to carry on the great work of
our Salvation at that time, viz. by a Promise of Christ, and by a Covenant in
Christ, and for thy better knowledge of it, study the Promise made to Adam, and
Abraham, and Moses, and David, and Israel. Come Soul, study these several
breakings out of the Covenant of Grace; Col. 1.26
it is worth thy pains, it is a Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations, but now is made manifest to the Saints. Here lies the first and
most firm Foundation of a Christians comfort; if thou can but study this, and
assure thy self of thy part in this, thou art blessed for ever; O how
incomparably sweet and satisfying is it to a self-studying Christian, to know
the faithful engagements of the Almighty God, through that Son of his Loves, in
a Covenant of Grace.

SECT. II. Of Considering Jesus in that Respect.
2. WE must consider Jesus carrying on the the great work of our Salvation in
that dark time; it is not enough to study it and know it, but we must seriously
muse, and meditate, and ponder, and consider of it, till we bring it to some
profitable Issue: This is the Consideration I mean, when we hold our thoughts
to this or that spiritual subject, till we perceive success, and the work do
thrive and prosper in our hands. Now to help us in this, --

Genesis 3.15.
1. Consider Jesus in the first Promise made to man; It shall bruise thy head,
and thou shall bruise his heel. When all men were under guilt of sin, and in
the power of Satan; and when thou, my Soul, were in as bad a case as any other,
then to hear the sound of this glad tidings, then to hear of Jesus, a Savior,
and Redeemer, sure this was welcome News. Come, draw the case nearer to thy
self; thou wast in Adams Loins, suppose thou had been in Adams stead; Genesis
3.8, 9, ^
suppose thou had heard the Voice of the Lord walking in the Garding, suppose
thou had heard him call, Adam, where art thou? Peter, Andrew, Thomas, where
art thou? What? have thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
should not eat? Why then Appear and come to judgment, the Law is
irrevocable, Genesis 2.17
in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; there is nothing to
be looked for but death temporal, and death spiritual, and death eternal; O
what a fearful condition is this! no sooner to come into the world, but
presently to be turned over into Hell? for one day to be Monarch of the World,
and of all Creatures in the world, and the very next day to be a slave of
Satan, and to be bound hand and foot in a darksome dungeon? for a few hours to
live in Eden, to enjoy every tree in the Garden, Pleasant to the sight, and
good for food, and then to enter into the confines of eternity, and ever, ever,
ever to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels? Genesis 3.8.
It is no wonder if Adam hid himself from the presence of the Lord God amongst
the trees of the Garden: O my soul, in that case thou would have cried to
the Rocks, Rev. 6.16.17
and to the Mountains, fall on me, and hide me from the face of him that
sits on the Throne. If God be angry, who may abide it? When the great day of
his wrath is come, who shall be able to stand? And yet despair not, cheer up O
my soul? for in the very midst of wrath God is pleased to remember Mercy; even
now when all the world should have been damned, a Jesus is proclaimed and
promised; and he it is that must die according to the Commination; for he is
our surety, and he it is that by Death must overcome Death and the Devil; it
shall bruise thy Head, said God to Satan, q. d. Come Satan, thou have taken
Captive ten thousands of souls? Adam and Eve are now ensnared, and in their
loins all the men and women, that ever shall be from this beginning of the
world to the end thereof; now is thy day of triumph, now thou keep Holy Day
in Hell; but thou shall not carry it thus. I foresaw from all Eternity what
thou have done, I knew thou would dig a hole through the comely and
beautiful frame of the Creation; but I have decreed of old a Counter-work; out
of the seed of the woman shall spring a Branch, and he shall bruise thy head,
he shall break thy Power, he shall tread thy Dominion under foot, he shall lead
thy Captivity Captive, he shall take away sin, he shall point out to Men and
Angels the glory of heaven, and a new world of free grace. In this promise, O
my soul, is foulded and wrapped up thy hope, thy heaven, thy salvation; and
therefore consider of it, turn it upside down look on all sides of it, view it
over and over; there is a Jesus in it, it is a field that contains in the
bowels of it a precious treasure, there is in it a Savior, a Redeemer, a
Deliverer from sin, death and hell: are not these dainties to feed upon? are
not these rarities to dwell on in our meditations?

2. Consider Jesus in that next promise made to Abraham: Genesis 17.7.
I will establish thy Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in
their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee and to thy
Seed after thee: in respect of this Covenant Abraham is called the Father of
the Faithful, Romans 4.11. Gal. 3.7.
and they which are of the Faith are called the Children of Abraham: And O my
soul, if thou art in Covenant with God, surely thou do by Faith draw it
through Abraham, to whom this promise was made; for if ye be Christ's, then are
ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the promise: Consider, what a mercy is
this, Gal. 3 29.
that God should enter into a Covenant with thee in the loins of Abraham? God
made a promise of Christ, and inclusively a Covenant of Grace in his comforting
Adam; but he makes a Covenant expressly under the name of Covenant, with Abraham
and his seed. O muse, and be amazed! What? that the great and glorious God of
heaven and earth should be willing to make himself a debtor to us? O my soul
think of it seriously; he is in heaven, and thou art on earth, he is the
Creator and thou art his Creature: Ah what art thou! or what is thy Fathers
house that thou should be raised up hitherto! The very Covenant is a wonder;
as it Relates to God and us; what is it but a compact, an agreement, a tying, a
binding of God and us; When Jehoshaphat and Ahab were in Covenant, see how
Jehoshaphat expresses himself, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, 1
King. 21.4
my horses as thy horses: So it is betwixt God and us. If once he gives us the
Covenant, then his strength is our strength, his power is our power, his armies
are our armies, his attributes are our attributes, we have interest in all;
there is an offensive and a defensive Language, (as I may say) betwixt God and
us; and if we put him in mind of it in all our straits, he cannot deny us. As
it was with the Nations allied to Rome, if they fought at any time, the Romans
were bound in honor to defend them; and they did it with as much diligence as
they defended their own City of Rome; so it is with the people allied to God,
he is bound in honor to defend his People, and he will do it if they implore
his aid; how else, is it possible God should break his Covenant? will he not
stir up himself to scatter his, and our spiritual enemies? Certainly he will.
Thus runs the tenor of his Covenant, I will be a God to thee and to thy seed
after thee. This is the general promise; I may call it the Mother-Promise, that
carries all other Promises in its womb; and we find a Jesus in this promise,
consider that it is God in Christ that is held forth to us in this phrase, I
will be as a God to thee: O sweet! Here is the greatest promise that ever was
made; Christ God is more than Grace, Pardon, Holiness, Heaven, as the Husband
is more excellent than the Marriage-Robe, Bracelets, Rings; the Well and
Fountain of Life is of more excellency than the streams; Christ Jesus the
objective happiness, is far above a created and formal Beatitude which issues
from him. O my Soul is not this worthy of thy inmost consideration? But of this
more in the next.

3. Consider Jesus in that promise made to Moses and the Israelites, I am the
Lord thy God who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
Bondage. Much has been said to this Promise before as matter of thy
Consideration; but to contract it, consider in the Promise the sufficiency and
propriety; 1. Here is sufficiency: it is a promise of infinite worth, an hid
treasure, a rich possession, an overflowing blessing which none can rightly
value; it is no less than the great, and mighty, and infinite God; if we had a
promise of an hundred worlds, or often heavens, this is more than all; heaven
indeed is beautiful, but God is more beautiful; for he is the God of heaven:
and hence it is that the Saints in heaven are not satisfied without their God;
it is a sweet expression of Bernard, As whatsoever we give unto thee, Lord,
unless we give our selves, cannot satisfy thee; so whatsoever thou give unto
us, Lord, unless thou give thy self, it cannot satisfy us: and hence it is,
that as God does make the Saints his Portion, so God is the Portion and
Inheritance of his Saints. Consider the greatness, the goodness, the
all sufficiency of this promise, I am the Lord thy God! No question but Moses
had many other rich promises from God, but he could not be satisfied without
God himself: if thy presence be not with us, bring us not hence. And no wonder,
for without God all things are nothing; Exodus 33.15.
but in the want of all other things, God himself is instead of all: It is Gods
alone Prerogative to be an universal good. The things of this world can but
help in this or that particular thing: as Bread against hunger, Drink against
thirst, Clothes against cold and nakedness, House against wind and weather,
Riches against poverty, Physic against sickness, Friends against solitariness:
but God is an alsufficient good; he is all in all both to the inner and outward
man. Are we guilty of Sin? there is mercy in God to pardon us. Are we full of
infirmities? there is Grace in God to heal us. Are we strong in Corruptions?
there is power in God to subdue them in us. Are we disquieted in Conscience?
there is that Spirit in God that is the Comforter, that can fill us with Joy
unspeakable and glorious: And for our outward man all our welfare is laid up in
God, he is the God of our Life Psalm. 42.8. he is the strength of our Life.
Psalm. 27.1. he is a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45 Which though it be in regard
of the inner man, yet there it is spoken of the inward man, which the Lord
shall quicken after death, and does now keep alive by his mighty power; for in
him we live, Acts. 17.28.
and move, and have our being.

O my Soul, that thou would but ruminate, and meditate, and consider this
promise in all thy wants and discontents: when means fail, and the streams run
no more, O that thou would then go to the Fountain, where the waters run
sweeter, and more sure: Genesis 41.16.
for as Joseph said to Pharaoh it is not in me, God shall give Pharaoh an
answer of peace: So may Silver and Gold, and such things say to thee, It is not
in us; God shall give enough out of himself: have God, and have all: want God,
and there is no content in the enjoyment of all: It was the Apostles case as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things: 2 Cor. 6.10.
Surely he lived to God and enjoyed God, and he was an all-sufficient good unto
him: God may be enjoyed in any condition, in the meanest, as well as the
greatest, in the poorest as well as the richest: God will go into a wilderness,
into a prison with his people, and there he will make up all that they are cut
short of. Thy discontents therefore arise not from the want of outward means,
but from want of inward fellowship with God: and if thou do not find a
sufficiency, it is because thou do not enjoy him who is thy all-sufficient
good: O stir up Faith, and consider the Covenant, think seriously on this
promise, I am God all-sufficient: I am the Lord thy God.

2. Here is the propriety of Saints, the Lord thy God. O what is this, that God
is thy God? Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men may stand astonished at it: What,
that the Great and Mighty God, God Almighty, and God all-sufficient should be
called thy God! Heb. 11.16.
It is observable what the Apostle speaks, God is not ashamed to be called
their God: Would not a prince be ashamed to take a Beggar, a Runagate, a base
and adulterous Woman to be his Wife? But we are worse than so, and God is
better than so; sin has made us worse than the worst of women, and God is
better, holier, higher than the best of Princes: and yet God is not ashamed to
own us, nor ashamed that we own him as our own, I am thy God. It is as if the
Lord should say, use me, and all my Power, Grace, Mercy, Kindness, as thine
own: go through all my Attributes; consider my Almighty Power, consider my
Wisdom, Council, Understanding, consider my Goodness, Truth, Faithfulness:
consider my Patience, Long-suffering, Forbearance, all these are thine: as
thus, My Power is thine, to work all thy works for thee and in thee, to make
passage for thee in all thy straits, to deliver thee out of six troubles and
out of seven; my Wisdom is thine, to counsel thee in any difficult cases, to
instruct thee in things that be obscure, to reveal to thee the Mysteries of
Grace, and the wonderful things contained in my Law: my Justice is thine, to
deliver thee when thou art oppressed, to defend thee in thy Innocence, and to
vindicate thee from the injuries of men: what needs more? O my Soul, think of
these, and all other Gods Attributes: say in thy self all these are mine: nay
more, think of God in Christ (for otherwise what have thou to do with God in a
Covenant of grace?) and say in thy heart Jesus Christ is mine, my Savior, my
Redeemer, my head, my elder brother: his doings are mine, and his sufferings
are mine, his Life and his Death, his Resurrection and Ascension, his Session
and Intercession, all are mine: nay more, if Christ be mine, why then all good
things are mine in Christ; I say in Christ, for they come not immediately, but
through the hands of a sweet Redeemer; and though he be a man who redeemed us,
yet because he is God as well as Man, there is more of God and Heaven, and
free-love in all our good things, than if we received them immediately from
God: Ravens have their food, and Devils have their being from God by
creature-right; but we have all we have from God in Christ by Covenant-right,:
this surely, this very promise is the main and principal promise of the
Covenant; it is the very substance, Soul and life of all: O then how careful
should thou be to improve the strength of thy mind, thoughts, and affections
on this only subject?

4. Consider Jesus in that promise made to David, 1 Samuel 23.5
He has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure.
1. An everlasting Covenant: consider this in the eternal efficacy, and not in
the outward administration? it is Christ that has built and prepared a
Kingdom, that shall never fade, a spiritual and an heavenly Kingdom which shall
never cease: and as he has prepared it, so if thou believe, he has entered
into a Covenant with thy soul to bestow it on thee; it is an everlasting
Covenant, and he will give thee everlasting Life. 2. It is ordered in all
things: the Covenant of grace is so marshalled and ordered, that it stands at
best advantage to receive and repel all thy objections. Many and many an
objection have thou raised; how often have such thoughts been in thee? Oh I am
miserable, I shall not live but die, my sins will damn me, I am lost for ever!
And again, If God has made with me a Covenant, why then have I something to do
on my part? for this is the nature of the Covenant, to bind on both parts; but
alas I have failed, I can do nothing, I can as well dissolve a Rock as make my
heart of stone a heart of flesh, I can as well reach heaven with a finger as
lay hold on Christ by the hand of Faith! Have not such arguings as these been
many and many a time in thy heart? O consider how the Covenant is ordered and
marshalled in respect of the Author of it, of the Persons interested in it, of
the parts of which it consists, of the end and aim to which it refers: and in
some of these, if not in all of these, thou will find thy Objections answered,
removed, routed. 3. It is sure: God is not fast and loose in his Covenant?
heaven and earth shall pass away, before one jot or title of his Word shall
fail: consider O my Soul, he both can and will perform his Word; his Power, his
Love, his Faithfulness, his Constancy, all stand engaged. What sweet matter is
here for a Soul to dwell upon? what needs it go out to other objects, whilst it
may find enough here? but especially what needs it to bestow it self upon vain
things? O that so much precious sand of our thoughts should run out after Sin,
and so little after grace, or after this Covenant of grace!

5. Jer. 31.33, 34
Consider Jesus in that new Covenant or Promise which God made with Israel and
Judah, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and I will be their God and they shall be my People; and they shall teach no
more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord;
for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them,
says the Lord, for I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their
Sins no more. Oh what an error is it, that there is no inherent righteousness
in the Saints, and there is no grace in the soul of a believer, but only in
Christ! is not this the ordinary Scripture phrase? Ezekiel. 36.27 John. 4.14. 1
John. 2 27. Col. 1.27. Ezekiel. 1.20.
I will put my Spirit within you: and the water that I shall give you, shall be
in you a Well of water springing up into everlasting Life: and the anointing
which you have received of him, abides in you: and Christ in you the hope of
glory. Observe how the spirit of the Living Creatures was in the Wheels, so
that when the Spirit went, they went, and when the Spirit was lifted up, they
were lifted up; even so is the Spirit of Christ, acting, and guiding, and
framing and disposing them to move and walk according to his Laws. Luke 17.21.
Psalm. 40.8.
The Kingdom of heaven is within you, says Christ: and I delight to do thy
Will, O God, (says David) yea thy Law is within my heart. O my Soul, if thou
art in Covenant whith God, besides the in-dwelling of the Spirit, there is a
certain spiritual Power or Principle of Grace, which Christ by his Spirit has
put into thy heart, enabling thee in some measure to move thy self toward God.
And this Principle is sometimes called a new Life, Romans 6.4. Sometimes a Living
with Christ, Romans 6 8. Sometimes a being alive to God, Romans 6.11. Sometimes a
revealing of his son in man, Gal. 1.15. And sometimes a putting of the Law into
our inward parts, and a writing of the Law within the heart, Jer. 31.33. O
consider of this inward Principle, it is an excellent subject, worthy of thy
consideration!

2. I will be their God, and they shall be my people: Consider God essentially,
and personally, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, God in
himself and God in his Creatures: this very promise turns over heaven, and
earth, and sea, and land, and bread, and cloths, and sleep, and the world, and
life, and death, into free grace. No wonder if God set this promise in the
midst of the Covenant, as the heart in the midst of the Body, to communicate
life to all the rest; this promise has an influence into all other promises;
it is the great promise of the new Covenant, it is as great as God is, though
the heavens, and heaven of heavens be not able to contain him: yet this Promise
contains him; God shuts up himself (as it were) in it. I will be their God, 2.
They shall be my People (i.e.) They shall be to me a peculiar People, Tit.
2.14. The word has this Emphasis in it, that God looks upon all other things
as accidents in comparison, and his substance is his People; they are his very
Portion: for the Lords Portion is his People, Jacob is the Lot of his
Inheritance. They are his treasure, his peculiar treasure: Deuteronomy. 32.9 Exodus 19.5.
his peculiar treasure above all People: If ye will obey my voice indeed, and
keep my Covenant, then shall ye be a peculiar treasure unto me, and above all
people; for all the earth is mine: Observe O my soul, all the earth is mine, q.
d. All people is my people; but I have a special interest in my covenanted
people, they are only my portion, my peculiar treasure. Blessed be Egypt my
People, Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine Inheritance. I have made
all People; Egypt and Assyria, and all the world is mine, but only Israel is my
inheritance: the Saints are those that God satisfies himself in; the Saints are
those that God has set his heart upon; they are children of the high God, they
are the Spouse that are Married to the Lamb, they are nearer God in some
respects than the very Angels themselves, for the Angels are not in a mystical
union so Married to Christ as Gods People are. Isa. 19.28.
O the happyness of Saints! I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

3. They shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of
them to the greatest of them, says the Lord. Consider of this! O poor Soul,
thou complainest many a time of thy weakness, thou know little or nothing:
why, see here a Glorious promise; if thou art but in Covenant with God, thou
shall be taught of God, and then thou shall know God far more clearly than the
Jews of old; he will open to thee all his treasures of wisdom and knowledge, he
will bestow on thee a greater measure of his Spirit, so that out of thy belly
shall flow Rivers of Living waters. John. 7.38.
We say a good Tutor may teach more in a day than another in a week, in a
month; now the promise runs thus, that all thy Children shall be taught of God;
Isa. 54.13.
not that private instruction, or public Ministry must be excluded, we know
these are appointed under the New Testament, and are subordinate to the Spirits
teaching; but that the teachings of God do far surpass the teachings of men,
and therefore the knowledge of God under the New Testament shall far surpass
that under the old: herein appears the excellency of Christ's prophetical
Office, He is such a Prophet as enlightens every man within, John. 1.9.33
that comes into the World: He is such a Prophet as baptiseth with the Holy
Ghost and with Fire: He is such a Prophet as makes men's hearts to burn within
them, when he speaks unto them: He is such a Prophet as bids his Ministers,
Luke 24.32. Mat. 28.19.20
Go, teach all Nations, and I will be with you; and I will make you able
Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit: He is such a Prophet as
teaches inwardly, clearly, experimentally, and sweetly: no man in the world
can say this, or do this, but Jesus Christ, the great Prophet of the Church,
whom God has raised up like unto Moses, or far above Moses; Oh my Soul
consider if thou art thus taught of God.

4. I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their Sins no more. Romans
4.7
Consider of this! Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose
Sins are covered. Consider O my soul, suppose thy case and thy condition thus:
As thou live under Laws of men, so for the transgression of those Laws thou
art called to account; the Judge weighs, and gives an impartial and just
judgment, he Dooms thee to the Axe, or Rack, or Wheel; and because of the
aggravation of thy Crime, he commands thee to be tortured leisurely, that
Bones, Sinews, Lights, Joints might be pained, for twenty, thirty, forty, fifty
years; that so much of thy flesh should be cut off every day; that such and
such a Bone should be broken, such and such a day; and that by art the flesh
should be restored, and the Bone cured again; that for so many years as is
said, thou might be kept every day dying, and yet never die; that all this
while thou must have no Sleep, nor Ease, nor Food, nor Clothing convenient for
thee; that Whips of Iron, Lashes and Scourges of Scorpions, that Racks, Wheels,
Cauldrons full of melted Lead, should be prepared instruments of thy continual,
horrible, terrible Torments; in this case, suppose a mighty Prince, by an Act
of free and special Grace, should deliver thee from this Pain and Torture, and
not only so, but should give thee a Life in perfect health, should put thee
into a Paradise of Pleasures, where all the honor, acclamations, love, and
service, of a world of Men and Angels should await thee, and where thou
should be elivated to the top of all imaginable Happiness, above Solomon in
the highest Royalty, or Adam in his first Innocence; where not this mercy?
would thou not thing it the highest Act of Grace and Love, that any creature
could extend to his fellow creature? and yet O my Soul, all this is nothing but
a shadow of grace in comparison of the love and rich grace of God in Christ in
the justification of a sinner. If thou have a right to this promise, I well
forgive thy Iniquity, and I will remember thy sin no more. Thou art delivered
from eternal Death, and thou art entitled to an eternal Kingdom; O know thy
blessedness aright! Consider how infinitely thou art engaged to God, and Christ,
and mercy, and free grace! This promise sounds forth nothing but grace and
blessing; grace from God, and blessing on us; it is grace, because nothing but
grace and mercy can forgive: it is grace, because God, if he will, has power
in his hand to Revenge; he does not pass by sin as men do offenses, when they
dissemble forgiveness; they may forgive, because they have not power to avenge:
Dut 32.35 Exodus 36.^4
it is otherwise with God; To me belonges Vengeance and Recompense, says God:
He is able to destroy and yet he chooses to forgive; this is his Name, strong
and gracious.

O my Soul thou art apt to complain, what? will the Lord forgive my Sins? What
reason has God to look on me, to Pardon me, to pluck me as a firebrand out of
the Fire of Hell? why should God forgive me? But now consider (if thy heart be
humbled) -- the Lord will do it. --

1. Because he delights in Mercy; it is a pleasure to God to forgive Sins:
Micah 7.18
never did we take more pleasure, nor so much pleasure in acting and committing
of sin, as he does in the pardoning of sin; he is the Father of Mercies, 2 Co.
1.3
he delights in mercy as a Father in his Children; it does him good to see the
Fruits of his own mercy, in taking away the sins of his own people.

2. Because it is his purpose which he has purposed within himself from all
Eternity; this was the great design of God (as you have heard) to make his
grace glorious in those whom he intends to save; he will have the praise of the
glory of his Grace: Ephesians. 1.6 2 These. 1.10
he will not lose his glory; he will be admired in his Saints; he will make the
World to wonder, when it shall be known what sin has been committed by them,
Rom 9.^^
and pardoned by him. And hence it is that Gods people are called Vessels of
Mercy, that he might make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of
Mercy; for, as Vessels are or may be filled up to the brims, so the Vessels of
Mercy shall be filled with Mercy, up to the Brim, that the Riches of his Glory
in the pardon of Sin, may be seen and known to the wonder of all the world.

3. Because it is his Nature and Inclination to pardon Sin: this appears, 1. In
the Proclaiming of his Name, the Lord, the Lord, Merciful, and Gracious,
Long-suffering, Ex^d. 34.6
abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin.

Mat. 11.28
2. In his gracious Invitations; Come unto me, says Christ, if sin burden you,
I will ease you. 3. In his patience and waiting for Repentance; he waits to
this very end that he might be gracious, Isa. 30.18
and that he may have mercy, for the Lord is a God of judgment.

Isa 43.25
4. Because it is his promise to pardon sin; I, even I, am he that blots out thy
transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins. This promise of
Pardon is one of the great blessings of the Covenant of Grace; you hear the
words in this very expressure of it, Jet. 31.34
I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more.

Now come, consider O my soul, of every particular in this gracious Covenant,
and O be serious in thy Consideration; surely there is too much expense of thy
spirit upon vain, and transitory, and worldly things; alas, alas, thou have but
a short time to live; and the strength of thy mind, that I call for, it is the
most precious thing thou have; O then let the business and activeness of thy
mind, let thy inmost thoughts and deep affections be acted and exercised on
this Subject; be careful that none of these waters run besides the Mill. If God
and Jesus, and all thy good be included here, why should not thy whole soul be
intent on this? Why should thou spend it on the Creature? why should thou
be so subject to carnal griefs and fears? surely all these are fitter to be
fixed on God in Christ, on Jesus in a Covenant of Grace.

SECT. III. Of Desiring Jesus in that respect.
3. WE must desire after Jesus, carrying on the great work of our Salvation in
a way of Covenant before his coming in the flesh. It is not enough to know and
consider, but we must desire. Thus is the order of Gods work, no sooner has
his Spirit clearly revealed the goodness of the Promise that we come to know,
but the soul considers of it, turns it upside down, views it in all its
Excellencies, weighs it in the Balance of its best and deepest meditation.
This done, the Affections begins to stir, and the soul begins thus to reason; O
happy I, that I see the goodness of this gracious Promise; but miserable I, if
I come to see this, and never have a share in it. O why not I Lord? Why not my
Sins Pardoned? Why not my Corruptions Subdued? Why not the Law Written in my
Heart, and put into my inward parts? Why may not I say, my Lord and my God? or
I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine? Why not this Covenant established
between God and me? Now my Soul thirsts after this as a thirsty Land, my
affections hunger after Jesus in a Covenant of Grace: Oh, I would fain be in
Covenant with God; for this is all my Salvation and all my desire, 2 Samuel 23.5.
-- But here is an Objection. --

The Object Object.
of this desire is apprehended as absent and distant; we do not covet those
things that we do enjoy; if they are present, we rather rest in them, than move
toward them, or desire after them; how then should David or any soul already
in a Covenant of grace desire after the Covenant; What is this? He has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23.5.
ordered in all things, and sure, for this is all my Salvation and all my
Desire.

Answ.
It is true, the Object of desire qua tale, is something absent, yet not always
absent in the whole, but in the parts and degrees of it; the very presence of a
good thing, does in some sort quicken the desires toward the same thing, so
far forth as it is capable of improvements or augmentation: As we see in
external Riches of the Body, none desire them more eagerly than those that
possess them; and the more gracious the Soul is, the more is the heart enlarged
in the appetition of a greater measure of Grace; as the putting in of some
water into a Pump, does draw forth more: no man is so importunate in praying,
Lord help my unbelief, as he that can say, Lord, I believe: things may be
desired in order to improvement and further degrees of them. Again, things
present may be the Object of our desires unto continuance; as he that
delights in a good thing that he has, he desires the continuance of that
delight; so the soul of a man having a reach as far as immortality, it may
justly desire as well the perpetuity, as the presence of those good things it
enjoys. --

Come then, O my soul, and whet on thy desires in every of these respects; as,
1. Desire after thy interest in the Covenant. 2. Desire after thy improvement
of the Covenant. 3. Desire after the continuance of thy Covenant-state. 4.
Desire after Jesus the great business, or the all in all in a Covenant of Grace.

1. Desire after thy interest in the Covenant; O say in thy self, is it thus?
prove. 1.22, 23
is the Lord willing to receive me to his Grace? was that his voice in the
streets, how long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? turn ye at my
reproof, Isa. 55.1, 3.
behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you? was that his Proclamation, Ho,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, incline your ear and come unto
me, -- and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David? and are these the promises offered in the Covenant, I will put my Law
into their inward parts, Jer. 31.33.
and I will write it in your hearts, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my
People? Deuteronomy. 33.29, psalm. 144.15.
Oh the Blessed condition of those People that are in Covenant with God!
Blessed art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee, a People saved by the Lord;
Oh happy is the People that be in such a case, yea, happy is that People whose
God is the Lord. But ah! what can I say? no sin like unto my sin, no misery
like unto my misery; alas, I am an alien to God, I am separated from his
People, I am out of the Covenant; like a poor Prodigal, I dye for hunger,
whilst those that are in my Fathers house have bread enough: Oh that I were in
their condition! never did David long more for the waters of the well of
Bethlehem, than my Soul now touched with the sense of Sin, does desire to be at
peace with God, and in Covenant with God; O I thirst, I pant, I gasp after him,
I long for Communion, and Peace with him; Jsa. 26, 9,
with my soul do I desire thee in the night, yea, with my Spirit within me do I
seek thee early.

2. Desire after the Improvement of the Covenant; it may be God has given thee
an interest in it, but alas thy hold is so weak that thou scarce know the
meaning of it; the Lord may answer, but yet he speaks darkly, as sometimes he
spoke to the woman, go thy way and Sin no more; it is a middle kind of
expression, John. 8.11.
neither assuring that her Sin was pardoned, nor yet putting her out of hope
but it might be pardoned; so it may be God has given thee some little ease,
but he has not spoken full peace; go on then and desire more and more after
confirmation: say in thine heart, O Lord thou have begun to show grace unto thy
Servant, but oh manifest to me all thy goodness; thou have given me a drop, and
I feel it so sweet, that now I thirst, and long to enjoy the Fountain; thou
have given me a kiss of thy mouth, and now I pant to be united to thee in a
more perfect and consummate marriage; thou have given me a taste, Romans 8.23.
but my appetite and desire is not thereby diminished, but enlarged; and good
reason, for what are these drops, and tastes, but only the first fruits of the
spirit? and earnests of the spirit? Ephesians. 1.14.
oh then what are those harvests of Joy? what are those treasures of wisdom,
and free grace hid in God? I have indeed beheld a feast of fat things, of fat
things full of marrow, of wines on the lees, of wines on the lees well refined;
but O what a Famine is yet in my spirit! O Lord I have longed for thy
Salvation, I am ready to swoon for further union, and clearer manifestation of
my share and interest in this Covenant of grace, come Lord Jesus come quickly.

3. Desire after continuance of the Covenant-state: many a sweet soul cannot
deny but that the Lord has showed mercy on him, but he fears that he shall not
hold out: he feels within such a Power of corruption, such strong temptations,
so many lusts, that now he doubts, O what will become of my poor Soul? what
will be the issue of this woeful work? why come now and desire after
perseverance: when Peter was ravished on the mount, it is good being here
(says he) let us build three Tabernacles; Mat. 17.4.
his desire was to have continued there for ever; and it was the prayer of
Christ in Peter's behalf, Luke 22.3
I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; what was this Prayer but
Christ's vehement desire of Peter's continuing in the faith? shall Christ
desire, and will not thou desire after thy own perfection? O come with these
Pantings, and Breathings after God; put forth thy desires in these or the like
expressions, O Lord thou have said I will betroth thee unto me for ever; Hosea.
2.19
and what means this but that the conjugal love of Christ with a gracious soul
shall never be broken? what means this but that the bond of union in a believer
to Christ is fastened upon God, and the spirit of God holds the other end of
it, and so it can never be broken? 2. O Lord thou have discovered in thy Word,
that th s union is in the Father, who has laid a sure foundation, 2 Timothy 2.19
the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them
that are his: John. 13.1.
and that this union is in the Son, who loves his to the end: and that this
union is in the spirit who abides in the elect for ever. 3. Thou have
discovered, that the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, Isa. 54.10.
neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has
mercy on thee. 4. Thou have said that the Saints shall be kept by the Power of
God. q. d. The special Power I mean to put forth in this world, 1 pet. 1.5.
it is to uphold the spirits of my saints; the special work I have in the world
to exercise my power about, it is to keep Christ and the saints together; it is
through the power of God that heaven and earth is kept up, but if God must
withdraw his Power from the one of these, sooner should heaven and earth fall
in pieces, than God would not uphold one gracious soul that has Union with his
Son Jesus Christ. And if th^se be thy sayings, why then Lord I desire the
accomplishment; O fulfill what thou have said; it would break my heart if ever
the Covenant should be broken betwixt me and thee: my desire is toward thee,
and the more I enjoy thee, the more and more I desire and pant after thee; my
desires are like thy self, infinite, eternal, everlasting desires.

4. Desire after Jesus, the great business, or the all in all in a Covenant of
Grace: the most proper object of desire, especia^ly to man fallen, is Jesus
Christ: hence it is that a poor sinner under the sense of sin, cries out with
the vehemence of desire, Christ, and none but Christ; give me Christ or I dye,
I am undone, I am lost for ever. But what is Christ or Jesus to a Covenant of
grace? Ru^kers trial of Faith
I answer, he is the great business, he is the all in all. Christ has at least
a Six-fold relation to the Covenant of grace. 1. As he is more than a creature,
he is the Covenant himself. 2. As he deals betwixt parties, he is the messenger
of the covenant. 3. As he saw, and heard, and testifies all, he is the witness
of the covenant. 4. As he undertaketh for the parties at variance, he is the
surety of the covenant. 5. As he stands between the contrary parties, he is
the Mediator of the covenant. 6. As he signifies the covenant, and closes all
the Articles, he is the Testator of the covenant. Oh here is abundance of fuel
for thy desire to work upon. 1. Consider the fuel, and then set on the flame
thy desire,

Isa. 42.6. Isa. 41.9.
1. Christ is the covenant it self. I gave thee for a covenant of the People,
for a light of the gentiles. And I will preserve thee, and give thee for a
Covenant of the People. Christ, God and Man, is all the Covenant: 1.
Fundamentally, he is the original of the Covenant; the Covenant of grace takes
i^s being and beginning from Christ; he is the covenant-maker, undertaker,
manager, dispatcher, he does every thing in the covenant; 2. Materially, the
very substance of the covenant stands in this, I will be their God, and they
shall be my People; now Christ he is both these in himself; he is God unto his
People, and he is the People representatively unto God, and before God. 3.
Equivalently; many branches or fruits of the Covenant are to be fulfilled to
believers in their season, but as soon as ever they are Justified, Christ is
said to be the Covenant, as a present pawn or earnest delivered into the hands
of a man at the very instant of his justification; and this pawn is of equal
value and worth with the whole Covenant when it is fulfilled to the uttermost.
Thus Christ in every of these respects is the Covenant it self; he is very
peace, and reconciliation it self, and this man shall be the Peace when the
Assyrian shall come into our Land. As fire is hot for it self, and all other
things hot for it, Micah. 5: 5.
as they participate of it; so Christ is the Covenant it self, and all we are
so far in Covenant to Christ, as we have any thing of Christ; want Christ, and
want peace, and want the Covenant of grace.

2. Christ is the messenger of this Covenant. The Lord whom ye seek shall
suddenly come to his Temple, Mal. 3.1.
even the messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in. Christ travels with
tidings between parties of the Covenant. 1. He reports of God to us, he
commends his Father unto us, Joh. 15.1. Joh. 6.29. Joh. 6.48. Joh. 8.12 Joh.
10.9 11. Prove. 1.20. Prove. 9.5.
my Father is the husband man; and this is the Fathers will which has sent me,
that of all which he has given me, I shall lose nothing; and he commends
himself to us, it became the Lord Jesus to commend himself, I am the bread of
Life, I am the Light of the world, I am the Door, I am the good Shepherd. It is
a wonderful thing how Christ is a broker, (as I may say) for Christ; wisdom
cries out, she utters her voice in the streets; come, eat of my bread, and
drink of my wine which I have mingled: Ministers cannot speak of Christ, and of
his Father, as he can do himself. O my Soul to excite thy desires, come, and
hear Christ, speak of Christ, and of his Father, and of Heaven, for he saw all.
Joh. 17.25.
2. He reports of us to God; he commends us to his Father; O righteous Father
the world has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that
thou have sent me. Christ gives a good report of the Saints in Heaven; the
Father and the Son are speaking of him (as I may say) behind back, and surely a
good report in heaven is of high esteem; Christ tells over Ephraim's prayers
behind his back, I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Jer.
31.18, 20
Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock unacustomed to the
yoke, turn thou me and I shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God: and
thereupon God resolves, Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? for
since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.
Happy souls of whom Christ is telling good Tidings in heaven; for he is the
Angel of the Covenant.

3. He is the witness of the covenant; he saw, and heard all, Isa. 55.4. Rev.
1.5. Rev. 3.14. Luke 19.10.
Behold I have given him for a witness to the people. And he is called the
faithful witness. The Amen: The faithful and true witness. The covenant says,
The Son of man came to seek, and to save that which was lost; Amen, says
Christ, I can witness that to be true; the covenant says, Christ dyed, and
rose again for sinners; Amen says Christ, I was dead, and behold I live for
evermore; Amen. Rev. 1.18.
There Is not any thing said in the covenant, but Christ is a witness to it; and
therefore we read in the very end of the Bible, this Subscription (as I may
call it) in relation to Christ: He which testifies these things, says, surely
I come quickly. Amen. Rev. 22.20.


4. Christ is the Surety of the covenant. Heb. 7.20, 22.
In as much as not without an oath he was made a Priest, -- by so much was
Jesus made a surety of a better Testament. The covenant of works had a promise,
but because it was to be broken, and done away, it had no oath of God, as this
has; O doubting soul, thou say thy salvation is not sure, think on this
Scripture, thou have the oath of God for it; it is a sworn article of the
covenant, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be Saved; and to this end
is Christ a Surety. 1. Surety for God, he undertakes that God shall fulfill his
part of the covenant, Fear not little flock, Luke 12.32.
for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. And all that the
Father gives me, John 6.37.
shall come to me, and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. 2.
Surety for us; and to this purpose he has paid a ransom for us; and gives a
new heart to us; and he is engaged to lose none of us. Those that thou gave
me I have kept, and none of them is lost. John 17.12. Heb. 12.24.


5. Christ is the Mediator of the covenant: the Apostle calls him Jesus, the
Mediator of the new covenant: He has something of God, as being true God; and
something of man, as sharing with us of the nature of man; hence he is Mediator
by office, Job 9.33.
and lays his hands on both parties, as a dayes-man does; and in this respect
he is a friend, a reconciler, and a servant. 1. A friend to both parties, he
has Gods heart for man, to be gracious, and he has man's heart for God to
satisfy justice. 2. A reconciler of both parties; he brings down God to a
treaty of peace, and he brings up man by a ransom paid, so that he may say
unto both, Father come down to my brethren, my kindred and flesh; and thou my
Sister and Spouse come up to my Father, and my Father, to my God, and thy God.
3. He is a servant to both parties, Behold my servant, says God, Isa. 24.1.
Isa. 53.11. Mat. 20.28.
my righteous servant. Yea, and our servant, He came not to be served, but to
serve, and to give his life a ransom for many.

6. Christ is the Testator of the covenant: He dyed to this very end, that he
might confirm the covenant, Where a Testament is, Heb. 9.16, 17.
there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator, for a Testament is
of force, after men are dead, otherwise it is of no strength at all, whiles the
Testator lives. Christ then must dye, and Christ's blood must be shed, to seal
the covenant of grace; it is not every blood, but Christ's blood that must seal
the everlasting covenant, Heb. 13.20. And his blood being shed, he is then
rightly called the Testator of the covenant.

O what fuel is here to set our desires on flame? come soul, and bend thy
desires toward Christ, as the Sun-flower toward the Sun, the Iron to the
Loadstone, and the Loadstone to the Pole Star; yea, the nearer thou drawest
toward Christ, the more and more do thou desire after Christ; true desires
never determine or expire: Bern. delect. evang. sermon.
He that thirsts let him thirst more (says Bernard) and he that desires let
him desire, yet more abundantly. Is there not cause? O what excellencies have
thou found in Christ? Poor soul, thou have undone thy self by sin, there is but
a step betwixt thee and damnation; but to save thy soul, Christ comes leaping
on the Mountains, and skipping on the Hills; he enters into a covenant with
God; he is the covenant, the Messenger of the covenant, the Witness of the
covenant, the Surety of the covenant, the Mediator of the covenant, the
Testator of the covenant, the great business, the all in all in a covenant of
grace; If David could say, Psalm. 119.20.
My soul breaks for the longings that it has to thy judgments at all times,
how may thou say, My soul breaks for the longings that it has to thy
mercies, and my Jesus at all times? Oh I gasp for grace, as the thirsty land
for drops of rain; I thirst, I faint, I languish, I long for an hearty draught
of the Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. Oh that I could see Jesus flying through the midst of heaven, with
the Covenant in his hand! Oh I long for that Angel of the Covenant; I long to
see such another vision as John did, when he said, And I saw another Angel fly
in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to Preach unto them that
dwell upon the Earth. What? Is that Covenant in the hand of Christ? and is my
name written in that roll? Say Lord; Is my name written on the Heart of Christ?
Oh! if I had the glory and possession of all the world, if I had ten thousand
worlds, and ten thousand lives, I would lay them all down, to have this poor
trembling soul of mine assured of this: Oh my thirst is insatiable, my bowels
are hot within me, my desire after Jesus in reference to the Covenant is greedy
as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement
flame.

SECT. IV. Of hoping in Jesus in that Respect.
WE must hope in Jesus carrying on the great work of our salvation in a way of
Covenant; now what is hope but a good opinion of enjoying its object; indeed a
good opinion is so necessary for hope, that it makes almost all its kinds and
differences; as it is greater or lesser, so it causes the strength or
weakness, the excess or defect of this passion, hope: This good opinion is that
which renders hope either doubtful, or certain; if certain, it produces
confidence or presumption; presumption is nothing but an immoderate hope
without a ground: but confidence is that assurance of the thing hoped for in
some measure, as if we had it already in hand. Hence it is that we usually say
we have great, and strong, and good hopes, when we would speak them assured;
which has occasioned some to define it thus: Hope is a certain grounded
confidence that the desired good will come; not to insist on this; all the
question is, Whether those promises contained in the Covenant of grace belong
unto me? and what are the grounds and foundations on which my hope is built? If
the grounds be weak, then hope is doubtful, or presumptuous; but if the grounds
be right, then hope is right, and I may cast Anchor, and build upon it.

In the disquisition of these grounds, we shall only search into those
qualifications, which the Scripture tells us they are qualified with, with whom
the Lord enters into a Covenant of grace; and these we shall reduce, 1. To the
condition of the Covenant. 2. To the promise of the Covenant. As --

1. If thou art in Covenant with God, then has God wrought in thee that
condition of the Covenant, Acts 16.31. Romans 10.9.
a true, and lively, and soul-saving, and justifying faith. Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved. If thou believe, thou shall be saved. The
promise of life contained in the Covenant is made only to believers; This is
so sure a way of trial, 2 Cor. 13.5.
that the Apostle himself directs us thereunto, Examine your selves whether ye
be in the Faith; Ay, But how shall I examine, for there are many pretenders to
faith in these days? Why thus, 1. True faith will carry thee out of thy self
into Christ, Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; a faithful man has not his life
in himself, but in Christ Jesus: he has his spiritual being in the Father, and
in his Son Jesus Christ; he is joined to the Lord, and is one Spirit; he sees
the Father in the Son, and the Son within himself, and also the Father within
himself through the Son; 2 Cor. 13.5. John 14.20. Joh. 17.22, 23.
Know ye not that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be reprobates? Ye shall
know me (says Christ) that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you. By
faith we enjoy the glory of union. The glory which thou have given me, I have
given them that they may be one even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me;
though we have not the glory of equality, yet we have the glory of likeness; we
are one with Christ, and one with the Father by faith in Christ. -- 2. True
faith will carry thee beyond the world; a believer looks on Christ overcoming
the world for him, and so by that faith he overcomes the world through him; 1
John 5.4. Rev. 1.12.
This is the Victory that overcomes the world, even your faith: Hence it is
that the Saints are said To be clothed with the Sun, and to have the Moon
under their feet; when through faith they are clothed with The Son of
Righteousness, the Lord Jesus; then they trample upon all sublunary things, as
nothing worth in comparison of Christ. 3. True faith is ever accompanied with
true love: if once by faith thou apprehendest Gods love, and Christ's love to
thee, thou can not but love that God, and love that Christ who loved thee,
and gave himself for thee; 1 John 4.19.
We love him, because he first loved us; he that loves not God, has not
apprehended Gods love to him; if ever God in Christ be presented to thee for
thy justification, 1 John 4.8.
it is such a lovely object, that thou can not but love him; He that loves
not, knows not God, for God is love. 4. True faith purifies the heart, and
purges out sin; When God discovers this, that he will heal backsliding, and
love freely, and turn away his anger, then Ephraim shall say, What have I any
more to do with Idols? Hos. 14.8.
if ever Christ reveal himself as the object of our Justification, he will be
sure to present himself as the pattern of our Sanctification: the knowledge of
Gods Goodness will make us in love with holiness; they shall fear and tremble,
for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity, Jer. 33.9.
that I procure unto them, says the Lord: The golden chain of Mercy let down
from Heaven, does bind us faster to the service of our God. 5. Above all,
observe the rise: true faith, if it be true, it is ever bottomed upon the sense
and pain of a lost condition; spiritual poverty is the nearest capacity of
believing: this is faiths method, be condemned to be saved: be sick and be
healed. Faith is a flower of Christ's own planting, but it grows in no Soul but
only on the margin and bank of the Lake of fire and brimstone; in regard
there is none so fit for Christ and Heaven, as those who are self-sick, and
self-condemned to Hell. They that be whole, need not a Physician (says Christ)
but they that are sick. Mat. 9.13.
This is a Foundation of Christ, that because the man is broken, and has not
bread, therefore he must be sold, and Christ must buy him, and take him home to
his fireside, and cloth him, and feed him there. I know Satan argues thus,
Thou art not worthy of Christ, and therefore what have thou to do with Christ?
but Faith concludes otherwise, I am not worthy of Christ, I am out of measure
sinful, I tremble at it, and I am sensible of it, and therefore ought I, and
therefore must I come to Christ; this arguing is Gospel-logick, and the right
method of a true and saving-faith: for what is faith, but the act of a sinner
humbled, weary, laden, poor, and self-condemned? Oh take heed of their doctrine
who make faith to act of some vile person never humbled, but applying with an
immediate touch, his hot, boiling, and smoking Lusts, to the bleeding blessed
Wounds, and Death of Jesus Christ.

2. If thou art in Covenant with God, then has God fulfilled in some part the
promises of this Covenant to thy Soul: As --

1. Then has God put the Law into thy inward parts, and writ it in thy heart:
look as Indenture answers to Indenture, or as a face in the glass answers to a
face, so the conformity of thy heart, and inwards to the Law of God; thou
obeyest God's Will, and delightest in that obedience; Thou say with David, I
delight to do thy Will O God; yea, psalm. 40.8.
thy Law is within my Heart.

2. Thou have a covenant relation to God, and a covenant interest in God; and
thou art by covenant as one of the people of God. Christ has thy soul, thy
body, thy affections, thy love to the very uttermost; God has a propriety, and
a peculiarity in thee; thou art Christ's by Marriage; thou have past over thy
self unto him to be his Jewel, his Spouse, his Diadem, his Crown, his Servant,
his Child for ever.

3. Then art thou clearly taught to know the Lord; thou know him in another
manner than thou did before; I will establish my Covenant with thee, Ezekiel.
16.60, 61.
and thou shall know that I am the Lord. There is a double knowledge. 1. A
speculative knowledge, and thus men may know much, but they are not affected
according to the things they know. 2. A practical knowledge; and thus if we
know the Lord, we shall see in him that excellency and beauty, that our Hearts
will be affectioned toward him, and we shall be able to say, that we love him
with all our Heart, and with all our Soul, and with all our Strength.

4. Then has God pardoned thy sins, and He will remember thy sins no more? But
how should I be assured of that? Why thus, -- 1. If thou have sincerely
confessed, bewailed, and forsaken thy sins; Wash ye, make ye clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do evil: -- And
presently it follows, come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord;
Isa. 1.16, 18.
though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, though they be
red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Isa. 55.7.
To the same purpose, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and He will have Mercy upon
him; and to our God, for He will abundantly Pardon. 2. If thy heart, after many
storms and troubles be calmed, and quieted through says in Christ; Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God; Romans 5.1.
What? have thou peace with God? and has God stilled thy soul with peace? this
is an argument of thy sins pardon -- 3. If thine Heart be singularly inflamed
with the love of Christ; the Woman that Had many sins forgiven her by Christ,
Luke 7.47.
she loved him much. Upon that account she wept, and washed his feet with her
tears, and so wiped them with the hairs of her head; she kissed his feet, and
anointed them with Ointment, nothing was too good for Christ, who had forgiven
her all her sins. -- 4. If thy heart, and soul, and all that is within be
singularly enlarged to praise God for his pardons; Ps. 103.1, 2, 3.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all
thine iniquities. If thine heart feel his pardons, thy mouth will sing his
praises; and hereby thou may be assured that God has pardoned all thy sins.

Come now; are these, O my soul, the grounds of thy hopes? a lively faith in
Jesus? an accomplishment in some measure of the promises of the Covenant? why,
these are the fuel of hope; if this be thy case, act thy hope strongly on
Christ, and on the covenant of grace; say not, hope is only of things future,
and therefore if I be already in covenant, What need I hope? For whether thou
art in covenant or no, it is the main question here; nay, though it be granted
that thou art in covenant, and that hope is swallowed up in the complete
presence of its object; yet it is not at all diminished, but rather increased
by a partial presence. As in massy bodies, though violent motion be weakest in
the end, yet natural motions are ever swiftest toward the center: so in the
hopes of men, though such as are violent and groundless, prove weaker and
weaker, yet those that are stayed and natural (or rather gracious) are evermore
stronger and stronger, till they procure the utmost presence and union of their
object. The nearer we come to a fruition of a good, the more impatient we are
to want it. O then hope in Jesus! draw on thy hope yet more and more in this
Covenant of grace! be not content only with an hope of expectation, but bring
it on to an hope of confidence, or assurance; thou can not fail if thou
hangest thy hope on Jesus: Christ is not fastened as a loose nail, or as a
broken rotten hedge in the covenant of grace; he is there As a nail in a sure
place; Isa. 22.23, 24.
and they shall hang on him all the glory of his Fathers house; the offspring
and the issue; all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to
all the vessels of flaggons. Come soul, thou art a vessel of small quantity,
hang all thy weight on Christ, he is a nail that cannot break.

SECT. V. Of Believing in Jesus in that Respect.
5. WE must believe on Jesus carrying on this great work of our salvation in a
way of covenant. Many a time Satan comes and hurles in a temptation, What? Is
it likely that God should enter into a covenant with thee? yea, sometimes he so
rivets in this temptation, that he darkens all within, and there is no sight of
comfort in the soul: O but now believe! now if ever is the season for faith to
act; little evidence and much adherence speaks says to purpose. We read of
some who could stay themselves upon the Lord, whiles they walked in darkness
upon the margin, and borders of a hundred deaths. Psalm. 23.4. Ps. 88.7.
David fears no evil, though he walked through the valley of the shadow of
death; for his faith told him, that God was with him. Heman could say, thy
wrath lies hard upon me, thou have afflicted me with all thy waves; sure he
thought, God could do no more to drown him; not only a wave or two, but all
Gods waves were on him, and over him; and yet he believes, Lord I have called
daily upon thee. Hezekiahs comforts were at an hard pinch. ver. 9.
Mine eyes fail with looking upwards: O Lord I am oppressed; Isa. 39.14.
yet praying argues believing, Lord undertake for me. Christ's sense of comforts
was ebb and low, when he wept, and cried, that he was forsaken of God; yet
then his faith is doubled, as the cable of an Anchor is doubled when the storm
is more than ordinary, Mat. 27.46.
my God, my God.

Poor soul! thou stand wondering at this great condescension of God; What?
That God should enter into covenant with me? What? that God should make such
great and precious promises with me? Surely these comforts, and these
privileges, are too high for me, or for any soul breathing. -- It may be so;
and yet be not discouraged, for God will magnify his grace, and therefore he
will do this great thing; all that thou have to do, and all that God requires
of thee, in this case, is only to believe; indeed thou have no part in Christ,
no part in the covenant of grace, if thou will not believe; faith is the
condition of the covenant of grace; and therefore either believe, or no
covenant.

I know it is not easy to believe; nay, it is one of the hardest things under
heaven to persuade a soul into faith: What? Will the great God of heaven make a
Covenant with such a wretch as I am? I cannot believe it. Why, What Is the
matter? Ah my sins, my sins, my sins! God is a consuming fire against such, he
cannot endure to behold iniquity: little hopes that ever God should enter into
a covenant with me. But to help on, or to allure a soul in, consider, O thou
soul, of these following passages.

1. Consider of the sweet and gracious nature of God: that which undoes broken
hearts, and trembling souls, it is misconceivings of God: we have many times
low, diminishing, ex enuating thoughts of Gods goodness; but we have large
thoughts of his power and wrath: now to rectify these misapprehensions,
consider his name, and therein his nature, the Lord, the Lord, Merciful, and
Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness, and Truth, keeping mercy
for Thousands forgiving Iniquity, Transgressions, and Sins; and will by no
means clear the guilty, visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children,
and upon the Childrens Children, unto the Third and Fourth Generation. O
terrible Text! Exodus 34.6, 7
says the Soul, alas I am guilty of thousands of sins; and if this be his Name
I am undone, woe to me and mine, unto the Third and Fourth Generation. But
consider again, and in this description of God we shall find an Ocean of Mercy
to a Drop of Wrath; a Sea of Oil to an half drop of scalding Lead. For, --

1. God does not begin, the Lord, the Lord, that will by no means clear the
guilty; but, the Lord, the Lord, Merciful, and Gracious, Long-suffering; this
is the first and greatest part of his Name; God is loath to speak in justice,
and wrath; he keeps it to the last; m^rcy lies uppermost in Gods heart; if the
sentence must come, it shall be the last day of the Assize.

2 Many words are used to speak his goodness: Merciful, Gracious,
Long-suffering and abundant in Goodness, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; here be six several phrases, to show the
Riches of his Goodness, but when he speaks his wrath, what haste makes he over
it? there is only two expressions of that; it was a Theme he took no delight in;
Judgment is his Work, his strange Work; Isa. 28.22.
for he does not afflict willingly nor grieve the Children of Men.

3. There Is a difference in the expression; when God speaks of mercy, Lam. 3.33.
he expresses it thus, abundant in Mercy; keeping Mercy for Thousands. But in
visiting sins, it is not to thousands, but only to the Third or Fourth
Generation. Surely Mercy rejoices against Judgment. God would show Mercy to
Thousands, Jam. 2.13.
rather than he would destroy three or four.

4. What if by no means God will clear the guilty? stubbornly guilty? yet never
will he destroy humble souls that lie at his feet, and are willing to have
mercy on his easy terms. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I deliver
thee O Israel? Hos. 11.8, 9.
how shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, I will not execute the
fierceness of Mine anger, I will not destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not Man,
the Holy One in the midst of ^^ee; O my soul! why stand thou at a distance
with God? Why do thou fancy a Lion in the way? O b^lieve in God, believe in
Jesus! and believe thy portion in this Covenant of grace! have sweet and
delightful thoughts of Gods nature, and thou will not, thou can not sly from
him: some are of opinion that a soul may fetch more encouragements to believe,
from the consideration of Gods gracious and merciful nature, than from the
promise it self.

2. Consider of the sweet and gracious nature of Jesus Christ: our thoughts of
God are necessarily more strange than of Jesus Christ, because of our infinite
distance from the Godhead; but in Christ, God is come down into our nature, and
so infinite goodness, and mercy is incarnate; art thou afraid, O my soul, at
his name Jah, and Jehovah! O remember his name is Emanuel; the Lion is here
disrobed of his garment of terror; his rough hair is turned into a soft wool;
see thy God disrobed of his terrible Majesty, see thy God is a man, and thy
Judge is a Brother; mince Jehovah with Jesus, and the Serpent will be a rod; O
that Balsamy name, Jesus; that name that founds healing for every wound,
settlement for every distraction, comfort for every sorrow: but here is the
misery, souls in distress had rather be poring on hell than heaven; rather
frighting themselves with the terrors of justice, than staying themselves with
the fl^ggons of Mercy. O my soul, how can thou more contradict the nature of
Christ, and the Gospel-description of Christ, than to think him a destroyer of
men? b^t wherein appears the gracious nature of Christ? I answer, in his being
incarnate, O how could Jesus have manifested more willingness to save, than
that the Godhead should condescend to assume our nature? surely this is ten
thousand times more condescension, than for the greatest King to become a sly,
or a toad, to save such creatures as toads and flies. 2. In his tender dealing
with all sorts of sinners, he professed th t he came into the world, not to
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. He wept over
Jerusalem, saying, O Jerusalem, Je^usalem, Mat. 23.37*
how often would I have gathered thee as an Hen gathers her chickens under her
wings? but ye would not. I would, but ye would not And when his Disciples would
have had fire come down from Heaven to consume those that refused him, he
reproves them, and tells them, they know not of what spirits they were of. 3.
In his care of his own; not caring what he suffered, so they might be saved.
Alas, alas, that the Lord Jesus should pass through a life of misery, to a
death more miserable, to manifest openly to the world the abundance of his
love; and yet that any soul should suspect him of cruelty, or unwillingness to
show mercy! Ah my soul, believe; never cry out, my sins, my sins, my sins;
there is a gracious nature and inclination in Jesus Christ to pardon all.

3. Consider of that office of saving, and showing mercy, which Christ has set
up; this is more than merely a gracious inclination; Christ has undertaken and
set up an office to seek, and to save that which was lost; to bring home
straying Souls to his Father, to be the great Peacemaker between God and Man,
to reconcile God to man, and man to God, and so to be the Head and Husband of
his People. Is not here a world of encouragement to believe in Jesus? what? to
consider him as one who has made it his office to heal, and relieve, and to
restore, and to reconcile? Among Merchants I remember they have an office of
security, that if you dare not adventure on Seas, yet there you may be ensured,
if you will but put in at that Office: in this manner Christ has constituted
and assumed the office of being a Mediator, the Redeemer, and the Savior of
men; he has erected, and set up on purpose an office of mere love, and tender
compassion, for the relief of all poor distressed sinners: if they dare not
venture otherwise, yet let them put in at this office. O what jealous hearts
have we that will not trust Christ, that will not take the word of Christ
without an office of security? surely Christ never so carried himself to any
soul, that it need be jealous of his love and faithfulndess, yet this dear
husband meets with many a jealous spouse: O my soul take heed of this! Satan
has no greater design upon thee than to persuade thee to entertain hard
thoughts of Christ: believe! never say God will not take thee into Covenant,
for to this purpose he has erected an office to save and have mercy.

Consider of those tenders and offers of Christ, those entreaties and
beseechings to accept of Christ, which are made in the Gospel. What is the
Gospel? or what is the sum of all the Gospel, but this? O take Christ, and life
in Christ, that thou may be saved: what mean these free offers, Ho every one
that thirsts come to the waters, and whosoever will, let him take of the
Waters of Life freely: and God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. God is the first suitor and solicitor, he first prays the
Soul to take Christ. Hark at the door! who is it that knocks there? who is it
that calls now, Cant. 5.2
even now? open unto me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled, for my head
is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night? See him through
the windows, this can be none but Christ: his sweet language of Sister, Love,
and Dove, bespeaks him Christ; his suffering language, that his head is filled
with dew, and his locks wih the drops of the Night? bespeaks him Christ; But
harken the motion he makes to thy Soul; Soul! consider what price I have given
to save thee; this my body was crucified, my hands and feet nailed, my heart
pierced, and through anguish I was forced to cry, my soul is heavy, heavy unto
death, and now what remains for thee but only to believe? See all things ready
on my part, remission, justification, sanctification, salvation; I will be thy
God and thou shall be of the number of my People; I offer now my self and
merits, and benefits flowing therefrom, and I entreat thee accept of this
offer. O take Christ, and Life, and Salvation in Christ What is this the voice
of my beloved? are these the entreaties of Jesus? and O my soul, will thou not
believe? will thou not accept of this Gracious offer of Christ? O consider who
is this that proclaims, inviteth, beseeches? if a poor man should offer thee
mountains of gold thou might doubt of performance, because he is not of that
Power; if a covetous rich man should offer thee thousands of silver, thou
might doubt of performance, because it is contrary to his nature; but Christ
is neither poor, nor covetous; as he is able, so his Name is gracious, and his
nature is to be faithful in performance; his Covenant is sealed with his blood,
and confirmed by his oath, that all shall have pardon that will but come in,
and believe: O then let these words of Christ (whose lips like lillies are
dropping down pure myrrh) prevail with thy soul, say Amen to his offer, I
believe, Lord help my unbelief.

5. Consider of those Commands of Christ, which notwithstanding all thy excuses
and pretenses, he fastens on thee to believe: And this is his Commandment, that
we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Surely this Command
should infinitely outweigh and prevail against all other Countermands of Flesh
and Blood, of Satan, Nature, Reason, Sense, and all the World. Why this Command
is thy very ground and warrant, against which the very Gates of Hell can never
possibly prevail: when Abraham had a command too kill his own only dear Son,
with his own hand, though it was matter of as great grief as could possibly
pierce his heart; yet he would readily and willingly submit to it; how much
more should thou obey, when God commands no more, but that thou should
belive on the name of his Son Jesus Christ? There Is no evil in this Command;
no, no, it comprehends in it all good Imaginable; have Christ, and thou have
with him the excellency and variety of all blessings both of heaven and earth;
have Christ, and thou have with him a discharge of all those endless and
easless torments of Hell; have Christ, and thou have with him the glorious
Deity it self, to be enjoyed through him to all Eternity. O then believe in
Jesus! suffer not the Devils cavils, and the groundless exceptions of thine own
heart to prevail with thee against the direct Commandment of Almighty God.

6. Consider of these Messages of Christ, which he daily sends by the hands of
his Gospel Ministers. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled unto God.
What a wonder is here! 2 Cor. 5, 20.
Would not an earthly Prince disdain and hold it in foul scorn to send unto his
inferior rebellious slaves for reconcilement? It is otherwise with Christ; he
is content to put up at our hands all indignities and affronts; he is glad to
sue to us first, and to send his Ambassadors day after day, beseeching us to be
reconciled unto him: O incomprehensible depth of unspeakable Mercy, and
Encouragement to come to Christ! That I may digress a little, say thou that
read, will thou take Christ to thy Bridegroom, and forsake all others? This
is the Message which God has bid me (unworthy Ambassador) to deliver to thee:
the Lord Jesus expects an answer from thee; and I should be glad at heart to
return a fit answer to him that sent me; say then, do thou like well of the
Match? will thou have Christ for thy Husband? will thou enter into Covenant
with him? will thou surrender up thy Soul to thy God? will thou rely on Christ,
and apply Christ's merits particularly to thy self? will thou believe? for that
is it I mean by taking, and receiving, and marrying of Christ: Oh happy if I
could but Join Christ and thy Soul together this day! Oh happy thou, if thou
would this day be persuaded by a poor Ambassador of Christ! Blame me not if
I am an importunate Messenger; if ever I hear from thee, let me hear some good
News, that I may return it to Heaven, and give God the Glory. Come, say on; art
thou willing to have Christ? would thou have thy name enrolled in the
Covenant of Grace? shall God be thy God, and Christ thy Christ? will thou have
the Person of Christ, and all those privileges flowing from the Blood of
Christ? sure thou art willing, art thou not? stay then; thou must take Christ
on these terms; thou must believe on him (i e.) Thou must take him as thy
Savior and Lord, thou must take him, and forsake all others for him. This is
the true Faith, the condition of the Covenant: O believe in Jesus, and the
Match is made, the hands are struck, the Covenant established, and all doubts
removed.

SECT. VI. Of loving Jesus in that respect.
6 WE must love Jesus, as carrying on this great work of our Salvation in a way
of Covenant. I know Love is reckoned as the first and fundamental Passion of
all the rest; some call it the first springing and out-going affection of the
Soul; and therefore I might have put it in the first place, before Hope or
Desire; but I choose rather to place it in this Method, as (me thinks) most
agreeing (if not to the order of Nature, yet) to the Spiritual workings, as
they appear in my Soul. When a Good is propounded' first I desire, and then I
hope, and then I believe, and then I love. And some describing this spiritual
love, they tell me, it is an holy disposition of the heart, Dr. Preston of Love.
arising from Faith. But to let these niceties pass for a Spiders web (curious,
but thin) certain it is that I cannot believe all these transactions of God, by
Christ in a Covenant-way for me, but I must needs love that God, and love that
Christ who has thus firstly and freely loved my soul; go on then O my Soul,
put fire to the harth, blow on thy little spark, set before thee God's Love,
and thou can not but love; and therein Consider, 1. The Time. 2. The
Properties. 3. The Effects of Gods love. 1. For The Time; He Loved thee before
the World was made: have thou not heard? and will thou ever forget it? were not
those ancient Loves from all eternity admirable, astonishing, ravishing Loves?
2, He Loved thee in the very beginning of the world: was not the promise
expressed to Adam intended for thee? as thou sinnedst in his loins, so did
thou in his loins receive the Promise, It shall bruise thy head: And not long
after, when God established his Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, wast not
thou one of that Seed of Abraham? If ye are Christ's, Gal. 3.29.
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the Promise. 3. He loves
thee now more especially, not only with a Love of benevolence, as before; but
with a love of complacency: not only has he struck Covenant with Christ, with
Adam, with Abraham in thy behalf, but particularly and personally with thy
self; and O what Love is this? If a woman lately conceiving, love her future
fruit; how much more does she love it when it is born and embraced in her Arms?
So if God loved thee before thou had a being, yea before the world or any
Creature in it had a being, how much more now? O the height, and depth, and
length and breadth of this immeasurable Love! O my Soul, I cannot express the
Loves of God in Christ to thee; I do but draw the Picture of the Son with a
coal, when I endeavor to express Gods love in Christ.

2. For the properties of this Love: 1. Gods Love to thee is an eternal Love.
He was thinking in his eternity of thee in this manner, At such a time there
shall be such. Man and such a Woman living on the earth: in the last times such
a one (I mean thou that read, if thou believe) and to that Soul I will
reveal my self, and communicate my loves; to that soul I will offer Christ, and
give it the hand of Christ to lay hold on Christ; and to that purpose now I
write down the Name in the Book of Life, and none shall be able to blot it out
again. Oh eternal Love! Oh the blessed transactions between the Father and the
Son, from all eternity to manifest his Love to thy very Soul!

2. Gods love to thee is a choice Love; it is an elective, separating Love:
when he passed by and left many thousands, Mal. 1.2, 3.
then, even then he sets his heart on thee: Was not Esau Jacobs brother? says
God, yet I loved Jacob, and hated Esau. So, were not thou such an ones Brother,
or such an ones Sister that remained wicked and ungodly? were not thou of such
a Family; whereas many, or some are passed by, yet God has loved thee, and
pitched his Love on thee: Surely this is choice Love.

Hos. 14.4. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
3. Gods Love to thee is a free Love: I will love them freely, says God, And
the Lord did not set his Love upon you, and choose you, because ye were more in
number than any people, -- but because the Lord loved you; there can be no
other reason why the Lord loved thee, but because he loved thee. We use to say,
this is a woman's reason, I will do it because I will do it; but here we find it
is Gods reason, though it may seem strange arguing; yet Moses can go no higher,
he loved thee, why? because he loved thee.

Gods love to thee is the Love of all relations: look what a friends Love is to
a friend, or what a Fathers Love is toward a Child, or what an Husbands Love
is toward a Wife; such is Gods Love to thee; thou art his Friend, his Son, his
Daughter, his Spouse; and God is thy All in All.

3. For the Effects of his Love: 1. God so Loves thee, as that he has entered
into a Covenant with thee. O what a Love is this? tell me, O my soul, is there
not an infinite disparity betwixt God and thee? He is God above, and thou art a
Worm below: He is the High and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name
is Holy: and thou art less than the least of all the Mercies of God: O wonder
at such a condescension! that such a Potter, and such a Former of things should
come on terms of bargaining with such clay as is guilty before him! Had we the
tongues of Men and Angels, we could never express it!

God so loves thee, as that in the Covenant he gives thee all his Promises?
Indeed what is the Covenant but an accumulation, or heap of Promises? As a
cluster of stars makes a Constellation; so as a mass of promises concurreth in
the Covenant of Grace; wherever Christ is, clusters of divine promises grow
out of him; as the motes, rays and beams are from the Sun. I shall instance
in some few. As, --

1. God in the Covenant gives the world. All is yours, whether Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas or the World, Mat. 6 33.
1 Cor. 3.22. First seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you. These temporary blessings are a part of
the Covenant which God has made to his People; It is he that gives thee Power
to get wealth, that he may establish his Covenant which he swear unto thy
Fathers. Others, Deuteronomy. 8.18.
I know, may have the World, but they have it not by a Covenant-right; it may
be thou have but a little, a very little of the world; well, but thou have it
by a Covenant-right, and so it is an earnest of all the rest.

2. As God in the Covenant gives thee the world, so in comparison of thee and
his other Saints, he cares not what becomes of all the world. I loved thee,
says God, Isa. 43.4.
therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy Life: If the case be
so, that it cannot be well with thee, but great evils must come upon others,
kindred, people and nations, I do not so much care for them, says God, my
heart is on thee, so as in Comparison of thee, I care not what becomes of all
the world: O the love of God to his Saints!

3. God in the Covenant pardons thy sins; this is another fruit of Gods love:
Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins by his own blood; Rev. 1.5.
it cost him dear to pardon our sins; even the heart-blood of Christ: such were
the transactions betwixt God and Christ: if thou will take upon thee to deliver
souls from sin (says God to his Son) thou must come thy self, and be made a
Curse for their Sin: Well (says Christ) thy will be done in it; though I lose
my Life, though it cost me the best blood in my heart, yet let me deliver them
from sin: This exceedingly heightens Christ's Love, that he should foresee thy
sin, and that yet he should Love. Many times we set our Love on some outward
unthankful Creatures, and we say, could I but have foreseen this untowardness,
they should never have had my Love: but now the Lord did foresee all thy sins,
and all thy ill requitals for love, and yet it did not once hinder his love
toward thee, but he puts this in the Covenant, I will forgive their
Iniquities, and remember their sins no more. Ezekiel. 36.25.


4. God in the Covenant gives thee Holiness and Sanctification. I will sprinkle
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from
all your Idols will I cleanse you: this Holiness is our excellency in the eyes
of Men and Angels: this is the Crown and Diadem upon the heads of Saints:
whence David calls them by the name of excellent ones. Holiness is a Spirit of
Glory, 1 Pet. 4.14. it is the delight of God: Psalm. 16.3. 1 Pet. 4.14.
as a Father delights himself in seeing his own Image in his Children, so God
delights himself in the Holiness of his Saints: God loved them before with a
love of benevolence and good will, but now he loves them with a love of
complacency: Psalm. 47.11. Psalm. 149.4.
The Lord takes pleasure in those that fear him; the Lord takes pleasure in his
People. Holiness is the very Essence of God, the Divine Nature of God: O what
is this, that God should put his own nature into thee? You are partakers of the
Divine Nature. O what a love is this that God should put his own Life into
thee? that he should enable thee to live the very same life that he himself
lives? remember that piece of the Covenant, I will put my Law into their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts.

5. God in the Covenant gives thee the knowledge of himself: it may be thou
knew him before: but it is another kind of knowledge that God now gives thee
than thou had before. When God teaches the Soul to know him, it looks on God
with another eye: it sees now another beauty in God than ever it saw before:
for all that knowledge that it had before, bred not love: only Covenant-knowledg
of God works in the Soul a true Love of God. But how does this
Covenant-knowledg work this Love? I shall tell you my own experiences: I go
through all the Virtues, Graces and Excellencies that are most amiable: and I
look in the Scriptures, and there I find them in God alone: if ever I saw any
excellency in any man, or in any Creature, I think with my self, there is more
in God that made that Creature: He that made the Eye, shall not he see? And so
he that made that Loveliness, is not he Lovely? Now when by these Mediums I
have presented God thus lovely to my Soul, then I begin to feel my heart to
warm. As when I conceive such an Idea of a man, that he is of such a carriage,
behavior, disposition, that he has a mind thus, and thus framed, qualified
and beautified, why then I love him; so when I apprehend the Lord aright, when
I observe him as he is described in his Word; when I observe his doings, and
consider his workings, and learn from all these together a right Idaea, opinion
or apprehension of him, then my will follows my understanding, and my
affections follow them both; and I come to love God, and to delight in God. O
here is a sweet knowledge! surely it was God's Love in Christ to put this blessed
Article into the Covenant of grace; They shall all know me from the least of
them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.

6. God in the Covenant of grace gives thee his Son. John. 13.6.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Nay more, as God
has given thee his Son, so he has given thee himself. O my Soul, would
thou not think it a mavelous love, if God should say to thee, Come Soul, I
Will give thee all the World for thy Portion; or that I may give thee a
testimony that I love thee, I will make another world for thy sake, and I will
make thee Emperor of that world also. Surely thou would say, God loves me
dearly; ay but in that God has given thee his Son, and given thee himself,
this is a greater degree of Love. Christi^ns! stand amazed; Oh what love is
this to the Children of men! Oh that we should live to have our ears filled
with this sound from Heaven! I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed after
thee, I am the Lord thy God; I will be their God, and they shall be my People.
O my Soul, where have thou been? rouse up, and recollect, and set before thee
all these passages of Gods Love in Christ; are not these strong atractives to
gain thy love; what will thou do? can thou choose to love the Lord thy God?
shall not all this love of God in Christ to thee constrain thy love? It is the
expression of the Apostle, The Love of God constrains us: 1 Cor. 5.14.
God in Christ is the very Element of Love, and whither should Love go but to
the Element? Air goes to Air, and Earth to Earth, and all the Rivers to the
Sea: 1 John. 4.16.
every Element will to its proper place: Now God is Love, and whither should
thy Love be carried, but to this Ocean, or Sea of Love? Come my Beloved (said
the Spouse to Christ) let us get up early to the vineyards, Cant 2.12.
let us see if the Vines flourish, whether the tender grapes appear; there will
I give thee my Loves: The flourishing of the Vine, and the appearing of the
tender grapes are the fruits of the graces of God in the Assemblies of his
Saints; now wheresoever things appear, whether in Assemblies, or in secret
Ordinances, then and there (says the Bride) will I give thee my Loves; when
thou come to the Word, Prayer, Meditation, be sure of this, to give Christ
thy Love: What? does Christ manifest his presence there? is there any abounding
of his graces there? O let thy Love abound: by how much more thou feel Gods
Love toward thee, by so much more do thou love thy God again: many sins being
forgiven, how should thou but Love much?

SECT. VII. Of joying in Jesus in that respect.
WE must joy in Jesus as carrying on the great work of our Salvation in a way
of Covenant. I know our joy here is but in part; such is the excellency of
Spiritual joy, that it is reserved for Heaven; God will not permit it to be
pure and perfect here below: and yet such as it is (though mingled with cares
and pains) it is a blessed duty; it is the light of our souls: and were it
quite taken away, our lives would be nothing but Horror and Confusion: O my
Soul, if thou did not hope to encounter joy in all thy Acts, thou would
remain languishing and immovable, thou would be without action and vigor,
thou would speak no more of Jesus, or of a Covenant of grace, or of God, or
Christ, or Life, or glory. -- Well then go on O my Soul, and joy in Jesus; if
thou love him, what should hinder thy rejoicing in him? It is a Maxim, that
as Love Proceeds, so if there be nothing that retains the Appetite, it always
goes from Love to Joy. One motion of the Appetite toward good is to be united
to it, and the next Appetite toward good is to enjoy it: now Love consists in
union, and joy in fruition; for what is fruition, but a joy that we find in the
possession of that thing we love? Much ado there is amongst Philosophers
concerning the differences of Love and Joy. Some give it thus; As is the motion
of fluid Bodies which run toward their Center, and think to find their rest
there; but being there, they stop not, and therefore they return, and scatter
themselves on themselves, they swell and overflow: So in the passion of Love,
the Appetite runs to the beloved Object, and unites it self to it, and yet its
motion ends not there; for by this passion of joy, it returns the same way;
again it scatters it self on it self, and overflows those Powers which are
nearest to it; by this effusion the soul doubles on the Image of the good it
has received, and so it thinks to possess it more; it distills it self into
that faculty, which first acquainted it with the knowledge of the Object, and by
that means it makes all the parts of the Soul concur to the possession of it.
Hence they say, That joy is an effusion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul
spreads it self on what is good, to possess it the more perfectly.

But not to stay in the inquiry of its Nature, O my Soul, be thou in the
exercise of this Joy; Is there not cause? come see, and own thy Blessedness;
take notice of the great things the Lord has done for thee. As, -- 1. He has
made a Covenant with thee of temporal mercies; thou have all thou have by
free-holding of Covenant-Grace: thy Bread is by Covenant, thy sleep is by
Covenant, thy safety from Sword is by the Covenant, the very tilling of thy
Land is by a Covenant of Grace, Ezekiel. 36.34. O how sweet is this? Every Crum is
from Christ, and by virtue of a Covenant of Grace.

2. He has made a Covenant with thee, of spiritual mercies; even a Covenant of
Peace, and Grace, and Blessing, and Life for evermore; God is become thy God,
he is all things to thee; he has forgiven thy sins, he has given thee his
Spirit, to lead thee, to sanctify thee, to uphold thee in that state wherein
thou stand; and at last he will bring thee to a full enjoyment of himself in
Glory, where thou shall bless him, and rejoice before him with joy unspeakable
and full of glory. O pluck up thy heart, lift up thy head, strengthen the weak
hands and the feeble knees; serve the Lord with gladness and joyfulness of
Spirit, considering the day of thy Salvation draws nigh. Write it in Letters
of Gold, that thy God is in Covenant with thee, to love thee, to bless thee,
and to save thee. Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and
receive thee to himself, and then thou shall fully know what it is to have God
to be thy God, or to be in Covenant with God. I know these Objects rejoice not
every heart; a man out of Covenant, if he look on God, he is a consuming fire:
if on the Law, it is a Sentence of Condemnation; if on the Earth, it brings
forth Thorns by reason of sins; if on Heaven, the Gate is shut; if on the
Signs in Heaven, Fire, Meteors, Thunder, strike in him a terror. But O my
Soul, this is not thy case: a Man in Covenant with God, looks on these things
with another eye; if he look on God, he says, This is my Father; if on Christ,
this is my elder Brother; if on Angels, these are my Keepers; if on Heaven,
this is my House; if on the Signs of Heaven, Fire, Meteors, Thunder, these are
but the effects of my Fathers Power; if on the Law, the Son of God has
fulfilled it for me; if on Prosperity, God has yet better things for me in
store; if on Adversity, Jesus Christ has suffered much more for me than this;
if on the Devil, Death, and Hell, he says with the Apostle, O Death! where is
thy Sting? 1 Cor. 15.55.
O Grave! where is thy Victory? Come poor soul, is it not thus with thee? what?
art thou in Covenant with God, or art thou not? If yet thou doubtest, review
thy grounds of hope, and leave not there, till thou come up to some measure
of assurance: but if thou art persuaded of thy Interest, O then rejoice
therein; is it not a Gospel-duty to rejoice in the Lord, and again to rejoice?
The Lord is delighted in thy delights: Phil. 4.4.
he would fain have it thy constant frame and daily business to live in joy,
and to be always delighting thy self in him.

This one Promise, I am the Lord thy God, is enough to cause thy appetite to
run to it, and to unite it self to it by Love; and to scatter it self on it,
and to overflow those powers of the Soul that are nearest to it, that every
part of the Soul may concur to the possession of it. Bless the Lord, O my Soul
(says David) and all that is within me bless his holy Name. So rejoice in the
Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, rejoice in the Name of God. This is
true joy, when the soul unites it self to the good possessed in all its parts:
And was there ever such an object of true joy as this? Hark, as if Heaven
opened, and the voice came from God in Heaven; I will be a God to thee, and to
thy Seed after thee: I am the Lord thy God; and I will be thy God. What? does
not thy heart leap in thy bosom at this sound? John the Baptist leaped in his
mothers womb for joy, at the sound of Mary's Voice; and does not thy soul
spring within thee at this voice of God? O wonder! some can delight themselves
in sin; and is not God better than sin? Others more refined, and indeed
sanctified, can delight themselves in remission of Sin, in Grace, Pardon,
Holiness, Fore-thoughts of Heaven; how exceedingly have some gracious hearts
been ravished with such thoughts? But is not God, the objective happiness, the
Fountain-blessedness, more rejoicing than all these? Why? Dear soul if there be
in thee any rejoicing faculty, now awake, and stir it up; it is the Lord thy
God whom thou art to rejoice in; it is he whom the glorious spirits joy in: it
is he who is the top of Heavens joy, their exceeding joy: and it is he who is
thy God as well as their God. Enough! enough! or if this be not enough, hear
thy Duty as the Lord commands thee: Rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 3.1. Phil. 3.1.
Be glad ye Children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God, Joel 2.23.
Joel. 2.23.
Rejoice in the Lord all ye Righteous, for praise is comely for the upright,
Psalm. 33.1. Psalm. 33.1.
Rejoice in the Lord ye Righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness, Psalm. 97.12. Psalm. 97.12.
Let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice, let them ever shout for
joy, because thou defendest them; let them also that love thy Name be joyful in
thee, Psalm. 5.11. Psalm. 5.11.
Let the Righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, yea let them
exceedingly rejoice, Psalm. 68.3. Psalm. 68.3.
Glory ye in his holy Name, let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord,
Psalm. 105.3. Psalm. 105.3.
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the Children of Zion be joyful in
their King, Psalm. 149.3. Psalm. 149.3.
Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice O ye Righteous, and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart, Psalm. 23.11. Psalm. 23.11.
O what pressing Commands are these?

SECT. VIII. Of calling on Jesus in that respect.
1. WE must call on Jesus, or on God the Father in and through Jesus in
reference to this gracious Covenant: Now this calling on God contains Prayer
and Praise.

Jer. 31.16.
1. We must pray: we must use Arguments of Faith challenging God, Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned: Why? for thou art the Lord my God. This Covenant is the
ground on which all Prayers must be bottomed; the Covenant we know contains all
the Promises, and what is Prayer but Promises turned into Petitions? Thus
prayed the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 14.21, 22.
Do not abhor us for thy Names sake, do not disgrace the Throne of thy Glory,
remember, break not thy Covenant with us. -- Why? Art not thou he the Lord our
God? And thus prayed the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 64.9.
Be not wroth very sore, neither remember iniquity for ever, behold we beseech
thee; and why so? we ar^ all thy Poople: q. d. Every one does for its own: the
Prince for his People, the Father for his Children, and the Shepherd for his
Sheep: and will not God do for his own in covenant with him? Be thy soul in the
saddest desertion, yet come and spread the Covenant before God: A Soul in the
greatest depth, swimming on this Covenant of Grace, it keeps it from sinking;
whence Christ in his blackest, saddest hour, prayed thus, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Be thy Soul in trouble for sin and prevailing
corruption: yet go to God, and plead his Promise and Covenant: say as
Johoshaphat, Lord, I am so born down by the power of my sin, that I know not
what to do, only mine eyes are unto thee; O do thou subdue mine iniquities. Be
thy soul troubled for want of strength to do this or that duty; yet go to God
and Christ in the Covenant of Grace, and say, Lord thou know I have no
strength of my self, I am a barren Wilderness, but thou have entered into a
Covenant of Grace with me, that thou will put thy Law into my inward parts,
thou will cause me to keep thy judgments, and do them. Ezekiel. 36.27. Ezekiel. 36.27.
As sometimes thou said to Gideon; I have sent thee, therefore I will be with
thee, Judge. 6.16. Judge. 6.16.
Many are apt to set upon their duties in their own strength; but Oh my soul,
look thou to the promise of Grace, and of the Spirit, and put them in suit, and
allege them unto Christ. Many are apt to work out their sanctifications by
their Watchfulness, Resolutions, Vows, Promises made unto God; but alas, were
there not more help in Gods Promises which he makes to us, than in our Promises
which we make to him, we might lie in our pollutions for ever. O here is the
way; in every want, or strait, or necessity, fly to God and Christ, saying,
Thou art our Father, and we are thy People, O break not thy Covenant with us. I
confess strong expressions and affections are good in Prayer, but surely
strength of Faith in the Covenant of God is the greatest strength of our Prayer.

Here it may be some Soul will object, Object.
O if I were assured that I were in Covenant with God, thus would I pray: but
alas, I am a Stranger, an Alien, and so have been to this very day, I have no
part in the Covenant.

I Answer, Answ.
If thou art not actually in Covenant, yet thou may be in Covenant in
respect of Gods purpose and gracious intention. Howsoever, to encourage all to
seek unto God, consider these Particulars. --

1. The Freeness of the Promise in this Covenant of Grace; Come and buy Wine
without Money or Money-worth, Isa. 55.2. Rev. 22.17.
come, and drink of the Waters of Life freely.

2. The extent of the Promise in this Covenant of Grace: I will pour out my
Spirit upon all flesh; hence the Gospel is compared to a Feast, and God invites
universally: As many as you find, Mat. 22.9.
bid to the Marriage. As persons are in estate, so they invite, and so they
feast: now Christ is a great King over all the Earth; he has one House that
will hold all; he has one Table that will hold all: yea, he has one Dish that
will serve all; and answerably he invites all: Ho every one that thirsts.

3. The forwardness of Christ, that gives to every one that asks, according
to his Promise. John 4.10.
Had thou but asked (said Christ to the Samaritan Woman) I would have given
thee living water. Mark here the occasion of Christ's, words; Christ being
weary and thirsty by reason of his Journey, he asked of the Woman a Cup of
water to drink; no great matter; he asks but a Cup of water, and the Woman
stands at the Well-side where was water enough; yet she gives not, but stands
wondering that he being a Jew should ask water of her that was a Samaritan;
well, says Christ, thou deniest me a Cup of cold water, being weary and
thirsty, but had thou asked of me, I would have given thee water of Life.
Wonderful! Christ is more ready to give water of Life, the very Spirit of God,
to a poor sinnner, than we are to give a cup of common water to a thirsty Soul.
Go then, thou that have denied the least mercy and kindness to Christ in any of
his Members, yet seek Grace from him, O look up unto Jesus! ask his Spirit,
entreat him to make thy heart new within thee; plead the promise of his
Covenant, and wait in hope.

2 We must praise: 1. If we would have the blessing, let us seek it with the
same mind that God offers it (i.e.) with a purpose and desire to have Grace
exalted; thus Moses sought pardon to this very end, that his mercy might
appear; If thou will pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear] and we shall be
thankful unto thee for it; Exodus 32.32.
so the words are made out by expositros, which in the text are either
passionately or modestly suspended. These are prevailing requests with God,
when we plead for the Glorifying of his own Grace. Father, Glorify thy Name,
said Christ; and presently there comes a voice out of the Cloud, I have
Glorified it, and I will Glorify it again. John. 12.28.
2. If we have the blessing already, then be sure to ascribe the Glory unto
him, that has made good his promise unto us: who is a God like unto thee,
Micah. 7, 18.
who passest by the transgressions of the remnant of thy Heritage? We should
make the praise of his grace to ring through the world, that Heaven and Earth
might take notice of it, and wonder at the grace that has been showed us. I
will mention the loving kindness of the Lord, Isa. 63.7.
and the Praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has bestowed on
us, and the great goodness toward the House of Israel, which he has bestowed
on them, according to his Mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving
Kindnesses. See how the Prophet mentions the kindnesses, the loving kindnesses,
the multitude of his loving kindnesses; the goodness, and the great goodness of
God; he could hardly get off it; he would have God and Grace to have all the
Glory: O my Soul, has God entered thee into a Covenant of Grace? why then
bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name; Psalm.
103.1.
But of this more anon.

SECT IX. Of Conforming to Jesus in that respect.
9 WE must conform to Jesus, in reference to this Covenant of Grace: We are
changed by beholding, into the same Image. 2 Cor. 3.18.
If we look unto Jesus in this respect, this Look will have such an influence
upon us, that we shall conform to Jesus. But wherein consists this Conformity?
I answer, in these several perticulars:

1. God in Christ offers his Covenant to us; so we through Christ should
embrace his Offer.

2. God in Christ keeps Covenant with us; so we through Christ should be
careful to keep Covenant with him.

3. God in Christ has highly honored us as we are his People: so we through
Christ should highly honor him as he is our God.

1. God in Christ offers a Covenant of Grace to us; so we through Christ should
embrace this gracious Offer. His Offers have appeared from first to last: as,
1. To Adam. 2. To Abraham. 3. To Moses. 4. To David. 5. To Israel, and to
Judah. Take notice of it in that great promise of the Covenant, I will be thy
God: q. d. Come Soul, if thou will but have me, I am thine, here I offer my
self, my son, my spirit, Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, Salvation:
whatsoever I am, or whatsoever I have, all is thine, if thou will but accept of
me: Look over all this wide, wide world, and if there be any thing in it that
can please thy soul; and when thou have gone through all the world, then come
and take a view of me, and see me in my glory, beauty and excellency; view me
in my Attributes, and see if thou find not enough in me worthy of thy
acceptance: all this, and more than this, nay more than eye can see, or ear can
hear, or heart can conceive I offer to thee, if thou will but have me; Lo, I
will he thy God. So Christians! God is first with us, he is the first mover, he
begins with us before we begin with him: I will bring them (says God) into the
bond of the Covenant. Now in this let us conform; does he offer? O let us
embrace the offer! does he lead the way? O let us follow him step by step in
that very way as he goes before us! Let us not prescribe unto God, let not us
presume to appoint the Conditions of the Covenant; let us not seek to wind
about the Promise of Grace to our own Mind and Will: let us not say, We will
have it thus, thus and thus it shall be or else we will admit of no conditions
of peace: But, O come, take God and Christ upon his own Terms; submit to that
way of the Covenant, and to those conditions of peace which the Lord
prescribes; why? this is to conform to his gracious offers. There is much of
this offer of Christ and conforming to Christ, and therefore give me leave to
enlarge. As in the offer God usually scatters some little seeds of Faith in the
hearts of those that he will bring to himself; so it is worth the while to
observe the work of Faith in receiving and accepting of this gracious offer;
only I shall not herein limit the Lord; but I will show what some conceive the
most usual and ordinary course of Faiths working, and of the souls conforming
to Jesus Christ in its closing with Christ. As thus --

1. Faith hearing the great things proposed in the Covenant of Grace, it stirs
up in the heart a serious consideration of their blessed condition, that are in
covenant with God; Blessed art thou O Israel, a People saved by the Lord --
What Nation in the Earth is like thy People, Deuteronomy. 33.29. 2 Samuel 7.2.3.
even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a People unto himself? Time was,
(says the Soul) that I counted the proud blessed, and the rich blessed, and
the honorable blessed; time was when I placed my blessedness in other things,
as in Riches, Preferments, Favor, Credit with men; but now these are become
vile, and things of no value; Faith makes us change our voice, and to speak as
the Psalmist, Blessed are the People whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144.15.


2. Faith stirs in the heart a longing desire after this condition; good being
believed, cannot but be desired and longed for; Desire naturally springs from
the apprehension of any good being made known; hence Faith (we say) is both in
the understanding and in the will; as it is in the understanding, it opens the
eye to see, and clearly to discern the Blessing of the Covenant; as it is in
the will, it pursues and desires the attaining of the Grace revealed; nor are
these desires faint desires, but very earnest, eager, violent; sometimes it is
called a thirsting after God; and sometimes a panting after God; and sometimes
a gasping after God: it is such a desire as cannot be satisfied by any thing
without God himself.

3. Faith stirs in the heart some hope to enjoy this condition; I say some
hope; for Faith being as yet in the Bud, or in the Seed, though its desire be
strong, yet hope of obtaining is but feeble and weak; hence Faith is taken up
with many thoughts: fain would the Soul be joined to Christ, but being as yet
dismayed with the sense of Sin, it stands like the Publican, afar off; as yet
Faith can scarce speak a word to God, only with Jonah, it can look toward his
holy Temple. As a poor weak babe who lies in the Cradle sick, and weak, and
speechless, only it can look toward the Mother for help; the cast of the eye
expresses in some sort what it would say; thus Faith being weak, it would
speak to God, but it cannot, or dares not; only it has its eye toward Heaven;
2 Chr. 20.12.
as Jehoshaphat sometimes said, Our eyes are toward thee. It feels a need, and
fain would have; but sense of unworthyness, and the sense of the Law strikes
such a fear into the heart, that it dares not come near. Consider Isreal's Case,
and we shall find it parallel to this: God proclaims on the Mount, I am the
Lord thy God: what was this, but Gods offer to be in Covenant with Israel? and
yet the terror of the Thunder was so great, that Israel durst not come near: a
poor Soul hearing the Lord to offer himself to be in Covenant in him, Come
soul, I am the Lord thy God. Why alas it dares not come near: What am I the
Lord? or what is my Fathers House, that I should enter into a Covenant with the
most high God? The Soul is unquiet within it self, it is hurried to and fro,
and finds no rest; it hears of Peace with God, but feels it not; there is much
ado with the Soul to sustain its hope; only Faith sets the mind again and again
to consider the promises, invitati^^^, and all other encouragements which God
has given in his Word.

4. Faith stirs in the heart some resolves to go to Gods Throne, and to sue for
Grace; Faith speaks within as they did, Jonah. 3.9. Amos. 5.15.
Who can tell whether the Lord will return? And, it may be the Lord God of
Hosts will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph. So, Who can tell? says the
Soul; It may be the Lord will, says the Soul: and this begets some resolves as
those Lepers in Samaria knew they were sure to perish, if they sat still;
therefore they resolved to try whether the Aramites would save them: Or as
Esther, knowing all was undone if she would not stir, she would try whether the
King would hold out his Golden Scepter: So the poor Soul, knowing there is no
way but perishing, if it continue in its Natural State, therefore it resolves
to go to God: Does the Lord say, Seek my Face? Why, Jer. 3.22.
thy Face Lord will I seek. -- Does the Lord say, Come unto Me? Why, Behold
Lord, I come unto Thee; for Thou art the Lord our God. And now, the Soul
betakes it self unto God, it sends up Complaints of it self, it laments its own
sinful Rebellions, it puts out a whole Volley of Sighs, Groans, and strong
Cries toward Heaven; it confesses with Grief and bitter Mourning, all its
former Iniquities; it smites, with Repenting Ephraim, upon its Thigh; it lies
down at God's Footstool, it puts its Mouth in the Dust; it acknowledges God's
Righteousness if He should condemn, and cast off for ever; and yet withal, it
pleads for Grace, that it may be accepted as one of His: It says unto God;
Lord, I have nothing to plead, why Thou may not Condemn me; but if Thou will
receive me, Thy Mercy shall appear in me: O let Thy Mercy appear, take away all
Iniquity, and receive me graciously. Thus the Soul lies at God's Throne, and
pleads for Grace.

5. As Faith is thus earnest in suing to God for Grace, so it is no less
vigilant and watchful in observing what Answer comes from the Lord; even as the
Prisoner at the Bar, not only cries for Mercy, but he marks every Word which
falls from the Judges Mouth, if any thing may give him Hope; or as Benhadad's
Servants lay at catch with the King of Israel, to see if they could take
occasion by any thing which fell from him, to plead for the Life of Benhadad:
So the poor Soul that is now pleading for Life and Grace, it watches narrowly,
to see if any thing may come from God, any Intimation of Favor, any Word of
Comfort, that may tend to Peace. O let me hear Joy and Gladness. -- I will hear
what the Lord will say; for He will speak Peace unto His People.

6. As Faith waits for an Answer, so accordingly it demeans it self.

1. Sometimes God answers not, and Faith takes on, and follows God still, and
cries after Him with more Strength; as resolving never to give over, till the
Lord either save or destroy: Nay, if the Lord will destroy, Faith chooses to
die at God's Feet; as when Joab was bidden to come forth from the Horns of the
Altar, and to take his Death in another Place; Nay, (says Joab) but I will dye
here: Or, as when Christ saw no Deliverance come in His Agony, He Prayed more
earnestly: So a poor Soul, Luke 22.44.
in the Time of its Agony, when it is striving as for Life and Death, if Help
come not at first Call, it prays again, and that more earnestly. Faith is very
urgent with God; and the more slack the Lord seems in answering, the more
earnest is Faith in plying God with its Prayers: It will wrestle with God, as
Jacob with the Angel; it will take no Denial, but will crave still: Bless me,
even me also; O send me not away without a Blessing!

2. Sometimes God answers in part; He speaks as it were out of a Dark Cloud; He
gives some little Ease, but He speaks not full Peace: In this manner He speaks
to the Woman; Go thy way, and sin no more: He does not say; Go in Peace, thy
Sin is forgiven thee; John 8.11.
No, no; but, Go thy way, and sin no more. Hereby Faith usually gets a little
Strength, and looks after the Lord with more Hope; It begins to plead with God,
as Moses did; O Lord, Thou have begun to show Grace unto Thy Servant; go on,
Lord, to manifest unto me all Thy Goodness. Here Faith takes a little hold on
the Covenant of Grace: It may be the Hand of Faith is feeble, shaking and
trembling; yet it takes a little Hold, it receives some Encouragement, it finds
that its former Seeking is not in vain.

3. Sometimes God answers more fully and satisfactorily; He applies some
Promise of Grace to the Conscience by His Spirit; He lets the Soul feel and
taste the Comforts of himself, or of such and such a Promise, more effectually
than ever before: Fear not, Isa. 41.10.
(says God) for I am thy God. Here Faith waxes bold, and with a glad Heart
entertains the Promise brought Home unto it. The Apostle calls this the
Embracing of the Promises: Now, Heb. 11.13.
Embracing implies an Affectionate Receiving with both Arms opened: So the Soul
embraces the Promise, and the Lord Jesus in the Promise; and having Him, like
Simeon, in his Arms, it lays Him in the Bosom, it brings Him into the Chamber
of the Heart, there to rest and abide for ever. And now is the Covenant struck
betwixt God, and the Soul: Now the Soul possesses God in Christ, as her own;
it rests in Him, and is satisfied with Him, it praises God for his Mercy, as
Simeon did, when he had Christ in his Arms; it commits it self wholly, and for
ever to that Goodness and Mercy, which has been revealed to it.

O my Soul, Have thou come thus by little and little, to touch the Top of
Christ's Golden Scepter? Why then, Is thy Hand given to God? Then art thou
entered into a Covenant of Peace? Christ's Offering, and thy Receiving the
Covenant of Grace, bears a sweet Agreement, an harmonious Conformity.

2. God in Christ keeps Covenant with us; so we through Christ should be
careful and diligent to keep Covenant with God: In the Things of this Life, a
strict Eye is had to the Covenants we make. Now, it is not enough for us to
enter into Covenant with God; but we must keep it: The Lord never will, never
has broken Covenants on His Part; but Alas! we on our Parts have broken the
first Covenant of Works: Take heed we break not the second; for then there
remains not any more place for any more Covenants. As the Lord keeps Covenant
with us; so let us keep Covenant with Him: and therein is the Blessing; Psalm.
103.17, 18.
The Mercy of the Lord is from Everlasting to Everlasting, -- to such as keep
his Covenant.

There is much also in this keeping of the Covenant; and therefore, give me
leave a little to enlarge. Sundry Acts of Faith are required to this keeping of
the Covenant: As thus, --

1. Faith in keeping the Covenant, has always an Eye to the Rule and Command
of God: As in Things to be believed, Faith looks on the Promise; so in Things
to be practiced, Faith looks upon the Command. Faith will present no strange
Fire before the Lord; it knows that God will accept of nothing, but what is
according to His own Will.

2. As Faith takes Direction from the Rule; so in keeping of the Covenant, it
directs us to the right End, that is, to the Glory of God. We are of Him, and
live in Him; and by Faith we must live to Him, Romans 14.7, 8. 2 Cor. 5.15. Psalm.
50.15. Psalm. 86.12.
and for Him: For none of us lives to himself, and no Man dies to himself;
for whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lord's. Again, He died for
all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
Him which died for them. This God claims as His right and due: Thou shall
glorify Me, says God: Yes, says Faith, I will glorify thee for ever.

3. Faith in keeping the Covenant, shields the Soul against all Hindrances
that it meets withal: As for instance, Sometimes we are tempted on the Right
Hand by the Baits and Allurements of the World; All these will I give thee,
says the World, if thou will be mine; but then Faith overcomes the World, by
setting before us better Things than these: Sometimes we are tempted on the Left
Hand, by Crosses, Afflictions, Persecutions, and Sufferings for the Name of
Christ; but then Faith helps us to overcome, and makes us Conquerours through
Christ that loved us, by setting before us the End of our Faith and Patience.
Heb. 12.2.
It is said of Jesus, That for the Joy that was set before Him, He endured the
Cross and despised the Shame.

4. Faith encourages the Soul, that the Lord will have a Gracious Respect unto
its keeping Covenant: Acts 10.33.
In every Nation he that fears Him, and works Righteousness, is accepted
with Him. Surely this is no small Encouragement to well-doing: What would not a
Servant do, if he knew his Lord will take it in good part? Now, Faith assures
the Soul, there is not one Prayer, one Holy Desire, or one Good Thought, or
Word which is spoken or done to the Glory of God, but God takes notice of it,
and accepts it in good part. Then they that feared the Lord, Mal. 3.16.
spoke often one to another; and the Lord hearkened, and heard it; and a Book of
Remembrance was written before Him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon His Name.

5. Faith furnishes the Soul with Strength and Ability to keep the Covenant:
By Faith we get a Power and Strength of Grace. As thus: --

1. By Faith we look at Christ, as having all Fullness of Grace in Himself; It
pleased the Father, Col. 1.19.
that in Him should all Fullness dwell: All others have but their Measures, some
more, some less, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ; but Christ
has received the Spirit, John 3.34.
not by Measure, but in the Fullness of it.

2. By Faith we know, that whatever Fullness of Grace is in Christ, He had it
not for Himself only, Psalm. 68.18. John 1.16.
but for us: He received Gifts for Men, said the Psalmist; not for Himself
merely, but for Men: Of His Fullness we receive Grace for Grace, says John: His
Wisdom to make us wise, His Meekness to make us meek, and His Patience to make
us patient.

3. By Faith we look at Christ, as Faithful to distribute such Grace unto us,
as He received for us: Heb. 4.2.
He is Faithful in all the House of God; He is Faithful in dispensing all the
Treasures of Grace committed unto Him, for His Churches Good: He keeps nothing
back: His Faithfulness will not suffer Him to keep that to Himself, which He
has received for us. Psalm. 68.18.
Hence as the Psalmist says, He received Gifts for Men; so the Apostle renders
it, He gave Gifts unto Men: As he receives, so he gives; Ephesians. 4.8.
being faithful in all that is committed to Him.

4. By Faith we seek God, and beg Performance of his Promises according to our
need: Do we want Wisdom, Meekness, Patience, or any other Grace? Faith carries
us by Prayer unto the Fountain, and in this way waits and expects to receive
the Grace we want. As the Child by sucking the Breast, draws forth Milk for its
own Nourishment, and thereby it grows in Strength; so do we by the Prayer of
Faith, suck from Christ, and from the Promise of Grace, and by that means
derive Strength to our inner Man, to fulfill the Covenant which we have made
with God.

6. As Faith strengthens us; so if at any times, by occasion or temptation, we
fail in our Covenant-keeping, Faith recovers us, and restores us again to our
former Estate: I do not say, the Covenant can be broken betwixt God and Us; we
may offend God, and fail in the Service of God; but till we refuse God, and
leave God, and choose another Master, Lord, and Husband besides God, there is no
Dissolution of the Covenant of Grace. Now, this a true Believer cannot do; He
may fall, and fall often; yet he does not fall, but he rises again: he may turn
aside, but yet he returns again into the way of the Covenant. What a sweet
Point is this? Christians, We may, and sometimes we do walk weakly, in keeping
of Covenants; our feet slip, and we step aside out of God's Path; yet Faith
brings us back again to God: It casts Shame on our Faces, that after all the
Grace showed us, we should so ill requite God: It reminds us of those Promises,
Return unto Me, and I will return unto you. -- Ye have done all this
Wickedness, Zech. 1.3. 1 Samuel 12.20, 22.
yet turn not aside from following the Lord: -- For the Lord will not forsake
his People, for his Great Names sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make
you his People. In the minding of these, and such other Promises, Faith does
encourage us to return unto God, to take words unto our selves, and to plead
the Covenant of his Grace toward us: This Work of Faith brought Peter back to
Christ; whereas Judas wanting this Faith, lies down in desperate Sorrow, never
able to rise up, or to recover himself.

O my Soul! Art thou acquainted with these Acts of Faith, enabling thee in some
good measure to keep Covenant with God? Then is there a sweet Conformity
betwixt Thee, and Jesus.

3. God in Christ has highly honored us, as we are his People; so we through
Christ should honor Him highly, as He is our God: This is the main End of the
Covenant; and I shall end with this: O my Soul, be like to God, bear the Image
and Resemblance of God thy Father, in this Respect: He has humbled Himself to
advance thee; O then humble thy self to advance Him; endeavor every way to
exalt his Name.

We are willing to be in Covenant with God, that we may set up our selves, that
we may sit upon Thrones, and possess a Kingdom: But we must think especially of
setting up the Lord upon his Throne: Ascribe Greatness to our God, says Moses;
Deuteronomy. 32.3.
make it a Name, and a Praise unto Him, that he has vouchsafed to make us his
People, and to take us into Covenant with Himself: Honor Him as he is God; but
honor Him more abundantly, as he is our God: Who should Honor Him, if his
People will not? The World knows Him not; The Wicked will not seek after God,
Psalm. 10.4,
-- God is not in all his Thoughts. And, Shall God have no Honor? Shall He
that stretched out the Heavens, and laid the Foundations of the Earth, and
formed Man upon it, have no Glory? O yes! The Lord Himself answers; This People
have I formed for My Self, Isa. 43.21.
they shall show forth My Praise: Surely, God will have Praise from his own
People, whom he has taken unto Himself: He will be glorified in all those that
come near Him. Lev. 10.3.


But, How should we honor God? I answer: --

1. We must set Him up as chief and highest in our Esteem: Kings acount not
themselves honored, if they be not set above other Men: And hence God's People
have used such Expressions concerning God, as do single Him forth beyond the
Comparison of all Creatures. Thus Moses; Who is like unto Thee amongst the
Gods? Who is like unto Thee, Exodus 15.11. 2 Samuel 7.22.
glorious in Holiness* fearful in Praises, doing Wonders? Thus David; Thou art
Great, O Lord God, for there is none like Thee, neither is there any God
besides Thee, according to all that we have heard with our Ears. Thus Solomon;
Lord God of Israel, 1 King. 8.22.
there is no God like unto Thee in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath; who
keep Covenant and Mercy with Thy Servants? Thus Micah; Who is a God like
unto Thee, Micah 7.18.
which passest by the Transgressions of the Remnant of thine Heritage? And thus
should we rise up in our Thoughts and Apprehensions of God, until we come to an
Holy Ecstasy and Admiration of God.

2. We must count it our Blessedness, and highest Dignity, to be a People in
Covenant with God: Are we Honorable? Yet esteem this as our greatest Honor,
that God is our God: Are we low and despised in the World? Yet count this
Honor enough, that God has lifted us up to be his People. Christians, if when
we are counted as things of naught, we can quiet our selves in this, that God
is our God; if when we are persecuted, imprisoned, distressed, we can say with
Jacob, I have enough, because the Lord has Mercy on me, and has taken me into
Covenant with Him: surely then we do bear Witness of God before Heaven and
Earth, that He is better to us than Corn, or Wine, or Oil, or whatsoever this
World affords.

3. We must lie under the Authority of every Word of God, and we must conform
our selves to the Examples of God; that is, we must labor to become Followers
of God, and imitate his Virtues. It is a part of that Honor which Children owe
to their Parents, to obey their Commands, and to imitate their Godly Example:
we cannot honor God more, than when we are Humbled at his Feet to receive his
Word, than when we renounce the Manners of the world, Deuteronomy. 31.3. Ephesians. 5.1.
to become his Followers as dear Children. O think of this! for when we conform
indeed, then are we Holy as he is Holy, and Pure as he is Pure; and then, How
should this but tend to the Honor and Glory of our Good God?

Thus far we have Looked on Jesus, as our Jesus, in that dark Time, before His
Coming in the Flesh: Our next Work is to Look on Jesus, carrying on the Great
Work of Man's Salvation, in His First Coming or Incarnation. LOOKING UNTO
JESUS In His Birth. The Fourth Book.
CHAP. I.
Luke 2.15. Let us now go even to Bethlehem, and see this Thing.
SECT. I. Of the Tidings of Christ.
IN this Period, as in the former, we shall first lay down the Object; and
secondly, direct you how to Look unto it.

The Object is Jesus, carrying on the Work of Man's Salvation, in His first
Coming in the Flesh, until His Coming again. But because in this long Period we
have many Transactions, which we cannot with Convenience dispatch together; we
shall therefore break it into smaller pieces, and present this Object, Jesus
Christ: 1. In his Birth. 2. In his Life. 3. In his Death. 4. In his
Resurrection. 5. In his Ascension, Session at God's Right Hand, and Mission of
his Holy Spirit. 6. In his Intercession for his Saints; in which Business he
now is, and will be employed till his Second Coming to Judgment.

1. First, For the Transactions of Jesus in His Birth: Some things we must
propound before, and some things after his Birth; so that we shall continue
this Period till the Time of John's Baptism, or the Exercise of his Ministry
upon Earth. Now in all the Transactions of this Time, we shall especially
handle these: 1. The Tidings of Christ. 2. The Conception of Christ. 3. The
Duplicity of Natures in Christ. 4. The real Distinction in that Duty. 5. The
wonderful Union, notwithstanding that Distinction. 6. The Birth of Christ. 7.
Some Consequents after his Birth, whilst yet a Child of Twelve Years old.

The First Passage in Relation to his Birth, is, The Tidings of Christ: This
appears, Luke 1.26, 27, 28, etc. And in the Sixth Month, the Angel Gabriel wat
sent from God, etc. Luke 1.26, 31.
I shall a little ins^st on some of these Words.

1. The Messenger is an Angel. Man was too mean to carry the News of the
Conception of God: Never any Business was Conceived in Heaven, that did so much
concern the Earth, as the Conception of the God of Heaven in a Womb of Earth;
no less therefore than an Angel was worthy to bear these Tidings; and never
Angel received a greater Honor, than of this Embassage. Angels have been sent
to diverse; as to Gideon, Manoah, David, Daniel, Eliah, Zechariah, etc. And then
the Angel honored the Message; but here is a Message that does honor the
Angel; he was highly glorious before; but this added to his glory, Indeed, the
Incarnation of God could have no less a Reporter than the Angel of God: When
God intended to begin his Gospel, he would first visit the World wirh his
Angel, before he would visit the World with his Son; His Angel must come in the
Form of Man, before his Son must come in the Nature of Man.

This Angel salutes the Virgin; Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord
is with thee; blessed art thou among Women. Luke 1.28.
Many Men and Women have been, and are the Spiritual Temples of God; but never
was any the material Temple of God, but only Mary; and therefore, Blessed art
thou amongst Women: and yet we cannot say that she was so Blessed in Bearing
Christ, as she was in Believing in Christ; her Bearing indeed was more
Miraculous, but her Believing was more Beneficial to her Soul: that was her
Privilege, but this was her Happiness. Christians, If we believe in Christ,
and if we obey the Word of Christ, we are the Mothers of Christ: Whosoever does
the Will of My Father which is in H^aven, Mat. 12.50. Luke 11.27.
he is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. Every renewed Heart is another Mary,
a spiritual Sanctuary of the Lord Jesus. It was the Woman's Acclamation,
Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps that gave thee suck: True,
said Christ; but that Blessing extends only to one: I will tell you how many
are Blessed, and rather Blessed; yea, Verse. 28.
rather Blessed are they that hear God's Word, and keep it: Blessed are they
that so incarnate the written Word by doing it, as the Blessed Virgin gave
Flesh to the Eternal Word by bearing it; those that hear and keep God's Word,
are they that Travel in Birth again, until Christ be formed in them. Gal. 41.9.
Hearing, they Receive the Immortal Seed of the Word, by a firm Purpose of
doing they conceive, by a longing Desire they quicken, by an earnest.
Endeavourr they travel, and when the Work is wrought, then have they incarnate
the Word, and Christ is formed in them. In this Respect was Mary ^lessed; and I
make no question, but in this Respect also the Angel calls her Blessed, and
Elizabeth calls her Blessed, and Simeon calls her Blessed, and She calls her
self Blessed, and all Generations call her Blessed, and God Himself calls and
makes her Blessed; yea, as Paul said, Comes this Blessedness on the
Circumcision only? so, comes this Blessedness on the Virgin only? No, Romans
4.9. Mat. 5.3, 4, 5. Psalm. 32.2.
even Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, Blessed are they that mourn, and Blessed
are the Meek; and Blessed are they, whose Sins are not imputed. Even these has
God blessed with Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places; and these shall Christ
entertain with a Come ye Blessed of My Father.

Luke 1.29.
3. This Virgin is Troubled at this Salute. She might well be troubled; For, 1.
If it had been but a Man that had come in so suddenly, when she expected none;
or so secretly, when she had no other Company; or so strangely, the Doors being
probably shut; she had cause to be troubled: How much more, when the shining
Glory of the Angel so heightened the Astonishment? 2. Her Sex was more subject
to fear: If Zachary were amazed with the sight of this Angel, How much more the
Virgin? We flatter our selves how well we could endure such Visions; but there
is a difference betwixt our Faith, and our Senses; to apprehend here the
Presence of God by Faith, this goes down sweetly: But should a Glorious Angel
appear among us, it would amaze us all. But for this, the Angel comforts her;
Verse. 30.
Fear not Mary, for thou have found Favor with God. The Troubles of Holy Minds
ever end in Peace or Comfort; Joy was the Errand of the Angel, and not Terror;
and therefore, suddenly he revives her Spirit with a cheerful Excitation: Fear
not; q. d. Let those fear who know they are in Displeasure, or know not they
are gracious: Thine happy Estate calls for Confidence, and that Confidence
calls for Joy: What should they fear, that are favored of Him at whom the
Devil's Tremble? O Mary! How should Joy but enter into thy Heart, out of whose
Womb shall come Salvation? I question, not but these very words revived the
Virgin: What remote Corner of her Soul was there, into which these Beams of
Consolation did not shi^e?

Luke 1.31, 32, 33.
4. Here is the Foundation of her Comfort, and our Happiness; Behold, thou shall
Conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call His Name Jesus.
Never was Mortal Creature thus honored, that her Womb should yield that
Flesh, which was personally united to the Godhead; that she should bear Him
that upholds the World. There Is one VVonder in the Conception, another in the
Fruit; both are mavelous: but the latter, I take it, is more Mysterious, and
fuller of Admiration; the Fruit of the Womb is Jesus, a Savior, the Son of
the Highest; a King, God shall give Him a Throne, and He shall Reign for ever;
for of His Kingdom there shall be no End Here was a Son, and such a Son as the
World never had before; and here was the Ground of Mary's Joy: How could she
but rejoice, to hear what her Son should be before He was? Surely, never was
any Mother so glad of her Son Born, as this Virgin was of her Son before He was
Conceived.

The Ground of this Joy lay more especially in that Name Jesus. Here
Christians! Here is the Object that you are to Look unto. The first Title that
the Angel gives our Savior, it is Jesus, a Savior. O come! let us dwell a
little here: Without Jesus we had never known God our Friend; and without
Jesus, God had never known us for any other than His Enemies. This Name Jesus
is better to us, than all the Titles of God: Indeed there is Goodness and
Greatness enough in the Name Jehovah; but we merited so little Good, and
demerited so much Evil, that in it alone there had been small Comfort for us;
but in the Name Jesus there is Comfort, and with the Name Jesus there is
Comfort in the Name of God. In old times, God was known by His Names of Power,
and of Majesty, and of His Nature; but His Name of Mercy was reserved till now,
when God did purpose to pour out the whole Treasure of his Mercy, by the
Mediation of his Son. And as this Name is exalted above all Names; so are we to
exalt his Mercy above all his Works. O it is an useful Name! In all Depths,
Distresses, Miseries, Perplexities, we beseech God by the Name of Jesus, to
make good his own Name, not to bear it for naught; but as He is a Savior, so
to save us: And this is our Comfort, that God will never so remember our
wretched Sins, as to forget His own Blessed Name; and especially this Name
Jesus. O it is the Highest, the Dearest, the Sweetest Name to us of all the
Names of God.

The reason of this Name was given by the Angel to Joseph: Matthew. 1*21.
Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for He shall save His People from their Sins.
But why from their Sins? We seem rather willing to be saved from Poverty,
Ignominy, Plague, Prison, Death, Hell, the Devil. Sin is a thing that troubles
but a few: O how few! how very few be there, that break their sleep for their
Sins? Alas, alas! Sin (if we understand) is the very worst of Evils: There is
no Poverty but Sin, there is no Shame but Sin, there is no Plague to that of
Sin; there is no Prison, but that Prison is a Paradise without Sin; there is no
Death that has any Sting in it, but for Sin; The Sting of Death is Sin, says
the Apostle; take out the Sting, 1 Cor. 15.56.
and you may put the Serpent in your Bosom: Nay, I Will say more, there is no
Hell, but for Sin; Sin first kindled the Fire of Hell, Sin fuels it; take away
Sin, and that tormenting Flame goes out. And for the Devil; Sin is his
Instrument, whereby he works all mischief: How comes a Man to be a slave to
Satan, but by Sin? But for Sin, the Devil had no Business in the World; but for
Sin he could never hurt a Soul.

What abundance of Benefits are here in one word; He shall save His People from
their Sins? There is no Evil incident to Man, but it cease to be Evil when
Sin is gone. If Jesus take away Sin, he does bless our very Blessings, and
sanctify our very Afflictions: He fetches Peace out of Trouble, Riches out of
Poverty, Honor out of Contempt, Liberty out of Bondage; He pulls out the Sting
of Death, puts out the Fire of Hell: As all Evils are wrapped up in Sin; so he
that saves us from Sin, he saves us from all Evils whatsoever.

But, Is not Christ as precious a Name as Jesus is? I answer, No, For, 1.
Christ is not the Name of God: God as he is God, cannot be anointed; but Jesus
is the Name of God, and that wherein He more especially delights. 2. Christ is
Communicated to others; Princes are called Christ's; but Jesus is proper to
Himself: There is no Savior but He. 3. Christ is anointed; To what End, but to
be a Savior? Jesus is therefore the End, and the End is always above the
Means. -- Why? this is that Jesus, the Son of God's Love, the Author of our
Salvation, In whom alone God is well pleased; and whom the Angel published
before He was Conceived: Thou shall Conceive, and bring Forth a Son, and shall
call His Name Jesus.

SECT. II. Of the Conception of Christ.
2. THe Conception of Christ, was the Conclusion of the Angel's Message: No
sooner had the Virgin said, Be it to me according to Thy Word; but according to
that Word it was: immediately the Holy Ghost over-shadowed her, and Forms our
Savior in her Womb. Now Christians! Now was the Time of Love; especially, if
we relate to His Conception and Birth: Well may we say, Now was it that the Day
brake up, that the Sun arose, that Darkness vanished, that Wrath and Anger gave
place to Favor and Salvation: Now was it, that Free Grace came down from
Heaven, Thousands of Angels waiting on her; the very Clouds part (as it were)
to give her way; the Earth springs to welcome her; the Floods clap their Hands
for Joy; the Heavenly Hosts sing as she goes along, Glory to God in the
Highest, Peace upon Earth, Good Will toward Men: Truth and Righteousness go
before her, Peace and Prosperity follow after her, Pity and Mercy waits on
either Hand; and when she first sets Foot on the Earth, she cries a Jesus, a
Savior! Hear ye Sons of Men! The Lord has sent me down to bring you News of a
Jesus! Grace and Peace be unto you: I will live with you in this World, and you
shall live with me in the World to come. O here was Blessed News! Why, this is
Gospel, pure Gospel; this is the Glad Tidings: Free Grace proclaims a Jesus;
and a Jesus is made up (as it were) all of Free Grace. O what Eternal Thanks do
we owe to the Eternal God! If there had not been a Jesus (to borrow that
Expression) made all of Grace, of Grace it self, we could never have had
Dealing with God. O how may we say with the Angels; Glory to God: Blessed be
God, for Jesus Christ!

But in this Conception of Christ are so many Wonders, that e're we begin to
speak them, 1 Timothy 3.16.
we may stand amazed: Without Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness;
God manifested in the Flesh. Say, Is it not a Wonder, a Mystery, a great
Mystery, a great Mystery without all Controversy, that the Son of God should
be made of a Woman, even made of that Woman which was made by Himself? Is it
not a Wonder, that her Womb then, and that the Heavens now, should contain Him,
whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain? Concerning this Conception of
Christ, I shall speak a little, and but a little: What Man can conceive much of
this Conception, which was a Conception without Help of Man? Luke 1.35.
Our greatest Light we borrow from the Angel, who describes it thus; The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall over-shadow
thee.

Out of these Words, observe, 1. The Agent or Efficient. 2. The Fruit or Effect.

1. The Agent or Efficient Cause of Christ's Conception, is the Holy Ghost.
This agrees with that Speech of the Angel to Joseph; Matthew. 1.20.
That which is Conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost. Here it may be demanded,
why the Conception of Christ should be ascribed to the Holy Ghost, which is
common to all the Actions in the Trinity? I answer, Not to exclude the rest;
but first, to show it was the free Grace of God, which is often termed the
Holy Ghost. 2. Because the Father and the Son effected it by the Holy Ghost, so
was it his Work immediately, and in a special manner: Good reason have we to be
thankful to all the Three Persons; to the Father, for ordaining this Garment;
to the Holy Ghost, for weaving it; to the Son, for wearing it; to the whole
Deity, for clothing us with it, and making us Righteous by it -- Neither yet
is the Holy Ghost Christ's Father; he did not beget Him, he did not form Him,
he did not minister Matter from his own Substance whereof Christ was made; but
took a part of Humane Nature from the Virgin, and of that he made the Body of
Christ within her. Away with all gross Opinions, and old Heresies! This
Conception of Christ was not by any Carnal Effusion of Seminal Humor; but by
way of Manufacture, (i.) by Handiwork, or Operation, or Virtue of the
Holy Ghost; or else by the Energetical Command and Ordination of the
Holy Ghost, whereby that part of the Virgin's Blood, or Seed, whereof the Body
of Christ was to be framed, was so cleansed and sanctified, that in it there
should be neither Spot nor Stain of Original Pollution.

2. The Fruit or Effect was the Framing of Christ's Manhood, in which we may
observe the Matter and Manner. 1. For the Matter: Observe we the Matter of the
Body, and of the Soul of Christ. 1. The Matter of the Body of Christ, it was
the very Flesh and Blood of the Virgin: He was made of Woman, says the
Apostle, (i.) of the Flesh and Blood, Gal. 4.4. Romans 1.6.
and Substance of the Woman: And He was made of the Seed of David (says the
Apostle) according to the Flesh, otherwise He could not have been the Son of
David, according to the Flesh: And, if it be true which the Philosophers say,
That the Seed of the Man does not fall into the Substance of the Child, but
only does dispose the Seed of the Woman, (as a Workman frames and disposes
his Work) to make the same into the Form of a Man: Why then, I know not wherein
the Conception of Christ should differ in the Matter at all from our
Conception; save only in the Agent, or Worker of his Substance, who was the
Holy Ghost. 2. The Matter or Substance of the Soul of Christ, was not derived
from the Soul of the Virgin, as a part thereof; but it was made as the Souls of
other Men be, (i.) of nothing, by the Power of God; and so infused into the
Body by the Hand of God: But of these Things (of His Body and Soul, and Humane
Nature) we shall speak more largely in the next Section.

2. For the manner of forming Christ's humane Nature, it was miraculous. The
Angel ascribes two actions to the Holy Ghost in this great work; the one to
come upon the Virgin, the other to overshadow her; by the first is signified
the extraordinary work of the Holy Ghost in fashioning the humane Nature of
Christ; as it was said of Sampson, Judge. 14.6.
The spirit of the Lord came upon him, (i.e.) the Holy Ghost inspired him with
an extraordinary strength; so the Spirit of the Lord came upon her (i.e.) the
holy Ghost wrought in her in an extraordinary way. As for instance; in ordinary
generation our substance and parts are framed successively by degrees, as
first, the seminal humor becomes an Embryo, then a body in organical; then are
fashioned the Liver, Heart, and Brain, and then the rest one after another? and
it is at least forty days before the body of a Child be fully formed: now it
was otherwise with the Body of Christ; for in the very instant of his
conception, he was made perfect in Body and Soul, void of Sin, and full of
Grace; in the very instant of his Conception he was perfectly framed, and
instantly united unto the eternal Word, perfect God and perfect Man. Surely
this was extraordinary, and this is the property of the Holy Ghost subito
operari, to work instantly and perfectly; as soon as ever the flesh was
conceived, it was presently united, Aug'l De fido ad Pet. c. 18.
and made the flesh of the Son of God; it was suddenly made, perfectly made,
holily made.

The second action ascribed to the holy Ghost, is adumbration, or overshadowing
of the Virgin; this teaches us that we should not search overmuch into this
great Mystery. Alas it is to high for us; if the course of ordinary generation
be a secret, how past all comprehension, is this extraordinary operation? the
holy Ghost did cast a shadow over the Virgin, and withal a shadow over this
Mystery? why should we seek a clear light where God himself will have a shadow?
Chrysostom. hom. 5.
I know the Word was made flesh (says Chrysostom) but how he was made I know
not.

1. In way of confutation, this word conception is the bane of diverse heresies.
1. That Manichee, who held he had no true body; if so, as one says well, that
had been Virgo decipiet, not concipiet, rather a deceiving of us, than a
conceiving of him. 2. That of the Valentinian, revived lately in the
Anabaptists, who hold, that he had a true body, but made in heaven, and sent
into the Virgin here on earth; and if so, that had been virgo recipiet, not
concipiet, rather a receiving, than conceiving; yet I cannot but wonder how
confidently the Anabaptists tell us, that the Flesh of Christ came down from
heaven, and passed through the Virgin Mary, as water through a Conduit-pipe,
without taking any substance from her: Their objections are raised out of these
Texts; --

1. No man ascends into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, John. 3.13.
even the son of man which is in heaven. I answer, first, this speech must be
understood, firstly in respect of the Godhead, which may be said in some sort
to descend, in that it was made manifest in the Manhood here on earth. 2. This
speech may be understood truly of the whole person of Christ, to whom the
properties of each Nature (in respect of the communication of properties) may
be fitly ascribed: but this does no way prove that this flesh which he assumed
on earth, descended from heaven. 1 Co. 15.47, 48


2. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from
heaven. -- heavenly. I answer, 1. This holds forth that Christ was
heavenly-minded, as sometimes he told the Jews, you are from below: I am from
above: you are of the World, I am not of this World: Christ was not
worldly-minded, or swayed with the lusts of the Flesh, John. 8.23. John. 15.19.
or any way earthly affected: as sometimes he could tell his Apostles, ye are
not of the world: so much more might he say of himself, that he was not of this
world, but his Conversation was in heaven. Or, 2. This holds forth that Christ
was heavenly, or from heaven, in respect of the glorious qualities which he
received after his Resurrection: and not in respect of the substance of his
Body: many glorious qualities was Christ endowed with after he was raised (I
shall not now dispute them) which he had not before: and in respect of these he
might be called heavenly, or from heaven. 3. This holds forth that Christ also
was in some sort heavenly, or from heaven in his humane nature, in that the
humane nature was united to the divine, and withal in that the humane nature
was formed by the holy Ghost; so John's Baptism is said to be from heaven:
though neither he, nor the water wherewith he Baptized, descended from heaven:
but because he received it from God who is in heaven. Christ was conceived (as
you heard) by the Holy Ghost, and in that regard his generation was divine and
heavenly, or from heaven.

2. In way of comfort and encouragement, Christ was thus conceived that he
might sanctify our conceptions; as the first Adam was the root of all
Corruption; so is the second Adam the root of all sanctification: Christ went
as far to cleanse us, as ever Adam did to defile us; what? were our very
Conceptions defiled by Adam? in the first place Christ takes course for this;
you see he is conceived by the Holy Ghost: and he was not idle whilst he was in
the womb; for even then and there he ea^e out the Core of corruption, that
cleaved close to our defiled natures; so that now God will not account evil of
that nature, that is become the nature of his own dear Son. O the
Condescentions of our Jesus! O that ever he would be conceived in the womb of a
Virgin! O that he would run through the Contumelies of our fordid Nature; that
he would nor refuse that which we our selves in some sort are ashamed of! Some
think it a reason why the Anabaptists and some others run into such Fancies,
and deny this Conception of Christ, only to decline those soul indignities (as
they take them) for the great God of heaven to undergo: but certainly this was
for us, and for our sakes; and therefore far be it from us to honor him the
less, because he laid down his honor for our sakes; no, no, let us honor him
more, and love him more; the lower he came for us, the dearer and dearer let
him be unto us: consider in all these transactions Christ was carrying on the
great work of our salvation, otherwise he had never been conceived, never had
assumed to his Person humane Nature, never had been Man.

SECT. III. Of the Duplicity of Natures in Christ.
Isa. 9.6. Gal. 4.4.
3. THe duplicity of Natures in Christ appears, in that he was truly God and
truly Man. To us a Child is born, says the Prophet; there is a Nature humane;
and he shall be called the Mighty God; there is a Nature divine: God sent his
Son, says the Apostle, therefore truly God: and this Son made of a Woman,
therefore truly Man: one would have thought this truth would never have come
into controversy in our days; but these are the last days, and that may take
off the wonder; In the last days shall come perilous times. 2 Timothy 3.1.
-- Men shall resist the Truth, etc. In the last days I know there will be
abundance of Truth revealed. Zech. 12.8.
The Knowledge of the Lord shall be as the waters that cover the Sea, and every
Child shall be as David. And the Book that was sealed, must be opened, Dan 12.4.
and knowledge shaall be increased; but Satan even then will be busy to sow his
Tares, as God is in sowing of his Wheat; then is Satan active to communicate
errors, when he sees God begin to discover truths; he hopes in the heat of the
Market to vent his own wares; and I believe this is one reason why now the
Devil sets on foot so many dangerous errors, that so he may prejudice the
hearts of God's People in the receiving and entertaining of many Glorious
truths. But that we may not pass over such a Fundamental Error as this; some
saying with Martian, that he is God, but not man; and others with Arrius, that
he is man, but not God; I shall therefore confirm this truth of the two Natures
of Christ against the Adversaries of both sides.

And 1. That Christ is true God, both apparent scriptures, and unanswerable
Reasons drawn from scriptures, do plainly evince.

1. The scriptures call him God. In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, Dan. 12.4. John. 1.1. Heb. 1.8. John. 20 28. Acts. 20.8. 1 John
3.16. 1 John. 5.20 1 Timothy 3.16.
and the word was God. -- And unto the son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for
ever. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God; and take heed
to your selves, and to all the flock -- To feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own Blood. And hereby perceive we the Love of God, because
he laid down his life for us. And we know that the Son of God is come. -- This
is the true God, and eternal Life. And without Controversy great is the
Mystery of Godliness, God was manifested in the Flesh.

2. Unanswerable Reasons drawn from Scriptures, prove him God: Thus it appears.
--

1. From those incommunicable properties of the Diety, which are properly
ascribed unto him: He is eternal as God, Rev. 1.17. He is infinite as God, Mat
28.20. He is omniscient as God, Mat. 9 4. He is omnipotent as God. He that
comes from above is above all. John. 3.41. Phil. 3.21. Rev. 1.18.
-- He is able to subdue all things unto himself. -- He has the keys of hell
and death.

2. From these Relations he has with God, as to be the only begotten Son of
God, John 1.18. The Image of the Father, 2 Cor. 4.4. Col. 1.15.

3. From those Acts ascribed to him which are only agreeable to the divine
Nature; as, to be the Author of our Election, John 13.18. To know the Secrets
of our Hearts, Ma. 9.4. To hear the prayers of his people, John 14.14. To judge
the quick and the dead, John 5.22. And thus he creates as God, John 1.4. He
commands as God, Mat. 8.26. He forgives as God, Mat. 9.6. He sanctifies as God,
John 1.12. He glorifies as God, John 10.28.

4. From all those acknowledgments given to him by the Saints, which are only
proper unto God; and thus he is believed on as God, John 3.18. He is loved as
God, 1 Cor. 16.22. He is obeyed as God, Mat. 17.5. He is prayed to as God, Acts
7.59. He is praised as God, Rev. 5.13. He is adored as God, Heb. 1.6. Phil.
2.10. Surely all these are strong demonstrations, and prove clearly enough,
that Christ Jesus is God. But why was it requisite that our Savior should be
God? I answer, 1. Because none can save Souls, nor satisfy for sin, but God
alone; There is none (says the Psalmist) that can by any means redeem his
Brother, or give a ransom for him. Psalm. 49.7.15.
-- but God will redeem my soul from the power of Hell. 2. Because the
satisfaction which is made for sin, must be infinitely meritorious: an infinite
wrath cannot be appeased, but by an infinite merit; and hence our Savior must
needs be God, to the end, that his obedience and sufferings might be of
infinite price and worth -- 3 Because the burden of God's wrath cannot be
endured, and run through by a finite Creature: Christ therefore must be God,
that he might abide the burden, and sustain the Manhood by his divine power. 4.
Because the enemies of our salvation were too strong for us: How could any
creature overcome Satan, Death, Hell, Damnation? Ah! this required the power of
God; there is none but God that could destroy him that had the power of death,
that is the Devil.

2. As Christ is God, so he is true man; he was born as man, and bred as man,
and fed as man, and slept as man, and wept as man, and sorrowed as man, and
suffered as man, and died as man; and therefore he is man.

But more particularly. 1. Christ had a humane body; Heb. 10.5.
Wherefore when he came into the world, he said, Sacrifice and Offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me. And when the Apostles thought
they had seen a Phantasm, or a Spirit, he said unto them, Handle me and see,
because a Spirit has no flesh and bones, as you see me have. Luke 24.39.
Here Is a truth clear as the Son; and yet, O wonder! Some in our times (as
Cochlaeus witnesses) do now avouch, that he had but an imaginary body, an
aerial body, a phantasm, only in show, and no true body.

2. Christ had an humane reasonable Soul. My Soul is heavy unto Death, said
Christ; Mat. 26.38. Luke 23.46.
and again, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Surely (says
Nazianzen) either he had a Soul, or he will not save a Soul. The Arrians
opposed this, saying, Christ had no humane Soul, but only a living flesh;
because the Evangelist says that the Word was made flesh; but this is a
Synechdoche, John. 1.14.
very usual in Scripture, to put the part for the whole; and signifies as much
as that he had said, the Word was made man. I know some reasons are rendered why
the Evangelist says, he was made flesh, rather than he was made man; as, 1. To
show what part of Christ was made of his Mother; not his Deity, nor his Soul,
but only his flesh. 2. To express the greatness of Gods Love, who for our sakes
would be contented to be made the vilest thing, flesh, which is compared to
grass. Isa. 40.6.
All flesh is grass. 3. To show the greatness of Chirsts humility, in that he
would be named by the meanest name, and basest part of man; the soul is
excellent, but the flesh is base. 4. To give us some confidence of his love and
favor toward us, because our flesh, which was the part most corrupted, is now
united to the Son of God.

3. Christ had all the properties that belong either to the soul or body of a
man: nay more than so, Christ had all the infirmities of out Nature, sin only
excepted: I say the infirmities of our nature, as cold, and heat, and hunger,
and thirst, and weariness, and weakness, and pain, and the like; but I cannot
say that Christ took upon him all our personal infirmities; infirmities are
either natural, common to all men, or personal; and proper to some men; as to
be born lame, blind, diseased; as to be affected with Melancholy, Infirmity,
Deformity: how many deformed Creatures have we amongst us? Christ was not thus;
his Body was framed by the holy Ghost of the purest Virgins Blood; and
therefore I question not, it was proportioned in a most equal symetry, and
correspondency of parts; He was fairer than the sons of men; his countenance
carried in it an hidden veiled star -- like brightness (says Jerome) which
being but a little revealed, it so ravished his Disciples hearts, that at the
first sight thereof they left all, and followed him: and it so astonished his
enemies, that they stumbled and fell to the ground. So then he had not our
personal infirmities, but only our natural; and good reason, for indeed he took
not upon him an humane person, but only an humane nature united to the person
of his Godhead.

But why was it requisite that our Savior should be Man? I answer, 1. Because
our Savior must suffer and die for our sins, which the Godhead could not do.
2. Because our Savior must perform obedience to the Law, which was not
agreeable to the Lawgiver; the Godhead certainly is free from all manner of
subjection. 3. Because our Savior must satisfy the justice of God in the same
nature wherein it was offended; For since by man came death, 1 Cor. 5 21.
by man came also the resurrection of the dead. 4. Because by this means we
might have free access to the Throne of Grace, and might find help in our
necessities, having such an High Priest as was in all things tempted like unto
us, and was acquainted with our infirmities in his own person, Heb. 4.15. --
5.2.

SECT. IV. Of the distinction of the two Natures of Christ.
4. A Real distinction of these two Natures is evident. 1. In regard of
essence, the Godhead cannot be Manhood, nor can the Manhood be the Godhead. 2.
In regard of proprieties, the Godhead is most wise, just, omnipotent, yea
wisdom, justice, omnipotency it self, and so is not the Manhood, neither can it
be. 3. They have distinct Wills; Luke 22.42.
Not my Will, but thy Will be done, O Father! Plainly differencing the Will of
a Creature, from the Will of a Creator. 4. The very actions in the work of
Redemption are indeed inseparable, John. 10.18.
and yet distinguishable; I lay down my life, and take it up again: to lay it
down was the action of man, not of God; and to take it up, was the action of
God, not of man; in these respects we say each nature remains in it self
entire, without any conversion, composition, commixtion, or confusion: there is
no conversion of one into the other, as when he changed water into wine; no
composition of both, no abolition of either, no confusion at all. It is easy to
observe this real distinction of his two natures from first to last; as first,
He was conceived as others, and so he was man; but he was conceived by the holy
Ghost, as never man was; and so he is God. 2. He was born as others, and so he
was man; but he was born of a Virgin, as never man was; and this speaks him a
God. 3. He was crucified, died, and was buried, and so he was man; but he rose
again from the dead, ascended into Heaven, and from thence shall come at last
to judge the quick and the dead, and so he is God. -- Or if from the Apostles
Symbol we go to the Gospel, which speaks both natures at large; we find there,
1. He was born of his Mother, and wrapped in swadling-clouts, as being a man;
but the Star shines over him, and the wise men adore him, as being a God. 2. He
was Baptized in Jordan, as being a man; but the holy Ghost from heaven
descended upon him, as being a God. 3. He is tempted of Satan; as being a man;
but he overcame Satan, and dispossessed Devils, as being a God. 4. He
traveled, and was thirsty, and hungry, and weary, as being a man; but he
refreshed the weary, and fed the hungry, and gave drink, even water of life to
the thirsty, as being a God. 5. He slept in the Ship, and his Disciples awoke
him, as being a man; but he rebuked the winds, and stilled the raging of the
tumultuous Seas, as being a God. 6. He was poor and needy, had not an house to
put his head in, as being a man; but he was, and is rich and mighty, and cannot
be contained in the heaven of heavens, as being a God. 7. He was sorrowful and
sad, he wept and he prayed, as being a man; but he comforts the sorrowful, and
hears the prayers of all his Saints, as being a God. 8. He was whipped, and
rent, and torn, and crucified, as being a man: but he rent the vail of the
Temple, and caused the Sun to hide his face for shame, when he was crucified,
as being a God. 9. He cried out on the Cross, Eloi, Eloi, lamasabacthani, as
being a man; but he could say to the Thief, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise, as being a God. 10. He died and was buried, and lay in the grave, as
being a man; but he overcame death, and destroyed the Devil, and raised up
himself to life again, as being a God. 11. After his Resurrection he appeared
to his Disciples, and ate with them, and talked with them, as being a man; but
he provided meat, and vanished out of their sight, as being a God. 12. He
ascended into heaven, and the heavens now contain him, as he is Man; but he
sustains the Heavens, and commands all therein, and rides on the same, as being
a God. Thus we see all along two real distinct natures still continuing in
Christ; God being become Man, the Deity being abolished, but the humane nature
was adjoined; according to the old Distich, Sum quod eram, nec eram quod sum,
etc. I am that I was, but I was not that I am. You will say, How then is it
said the word was made flesh, or God became Man? I answer, one thing may become
another either by way of change, as when the water was turned into wine; but
thus was not Christ: the Godhead was for a time concealed, but it was never
cancelled: or one thing may become another either by way of union, as when one
substance is adjoined unto another, and yet is not transferred or changed into
the nature of the other; thus a Soldier putting on his Armor, is an armed
man; or a man wearing on his Garments, is no more a naked, but a clothed man;
and yet the Armor and the Soldier, the man and his Apparel are distinct
things: and thus was it with Christ; the flesh is said to be deified, and the
Deity is said to be incarnate; not by the conversion of either into the nature
of the other, but by assuming, and adjoining the humane nature to the divine;
and yet still the humane nature, and the divine are distinct things; both the
natures in Christ do remain entire, and inconfused; indeed the humanity is much
magnified by the divinity; but the divinity is nothing altered by the humanity:
Thus much for the distinction of his two Natures.

SECT. V. Of the Union of the two Natures of Christ in one and the same Person.
5. THe Union of two Natures of Christ, in one and the self-same person, is
that great wonder which now we must speak of as we are able; but alas! how
should we speak this union, and not be confounded in our selves? It is a great
mystery, a secret, a wonder; many wonders have been since the beginning of the
world; but all the wonders that ever were, must give place to this, and in
respect thereof, cease to be wonderful: neither the Creation of all things out
of nothing, nor the restoration of all things into their perfect being; I mean
neither the first work, nor the last work of God in this world (though most
admirable pieces) may be compared with this. This Union of the two Natures of
Christ into one person, is the highest pitch (if any thing may be said highest
in that which is infinite) of God's wisdom, goodness, power, and glory; well
therefore, said the Angel to Mary, The power of the highest shall overshadow
thee: and if God did overshadow this Mystery with his own Vail, How should we
presume with the men of Bethshemesh, to look into it? Christians! If you will
needs put it to the question, How that wonderful connection of two so
infinitely differing natures, in the unity of one person should be effected? I
must answer you with the Apostle, Who is sufficient for these things? Certainly
these are the things which the Angels desire to stoop and look into: It is an
Inquisition fitter for an Angelical intelligence, than for our shallow
capacity; 1 Pet. 1.12.
and yet as Moses could not choose but wonder, though he must not draw nigh to
the Bush burning with fire, and not consumed: so though we dare not draw too
nigh to see this great sight, How poor dust and ashes should be assumed into
the unity of God's own person, and that in the midst of those everlasting
burnings the Bush should remain unconsumed, Isa. 33.14.
and continue fresh and green for evermore; yet what does hinder, but we may
stand aloof off, and wonder at it? this is one piece of our duty, to recite all
the long-fore-passed acts, and benefits of God (as well as we may; Scripture
still going along) that thereby we may admire and adore, and express our Love,
and Thankfulness unto God.

For the untying of this Knot, I cannot but wonder, what a world of questions
have been tossed in Schools. As,

1. Whether the union of the Word incarnate was in the Nature? -- 2. Whether
the union of the Word incarnate was in the Person? -- 3. Whether the humane
Nature was united to the Word by way of accident? -- 4. Whether the union of
the divine Nature be something cremated? -- 5. Whether the union of the Word
incarnate be the same with assumption? -- 6. Whether the union of the two
Natures of Christ be the chief of all unions? -- 7. Whether the union of the
two Natures of Christ was made by Grace? -- 8. Whether it was convenient for
the divine person to assume a created Nature? -- 9. Whether a divine Person
could assume the Nature humane? -- 10. Whether more persons divine could assume
one Nature humane? -- 11. Whether it was more convenient that the person of the
Son should assume humane nature, than any other of the persons in the Godhead?
-- 12. Whether the humane nature was more assumptible by the Son of God than
any other nature? -- 13. Whether the Son of God did not assume the person of
man? -- 14. Whether the Son of God assumed the humane nature in all its
Individuals, or as abstracted from all Individuals? -- 15. Whether the Son of
God assumed a true Body, Soul, and all its Intellects? -- 16. Whether the Son
of God in respect of nature, though not of time, did first assume the Soul, and
then the Body of man? -- 17. Whether the Son of God in humane nature assumed
all the defects of the Body? -- 18. Whether the Son of God assumed all the
defects of the Soul of man? -- 19. Whether by Virtue of this union those things
which are agreeable to the Son of man, may be predicated of the Son of God, and
e converso? -- 20. Whether Christ be one or two? and whether in Christ be one
or two Wills? one or more Operations? These and many other like Questions are
raised, that in their discussions make up large Volums; but I shall leave them
all to the Schools.

In the explication of this union, that which I shall insist on (as the most
necessary for our understanding) is, 1. The Union it self. 2. The Effects, or
Benefits of it.

1. For the Union it self we shall discuss, 1. Of the sorts of Union, and of
what sort this is. 2. Of the very thing it self, wherein this union consists.
3. Of the Scriptural Texts that confirm this union. 4. Of the similitudes that
hold sorth this union. 5. Of the person assuming; and of the nature assumed;
and of the reason of this way. And of these, as briefly as I may: I would
rather say much in a little, than a little in much.

1. Union is of diverse sorts, as natural and mystical, accidental and
substantial, essential and integral. But I shall pass these by; and speak only
of these sorts. 1. When one of the things united is turned into the other; as
when a drop of water is poured into a vessel of Wine. 2. When both the things
united are changed in nature and essence; as when the Elements are united, to
make mixed or compounded bodies. 3. When there is no change of things united,
but the constitution of a third nature out of them both, as is the union of the
soul and body. 4. When there is neither a change of natures united, nor
constitution of a third out of them both; but only the founding, settling, and
staying of the one of the things united in the other, and the drawing of it
into the unity of the personal being, or subsistence of the other: so the
Branch of a Tree being put upon the stock of another Tree, it is drawn into the
unity of the subsistence of that Tree into which it is put: and whereas if it
had been set in the Ground, it would have grown as a separate Tree in it self;
now it grows in the Tree into which it is graffed, and pertains to the
unity of it: and this kind of union does, of all others, most perfectly
resemble the personal union of the two Natures of God, and man in Christ;
wherein the nature of man, that would have been a person in it self, if it had
been left to it self, is drawn into the unity of the divine person, and
subsisteth in it, being prevented from subsisting in it self, by this personal
union and assumption.

2. For the thing wherein this union of two natures consists; we say that this
union consists in that dependence of the humane nature on the person of the
Word, and in that communicating of the person, or substance of the Word, with
the humane nature that is assumed; so that it is an hypostatical or personal
union; that is, such an union as that both natures do make but one person of
Christ: for the better understanding of this, we must consider what the
difference is betwixt Nature and Person, and what makes an individual Nature to
be a Person: briefly thus; To be this or that, we say, is an individual nature;
to be this or that, in or for it self, is a person or subsistence; to be this
or that, in or for another, is to pertain to the person or subsistence of
another. Now amongst those created things which are naturally apt to make a
personal being, or to subsist in and for themselves, there is a very great
difference: for, --

1. Some things of this kind may become parts of another more entire thing of
the same kind: as we see in all those things wherein every part has the same
nature that the whole has; as every drop of water is water, and being lest to
it self, it is a subsistence in it self, and has its quality, nature, and
being in, and for it self; but if it be joined to a greater quantity of water,
it has now no being, quantity, nor operation, but in and for that greater
quantity of water, into which it is poured.

2. Other things of this kind cannot naturally put themselves into the unity of
any other thing; and yet by the help of some foreign cause they may be united;
as the branch of a Tree of one kind (which put into the ground, would be an
entire, distinct Tree in it self) may by the hand of a man be put into the
unity of a Tree of another kind; and so grow, move, and bear fruit, not
distinctly in and for it self, but jointly in and for that Tree into which it
is planted.

3. Other things of this kind cannot by force of natural causes, nor by the
help of any foreign thing, ever become parts of any other created thing or
pertain to the unity of the substance of any such thing; as the nature of man,
and the nature of all living things; and yet by divine and supernatural
working, it may be drawn into the unity of the subsistence of any of the
Persons of the blessed Trinity, wherein the fullness of all being, and the
Perfection of all created things, is in a more eminent sort than in themselves;
for though all created things have their own being, yet seeing God is nearer to
them than they are to themselves, and they are in a better fort in him than
they are in themselves, there is no question but that they may be prevented and
staid from being in and for themselves, and caused to be in, and for one of the
divine persons of the blessed Trinity.

So that as one drop of water, that formerly subsisted in it self, if it be
poured into a vessel containing a greater quantity, it becomes one in
subsistence with the greater quantity of water; and as a branch of a Tree, that
being set in the ground, and left to it self, would be an entire and
independent tree, becomes one in subsistence with that tree into which it is
grafted; so the individual nature of man assumed into the unity of one of the
Persons of the Blessed Trinity, it loses that kind of being, that naturally
left to it self, it would have had, and it becomes one with the Person; for now
it is not in, and for it self, but has got a new Relation of dependence and
being in another.

But you will say, all the Creatures in the world have their being in God, and
dependence on God; and therefore all Creatures, as well as Man, may pertain to
the Person, or Subsistence of God.

I Answer, it is not a general being in, and depend^nce on God, but a strict
dependence on man's part, and a Communicating of the subsistence on Gods part
that makes up this union. Hence we say that there are four degrees of the
presence of God in his Creatures; the first is his general presence, whereby he
preserves the substances of all Creatures, and gives unto them to live, and to
move, and to have their being; Acts. 7.28.
and this extends it self to all Creatures good and bad.

The Second degree is the presence of Grace, whereby he does not only preserve
the substance of his Creature, but also gives Grace unto it; and this agrees to
the Saints and Gods People on earth. The third degree is the presence of glory
peculiar to the Saints and Angels in heaven, and hereby God does not only
preserve their substances, and give them plenty of his Grace, but he also
admits them into his Glorious presence, so as they may behold him face to face.
The fourth and last degree is that whereby the Godhead of the Son is present
with, and dwells in the Manhood, giving unto it in some part his own
subsistence, whereby it comes to pass that this Manhood assumed is proper to
the Son, and cannot be the Manhood of the Father, or of the Holy Ghost, or of
any Creature whatsoever. And this is a thing so admirable and unspeakable, that
though we may find some similitudes, yet there cannot be found another example
hereof in all the World.

Hence it follows that in the Manhood of Christ, consisting of Body and Soul,
there is a Nature only, and not a Person; because it does not subsist alone as
other men, Peter, Paul and John do, but it wholly depends on the Person of the
Word into the unity whereof it is received; and this dependence of the humane
nature on the person of the Word, and the communicating of the Person or
subsistence of the Word with the humane nature, is the very thing it self
wherein this union consists.

3. For the Scriptural texts that confirm this Union, you see the Well is very
deep; but where is the Bucket? What texts of Scripture have we to confirm this
wonderful Union of two Natures in one Person? Amongst many I shall only cite
these; Mat. 16.13, 16.
--

When Christ asked his Apostles, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? --
Simon Peter answered, Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God: Now, if
but one Christ, then surely but one Person; and if the Son of man be the Son of
the Living God, then surely there are two natures in that one Person: Observe
how the Son of man, and the Son of God, very Man and very God, concenter in
Christ: as the Soul and the Body make but one man, so the Son of man and the
Son of God make but one Christ: Romans 1.3, 4.
Thou art Christ, says Peter, the Son of the Living God.

So Paul, speaking of Jesus the Son of God, he tells us, that he was made of
the seed of David according to the Flesh, and declared to be the Son of God
with power, according to the Spirit. 1. Made of the Seed of David; of the
substance of the Virgin, who was David's posterity. 2. Declared to be the Son of
God: not made the Son of God, as he was made the Son of Man; but declared to be
the Son of God: The word in the Original signifies a Declaration by a solemn
sentence or difinitive judgment. I will declare the Decree; the Lord has said
unto me, Thou art my Son. That which I point at, he is the Son of David, Psalm.
2.7.
(...) in respect of his Manhood; and he is the Son of God (...) in respect of
his Godhead; here be the two Natures; but i^ ^he words before, these two
natures make but one Son, Jesus Christ our Lord: and (...) ^^^ry words
themselves he is declared to be the Son of God; he does not say, Some (...)
two; but his Son Jesus Christ, first before, and then after; to show unto us,
th^^ ^^fore his making, so after his making, he is still but one Son, or one
person of the (...) ^^^tinct natures subsisting.

Col. 2.9.
To the same purpose is that same Text, In him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily; by the union of the divine nature with the humane in the unity
of his person, the Godhead dwells in Christ as the Soul in the Body: it
dwells in him bodily; not seemingly, but really, truly, and indeed; not
figuratively, and in a shadow, as he dwells in the Temple; not by power and
efficacy, as he dwells in all the Creatures; not by Grace, as in his People;
nor by Glory, as in the Saints above; but essentially, substantially,
personally, the humane nature being assumed into Union with the person of the
Word. Observe the passages; he in whom that fullness dwells, is the Person; that
fullness, which does so dwell in him, is the Nature; now there dwells in him not
only the fullness of the Godhead, but the fullness of the Manhood also; for we
believe him to be both perfect God, begotten of the substance of his Father
before all Worlds; and perfect man, made of the substance of this Mother in
this World; only he in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells, is one; and he
in whom the fullness of the Manhood dwells, is another; but he in whom the
fullness of both these natures dwells, is one and the same Immanuel, and
consequently one and the same person; in him, (i.) in his person dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead, and all the fullness of the Manhood: In him dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

4. For the similitudes that resemble, or set forth this mystery, many are
given: but for our better understanding, let us consider these few.

The first is of the soul and body, that make but one man: as the soul and body
are two distinct things, and of several natures: yet being united by the hand
of God, they make one Person: so the Godhead and Manhood are two distinct
things, and of several Natures: yet being united by the hand of God, they make
but one Person. Indeed herein is the similitude defective: first in that the
Soul and Body being imperfect natures, they concur to make one full and perfect
nature of a man: Secondly, in that the one of them is not drawn into the unity
of the substance of the other, but both depend on a third substance, which is
that of the whole.

The second is of Light and Sun: as after the Collection of, and Union of the
Light with the Body of the Sun, no man can pluck them asunder: nor does any man
call one part the Sun, and another part the Light: but both of them jointly
together, we call the Sun: even so after the Union of Flesh with that true
Light the Word, no man does call the Word apart to be one Son of God, and the
Son of Man another Son of God: but both of them jointly together, we call one
and the self-same Christ. I know in this similitude are mamy defectives: Justin
Martyr de recta confess. de Coessent. Trinit.
yet if hereby we be not altogether able to attain the truth of this great
Mystery, certainly we have herein a most excellent similitude, which will
greatly help, and contentedly suffice the godly and moderate searchers of this
divine truth.

The third is of a fiery and flaming Sword: as the subsistences of the Fire and
Sword are so nearly conjoined, that the operations of them for the most part
concur: for a fiery sword in cutting, burns, and in burning, cutteth: and we
may say of the whole that this fiery thing is a sharp piercing Sword, and that
this sharp piercing Sword is a fiery thing: even so in the union of the two
natures of Christ, there is a communication of properties from one of them to
the other, as shall be declared, if the Lord permit: only this similitude is
defective in this, in that the nature of the Iron is not drawn into the unity
of the subsistence of fire, nor is the nature of the fire drawn into the Unity
of the subsistence of Iron: so that we cannot say, this fire is Iron, or this
Iron is fire.

The fourth is of one man having two qualities, or accidental natures: as a man
that is both a Physician and a Divine; he is but one person, and yet there are
two natures concurring and meeting in that same one Person; so we may rightly
say of such a one, this Physician is a Divine, and this Divine is a Physician;
this Physician is happy in saving souls, and this Divine is careful in curing
bodies: even so is Christ both God and Man, and yet but one Christ; and in that
one Christ, according to the several natures, are denominations of either part;
as that this man is God, and this God is man; or that this man made the world:
and this God died upon the Cross: but in this similitude is this deffect, in
that the different natures are accidental, and not essential or substantial.

The fifth and last, is of the Branch and Tree into which it is engraffed; as
suppose a Vine-branch and an Olive Tree: now as this Olive Tree is but one, but
has two different natures in it, and so it bears two kinds of fruit: and yet
between the Tree and the Branch there is a composition, not hujus ex his, but
hujus ad hoc (i.e.) not of a third thing out of the two things united, but of
one of the two things united or adjoined to the other: even so Christ is one,
but he has two different natures, and in them he performs the different
actions pertaining to either of them: and yet between the different natures
(the Divine and Humane nature) there is a composition, not hujus ex his but
hujus ad hoc, not of a third nature arising out of these but of the humane
nature added or united to the Divine, in unity of the same person: so that now
we may say, as this Vine is an Olive Tree, and this Olive Tree is a Vine: or as
this Vine bears Olives, and this Olive Tree bears Grapes, so the Son of man is
the Son of God, and the Son of God is the Son of Man: or this Son of Man laid
the Foundation of the Earth, and this Son of God was born of Mary, and
crucified by the Jews. This similitude (I take it) is the aptest and fullest of
all the other, though in some things also it does fail; for the branch has
first a separate subsistence in it self, and losing it after, then it is drawn
into the unity of the subsistence of that Tree into which it is implanted; but
it is otherwise with the humane nature of Christ; it never had any subsistence
of its own, until it was united to the person or subsistence of the Son of God.

5. For the person assuming, and the nature assumed, and for the reason of this
way; we say, 1. That the person assuming was a Divine person; it was not the
Divine nature that assumed an humane person, but the Divine person that assumed
an humane nature; and that of the three Divine persons, it was neither first,
nor the third; neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost that did assume this
nature; but it was the Son, the middle person, who was to be the middle one,
that thereby, 1. He might undertake the mediation between God and us. 2. He
might better preserve the integrity of the blessed Trinity in the Godhead. 3.
He might higher advance mankind by means of that relation which the second
person, the Mediator did bear unto his Father: for this very end, says the
Apostle, God sent his own Son made of a woman, Gal. 4.4.5, 6.
that we might receive the Adoption of Sons; wherefore thou art no more a
servant but a Son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ; intimating
thereby, that what relation Christ has unto God by nature, we being found in
him, have the very same by Grace, Romans 8.29. Exodus 4.22, 23
he was Gods Son by nature, and we are his Sons by Grace; he was in a peculiar
manner the first born among many Brethren: and in him, and for him, the rest of
the Brethren by grace of Adoption are accounted as firstborn, Heb. 12.23. Heb.
2.16.


2. The nature assumed was the seed of Abraham: for verily he took not on him
the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham: Romans 1.3. Genesis
3.15. Gal. 4.4.
elsewhere the Apostle calls it the seed of David: He is made the seed of David
according to the Flesh: and elsewhere he is called the seed of the Woman: I
will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed and her seed:
and when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman:
no question she was the passive and material principle of which that precious
flesh was made, and the Holy Ghost the agent and efficient: that blessed womb
of her was the Bride-chamber, wherein the holy Ghost did knit that indissoluble
knot betwixt our humane Nature and his Deity: the Son of God assuming into the
unity of his person that which before he was not, even our humane Nature. O
with what astonishment may we behold our dust and ashes assumed into the unity
of Gods own Person!

3. For the reason of this way: why did the person assume a Nature? or rather,
why did not the person of the Son of God join it self to a perfect person of
the Son of man? I answer.

1. Because then there could not have been a personal union of both natures,
and so Christ had not been a perfect Mediator.

2. Because then the work of each of the Natures of Christ could not have been
counted the works of the whole person; whereas now by this union of both
natures in one person, the obedience of Christ performed in the Manhood, is
become of infinite merit, as being the Obedience of God; and thereupon God is
said to have purchased the Church with his own Blood.

Acts. 20.28.
3. Because if the Person of the Son of God had been joined to the Person of
man, there should have been four Persons in the Trinity. It is very observable,
how for the better preservation of the integrity of the blessed Trinity in the
Godhead, the humane Nature was assumed into the unity of the second person; for
if the fullness of the Godhead should have dwelt in any humane Person; there
should then have been a fourth Person necessarily added unto the Godhead; and
if any of the three Persons besides the second, had been born of a Woman, there
should then have been two Sons in the Trinity; whereas now the Son of God, and
the Son of Man, being but one Person, he is consequently but one Son; and so no
alteration at all made in the relations of the Persons of the Trinity, but they
are still one Father, one Son, and one Holy Ghost.

These are the deep things of God, and indeed so exceedingly mystical, that
they can never be perfectly declared by any man. Bernard compares this
ineffable mystery of the union of two natures, with that incomprehensible
mystery of the Trinity in unity. In the Trinity is three Persons and one
Nature; in Christ is two Natures and one Person; that of the Trinity is indeed
the greatest, and this of the Incarnation, is like unto it; they both far
exceed man's capacity; for his way is in the Sea, and his path in the great
waters, Psalm. 77.19.
and his footsteps are not known.

2. For the effects and Benefits of this Hypostatical Union; they are either in
respect of Christ, or in respect of Christians.

1. Those in respect of Christ, are, 1. An exemption of all sin. 2. A Collation
of all Graces. 3. A Communication of all the properties,

1. We find that although Christ appeared as a sinner, and that he was numbered
among the wicked or with the Transgressors. Isa. 53.12. Isa. 53.12.
Yet in very Deed and Truth he did no sin, neither was any guile found in his
mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. 1 Pet. 2.22. Heb. 7.36.
The Apostle tells us, he was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from
Sinners: he assumed the nature of man, yet by reason of his pure Conception,
and of this Hypostatical Union he was conceived, and born, and lived without
sin; he took upon him the seed of man, but not the Sin of man, save only by
imputation: but on this point I shall not stay.

2. The Graces collated unto the humanity of Christ by reason of his union, are
very many: I shall instance in some: As, --

1. That the Manhood has its subsistence in the second Person of the Trinity,
whereof it self (as of it self) is destitute.

2. That the Manhood is a peculiar Temple for the Deity of Christ to dwell in:
it is the place wherein the Godhead shows it self more manifestly and more
Gloriously than in any other Creature whatsoever: it is true, that by his
providence he shows himself in all his Creatures, and by his Grace in his
Saints: but he is only most Gloriously, eternally, according to the fullness of
his Deity, and by an Hypostatical Union in the humanity of Jesus Christ, in him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: Some are of opinion that as now
in this Life, Col. 2.9.
No man comes unto God but by Christ; so hereafter in the next life, no man
shall see God, but in the face of Jesus Christ.

3. That in the Manhood is a nearer familiarity with the Godhead than any other
Creature, whether Men or Angels: as sometimes he said, My Father and I are one:
(i.e.) one essence; so he may as truly say, the Manhood and I are one (i.e.)
one person for ever.

4. That the Manhood of Christ, according to its measure, is a partner with the
Godhead in the work of Redemption and Mediation: as he is Immanuel in respect
of his person, so he is Immanuel in respect of his office. He must needs be man
as well as God, that he might be able to send this comfortable message to the
Sons of men; go to my Brethren, John. 20 17.
and say to them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and
your God. I, as man, am in the work of redemption, and in the work of
mediation, as well as God: my Flesh is indeed the Bread of Life.

5. That the Manhood of Christ, together with the Godhead, is adored and
worshipped with Divine honor: as in like case, the honor done to the King,
redounds to the Crown upon his head; not that we worship the Manhood alone, as
merely a Creature; but that we adore the person of Christ which consists of
the Manhood and of the Godhead.

6. That the Manhood has an extraordinary measure, without measure, of
habitual Graces, poured into it; in this he excels the very Angels, for to them
was given Grace only by measure; but to the humanity of Christ was given Grace
without measure; even so much as a Creature is any ways capable of. I know it
is said that Jesus increased in Wisdom, and Stature, and in favor with God and
Man; Luke 2.52.
but this increase or growth in Wisdom, is not to be understood in respect of
the essence or extension of the habit (for that he had from the beginning, even
from the first moment of his incarnation; and he brought it with him out of the
womb) but in respect of the act and use of it, or in respect of his
experimental knowledge, so he increased, and not otherwise. Never was there any
but Christ, whose Graces were no way stinted, and that was absolutely full of
Grace: Divines tell us of a double Grace in Christ; the one of union, and that
is infinite; the other of unction (which is all one with Grace habitual) and
that is in a sort infinite; for howsoever it be but a finite and created thing,
yet in the nature of Grace, it has no limitation, no bounds, no stint, but
includes in it self whatsoever any way pertains to Grace, or that comes
within the compass of it. The reason of this illimited donation of Grace
bestowed on the Nature of man in Christ, was, for that Grace was given to it as
to the universal cause, whence it was to be derived unto all others; he is the
Fountain of Grace, John. 1.16.
and of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace.

3. For the Communication of the Properties. It is a kind, of phrase of speech
peculiar to the Scriptures, when the properties of either Nature of Christ
considered singly and apart, are attributed to the person of Christ, from which
soever of the natures they be denominated. For the understanding of this,
observe, 1. That words are either abstractive or concretive; the former speaks
the Nature of things, the latter speaks the person that has that nature; as
the Godhead and God; the Man Hood and Man; Holiness and Holy. 2. Observe that
abstractive Words noting precisely the distinct Natures, cannot be affirmed one
of the other; we cannot say, the God head suffered, or the Manhood created;
but we may truly say, that God suffered, and man created; because the person
which these concretive words imply, is one: and all actions, passions, and
qualities agree really to the person, though in respect sometimes of one nature,
and sometimes of another: thus God purchased the Church with his own blood:
Acts. 20.28 John. 3.13.
not that the Godhead shed blood, but the person which was God: and thus the
Son of man talking with Nicodemus, is said to be in Heaven; not that the
Manhood was in Heaven while he was on earth, but the person of the Son of Man.
Thus we may say that God was born of a Virgin, and that God suffered, and God
was crucified; not simply in respect of his Godhead, but in respect of his
person; or in respect of the humane nature which God united to himself: because
God here is a concrete word, and not an abstract, and signifies the Person of
Christ, and not the divine nature of Christ. And thus we may say, that the Man
Christ is Almighty, Omniscient, Omnipresent, yet not simply in respect of its
Manhood, but in respect of the Person which is the same God and Man: or in
respect of the divine nature of the man Christ Jesus: for that here also Man is
a concrete word, and not an abstract, and signifies the whole person of
Christ, and not the humane nature: but on the contrary, we may not say, that
the Godhead of Christ was born of a Virgin, or suffered, or was crucified: nor
may we say, that the Manhood of Christ is Almighty, Omniscient, Omnipresent;
because the Godhead and Manhood are abstract words (i.e.) such words as note to
us the two natures of Christ, the one divine, the other humane, and not the
person of Christ.

And this I think is the mind of Luther and his Followers, and yet (O wonder)
what a deal of objections are made to the multiplying of needless and fruitless
contentions? The Lutherans confess (however they hold the ubiquitary presence
of the humanity of Christ) that his Body is only in one place locally: If we
ask them (says Zanchius Zanchius in judicio de dissidio caenae Dominicae
) whether Christ's body be every where? they answer, that locally it is but in
one place, but that personally it is every where: now if they mean (says he)
that in respect of Essence, his Body is finite, and confined to one certain
place: but in respect of the being of subsistence, or of his person, it is
infinite, and every where: they say the truth, and there is no difference
amongst us. Happy are the Reconcilers of dissenting Brethren: Unto their
Assembly mine honor be thou united.

2. The Effects or benefits of this hypostatical union in respect of
Christians, are their spiritual union and communion with God and Christ.

1. There is a spiritual union of Christians with God in Christ; O the wonder
of these two blessed unions; first of the personal or hypostatical union;
secondly of this spiritual or mystical union; in the personal union, it pleased
God to assume and unite our humane Nature to the Diety; in this spiritual
union, it pleased God to unite the person of every Believer to the person of
the Son of God. This union is mystical, and yet our very Persons, natures,
bodies, souls are in a spiritual way conjoined to the Body and Soul of Christ;
Ephesians. 5.30.
so that we are members of the Body of Christ, and of the Flesh of Christ, and
of the Bones of Christ; and as this conjunction is immediately made with his
humane nature; 2 Pet. 1.4.
so thereby we are also united to the divine nature; yea, the person of the
Believer is indissolubly united to the Glorious person of the Son God.

Now concerning this union, for our better understanding, observe these four
things.

1. It is a most real union; it is not a mere notional and intellectual union,
that consists only in the understanding and without the understanding is
nothing; it is not an imaginary thing, that has no other being but only in the
Brain; no, no, it is a true, real, essential, substantial union; In natural
unions, I confess, there may be more evidence, but there cannot be more truth;
spiritual Agents neither have, nor put forth less virtue, because sense cannot
discern their manner of Working; even the Lodestone, though an earthen
substance, yet when it is out of sight, whether under the table, or behind a
solid partition, it stirs the needle as effectually as if it were within
view. Shall not he contradict his senses, that will say, It cannot work,
because I see it not? Oh my Savior! thou art more mine, than my Body is mine:
my sense feels that present, but so as that I must lose it: but my faith so
feels, and sees thee present with me, as that I shall never be parted from thee.

2. It is a very near union: You will say, how near? If an Angel were to speak
to you, he cannot satisfy you in this: only as far as our understanding can
reach it, and the Creatures can serve to illustrate these things, take it thus:
Whatsoever by way of comparison can be alleged concerning the combination of
any one thing with another: that, and much more may be said of our union with
Jesus Christ. To give instance out of the Scripture: see what one stick is to
another being glewed together: see what one friend is to another, as Jonathan
and David, who were said to be woven and knit each one to other: see how near
the father and the child are: how near the husband and the wife are: 1 Cor. 6,
17. 1 Samuel 18.1. Isa. 62.5.
see what union is between the Branches and the Vine, the members and the head;
nay, one thing more; see what the the soul is to the body: such is Christ, and
so near is Christ, and nearer to the person of every true believer: I live, yet
not I (says Paul) but Christ lives in me: John. 15.5. 1 Cor. 12 12. Gal. 2.20.
q. d. as the soul is to the body of a natural man, that acts and enlivens it
naturally, so is Jesus Christ to my soul and body. O there is a mavelous
nearness in this mystical union.

3. It is a total union; (i.e.) whole Christ is united to the whole believer,
soul and body. If thou art united to Christ, thou have all Christ: thou art one
with him in his nature, in his name: thou have the same Image, Grace, and
Spirit in thee, as he has; the same precious Promises, the same access to God
by prayer as he; thou have the same love of the Father; all that he did or
suffered, thou have a share in it: thou have his life and death: all is thine:
so on thy part, he has thee wholly, thy nature, thy sins, the punishment of
thy sins, thy wrath, thy curse, thy shame: yea, thy wit, and wealth, and
strength, all that thou art, or have, or can do possibly for him. It is a
total union: My beloved is mine, and I am his: whole Christ from top to toe is
mine, and all that I am, have, or can do, for evermore is his.

4. It is an inseparable union, it can never be broken. I will make (says God)
an everlasting Covenant with them, Jer. 32.40.
and I will not turn away from them to do them good, I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. This is a glorious promise:
some poor souls may say. True Lord, thou will not turn away from me: I know
thou will not: Oh, but I fear I shall turn away from thee: Oh alas, I turn
every day toward sin and Satan! Nay, says God, I will put my fear in their
heart, that thou shall not turn away from me: q. d. We shall be kept together
for evermore and never be separated. Hence Paul triumphantly challenges all
enemies on earth, (or rather in hell) to do their worst to break this knot:
Romans 8.5.
Who shall separate us from the love of God in Christ? shall tribulation,
Distress, Famine, Nakedness, Peril or Sword? Come all that can come, and see if
that blessed union betwixt me and Christ, shall ever be broken, by all that you
can do. Thus for this union.

2. There is a spiritual communion with God in Christ. Both these are the
effects of Christ's personal or hypostatical union: first, union to his person,
and then communion with his benefits: union in proper speaking is not unto any
of the benefits flowing to us from Christ: we are not united to forgiveness of
Sin, Holiness, Peace of Conscience, but unto the person of the Son of God
himself: and then secondly, comes this communication of all the benefits
arising immediately from this union to the Lord Jesus: that as Christ was
Priest, Prophet, and King: so we also by him, are after a sort Priests,
Prophets and Kings: for being made one with him, we are thereby possessed of
all things that are his, as the Wife is of the wealth of her Husband; now all
things are yours, (says the Apostle) whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or
the World, etc. --

Hitherto have we took a view of Christ in his Mothers Womb; 1 Cor. 3, 21.23
and O what marvails there! Did ever womb carry such a fruit? Well might the
Angel say, Blessed art thou amongst Women! and well might Elizabeth say,
Blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb! but the blessing is not only in conceiving,
but in bearing; and therefore we proceed.

SECT. VI. Of the Birth of Christ.
6. THe birth of Christ now follows. Now was it that the Son of Righteousness
should break forth from his bed, where nine months he had hid himself, as
behind a fruitful cloud: this was the worlds wonder; a thing so wonderful, that
it was given for a sign unto believers seven hundred and forty years before it
was accomplished: Isa. 7.14.
therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; behold a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son. A wonder indeed! and great, beyond all comparison:
that the Son of God should be born of a Woman: that he who is the true
Melchizedech, without Father, and without Mother, must yet have a
mother-Virgin: that he that is before Abraham was, should yet be born after
Abraham a matter of two thousand years: that he who was David's Son, and
therefore born in Bethlehem, should yet be David's Lord; wonderful things are
spoken of thee, Heb. 7.3.
O thou Son of God: before he was born, the Prophets sing, the Sybils
prophecy, the Patriarchs typisie, the Types foretell, God promises, and the
Son of God performs; when he was born, Angels run errands, Gabriel brings
tidings, the glory of Heaven shines, a Star displaies, and wise men are the
Heralds, that proclaim his Birth. But come yet a little nearer, Let us go to
Bethlehem (as the Shepherds said) and see this thing which is come to pass! if
we step but one step into his loding, Heavens wonder is before our eyes; now
Look upon Jesus! Luke 2.15.
look on him as in fullness of time he carried on the great work of our
Salvation: here now you may read the meaning of Adams Covenant, Abraham's
promise, Moses revelation, David's succession; these were but vailes; but now
shall we draw aside the Curtains? come, take a view of the truth it self; O
wonder of wonders! whom find we in this lodging? a Babe in a Cratch, a
Mother-maid, a Father-virgin: is this the Babe whom we look unto as our Jesus?
is this a Mother (as Austin) scarce fourteen years of age? is this the Father
that knew her not, until she had brought forth her firstborn Son? Mat. 1.25.
what a strange birth is this? Look on the Babe, there is no Cradle to rock
him, no Nurse to Lull him, no Linnens to swaddle him, scarce a little food to
nourish him; look on the Mother, there is no Mid-wives help, no downy pillows,
no linen hangings, scarce a little straw where she is brought a-bed: look on
Joseph the reputed Father: he rather begs, than gives a blessing: poor
Carpenter! that makes them a Chamber of an Oxe-stall, and carves him a Cratch
to be his Cradle: Mary that sees with her eyes, and ponders all in her heart,
how does modest shame fac'dness change her colors so often as her imagination
works? she must bear a Son: an Angel tells her, the Holy Ghost overshadows her,
the days are accomplished, and she is delivered; each Circumstance is enough
to abash a modest Virgin: But who will not wonder? a Maid believes, a Maid
conceives, a Maid brings forth, and a Maid still remains: How might we descant
on this Subject? but I shall contract my self, and reduce all wonders to this
word, I am the Vine. John 15.5.


It is a blessed Parable: in which, under the shadow of a Vine, Christ
elegantly sets forth himself. Christ in many resemblances is a precious Vine;
but why a Vine, rather than a Cedar, Oak, or some of the strongest, tallest
trees? Many reasons are given: as, 1. Because of all Trees the Vine is the
lowest: it grovels, as it were, on the ground. 2. Because of all Trees the Vine
is weakest; hence they that have Vines, have also their Elms to support them,
and hold them up. 3. Because of all Trees, the Vine has the meanest Bark and
outside: it is of little worth or reputation. 4. Because of all Trees, Psalm.
128.3.
the Vine is fruitfullest: and therefore it is called the Fruitful Vine. In
every of these respects, Christ is called a Vine, who by his Incarnation took
upon him the lowest condition, and made himself, by emptying himself, of no
Reputation: but he was the fruitfullest Vine that ever the earth bore: Phil.
2.7.
and in this respect no Vine, nor all the Vines on the Earth were worthy to be
compared with him, or to be so much as resemblances of him. I shall not
prosecute the resemblances throughout; for, so I might pass from his Birth to
his Life: and from his Life to his Death; when the blood of the Grapes was
pressed out: only for the present we will take a view of this Vine. 1. In its
Plant. 2. In its Bud. 3. In its Blossom. 4. In its Fruit; and so an end.

1. For the Plant: the way of Vines is not to be sowed, but planted; that thus
translated, they might better fructify: so our Jesus, first sprung from his
Father, is planted in a Virgins womb; God from God, coeternal with God; but by
his Incarnation made that he was not, and yet remaining that he was; God of his
Father, and Man of his Mother; before all time, yet since the beginning.
Bernard tells us, that this Vine sprung of the Vine, Ber. de Passione Dom.
is God begotten of God, the Son of the Father, both coeternal and
consubstantial with the Father; but that he might better fructify, he was
planted in the Earth; (i.e.) he was conceived in a Virgins womb. There is
indeed a resemblance in this; in this resemblance, we must be careful to
observe that communication of properties; of which I told you, we may truly
say, that God was planted, or conceived, but not the Godhead; God is a concrete
word, and signifies the Person of Christ: and his Person was planted or
conceived, not simply as God: but in respect of the Manhood united to it: and
thus he that is infinite, was conceived; and he that is eternal, even he was
born: the very fullness of all perfection, and all the properties of the Divine
Essence are by this communication given to the nature of man in the Person of
the Son of God: no wonder therefore, that we say, that this Vine (the Son of
God) is planted in Mary; I know some would have the Plant more early: and
therefore they say, that Christ was a Vine planted in Adam, budded in David,
and flourished in Mary: but I take this but for a flourish: all before Mary
were but Types, now was the Truth: now in Mary was Christ planted, and not
before: as in the beginning, there was not a Man to Till the Ground: -- but out
of the ground the Lord made to grow every Tree: -- and a River went out of Eden
to water the Garden: so there was no man that tilled this Ground: but out of
this Ground (the Virgin) the Lord made to grow this Plant, watering it by his
Spirit: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, Luke 1.35.
and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: Of this conception, and of
the Holy Ghosts efficiency, I believe, spoke the Prophet, when there was such
longing after Christ's coming in the flesh: Isa. 45.8.
Drop down ye Heavens from above, and let the Sky pour down Righteousness, let
the Earth open, and bring forth Salvation. But of this Conception before.

2. For the Bud: the nature of Vines is to Bud, before it Blossom or bring
forth its fruit: Psalm. 85.11.
so was it said of Christ before he came, Truth shall Bud out of the Earth; now
what was this budding of Truth out of the Earth, but Christ born of a Woman?
What was the Truth (says Irenaeus and Augustine) but Christ? Iraen. l. 3. c. 5.
and what the Earth, but our flesh? and what Truth budding, but Christ being
born? Here let us stay a while: surely it is worth the while (as the Spouse
said in another place) to get up early to the Vineyards, and to see how the
Vine did flourish, Cant. 7.12.
and how the tender Grape did open.

In Christ's carrying on the great Work of our Salvation before all Worlds, we
told you of Gods Councils, as if he had been reduced to some straits and
difficulties by the cross demands of his several Attributes: but Wisdom found
out a way, how to reconcile these differences by propounding a Jesus, and in
him Mercy and Truth met together, Righteousness and Peace kissed each other.
Psalm. 85.10.
That reconciliation was in the Counsel of God from all Eternity: but for the
execution of this Counsel, it was now in the fullness of time, even at this time
when Christ was born: Now in deed and in truth, in execution and performance,
was the reconciliation of all differences: and of this time was the Psalmists
Prophecy more especially meant: Mercy and Truth shall meet together,
Righteousness and Peace shall kiss each other: Psalm. 85.10, 12
and Truth shall bud out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from
Heaven.

In these words we find, first a meeting of Gods blessed Attributes; and
secondly, this meeting at a birth, the birth of Truth: at which meeting thirdly
was that glorious effect, that Righteousness looked down, and indeed came down
from Heaven; I desire a little to invert the words, and shall first speak to
Christ's Birth; secondly, to the effects of his Birth, of Righteousness looking
down from Heaven; thirdly, to the meeting and agreement of all Gods Attributes
as the issue and effect of all; When Mercy and Truth met together, and
Righteousness and Peace kissed each other.

1. For his Birth; our Vine does Bud, Truth shall Bud out of the Earth, (i.)
Christ shall be born upon the Earth, or Christ shall be born of a Woman; for
Truth is Christ, Bud is born, and the Earth] is a Woman. 1. Truth] is Christ: I
am the Way and Truth, John 1.4, 6,
said Christ; he is the truth of all Types, and the truth of all Prophesies,
and the truth of all promises; for in him are all the Promises, Yea and Amen.
2. Bud] is born: the Vine budding is the first putting forth of the Grape; so
Christ being born, was Truth budding out of the Earth, he then first showed
himself to the World, and was first seen (like the Vine springing forth) above
ground. 3. The Earth] is the Woman; Isa. 45.8.
thus some render that Text, Let the Earth bring forth a Savior: look how the
Field-flowers spring forth of themselves without any Seed cast in by the hand
of Man; so the Virgin brings forth Christ. It is observable that in the
Creation of Adam was laid the Prognostics of this future birth: begin with the
first Man Adam, and you may see him paralleled in this second Adam, Christ.
Adam was created of the Virgin-Earth, Christ was born of a Virgin Mother; the
Earth had no Husbandman, yet brought forth without Seed: Mary had no Husband,
yet brought forth without Seed of Man: in the Creation God said, Let us make
Man: and now says the Holy Ghost, the Word is made flesh, Genesis 1.26. John 1.14.
or the Word is Man indeed: those were but Types, but Christ is the Truth: he
is the Vine that Buds, the Messiah born; the Angels own him, the Star designs
him, the Prophets foreshew him, the Devils confess him, his Miracles declare
him, the Sages seek him, and Heaven and Earth Rings with the News, that Truth
is Budded out of the Earth.

2. For the effect of this Birth, Righteousness shall look down from Heaven. No
sooner Christ born, but Righteousness looked down from Heaven; she cast her eye
upon Earth, and seeing Truth freshly sprung there, she looked and looked again;
certainly it was a sight to draw all the eyes of Heaven to it. It is said of
the Angels that they desired to look into these things: they looked wishly at
them, 1 Pet. 1.12^
as if they would look through them: no question but Righteousness looked as
narrowly and piercingly as the Angels. Some observe that the Hebrew word, she
looked down, signifies that she beat out a window; so desirous was
Righteousness to behold the sight of the Vine Budding, of Christ being born,
that she beats out a Window in Heaven: before this time, she would not so much
as look down toward the Earth: Righteousness had no prospect, no window open
this way: she turned away her eyes, and clapped to the Casement, and would not
abide so much as to look on such sinful wretches, forlorn sinners as we are;
her eye was purer than to behold Iniquity, she abhorred it, and us for it: and
therefore would not vouchsafe us once to cast off her eye. O but now the case
is altered: no sooner does our Vine Bud upon the Earth, but she is willing to
condescend, and so willing, that she breaks a Window through the Walls of
Heaven to look down upon this Bud: and nomarvail: for, what could Righteousness
desire to see, and satifie her self in, that was not to be seen in Jesus
Christ? He was all righteous, there was not the least spot of sin to be found
in him: his Birth was clean, and his Life was holy, and his Death was innocent;
both his Soul and Body were without all sin; both his Spirit and his Mouth were
without all guile; whatsoever satisfaction Righteousness would have, she might
have it in him, lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Balance, and
there is nothing in Jesus but Straight for the Line, and full Weight for the
Balance.

3. For the meeting and agreement of all Gods Attributes, as the issue and the
least effect of this budding Vine, the Verse before tells us; that Mercy and
Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: This
meeting presupposes a distance before they met: for they that meet come from
diverse coasts. Here then are two things considerable; first the distance, and
secondly, the meeting. But you will say, how came this distance? Are they not
all the Attributes of Gods undivided essence? are they not all four in the
bosom of God from all eternity? I answer, Yes: they are undivided in
themselves, but they were divided about us; it was Adam's sin, and ours in him,
that first divided Heaven, yea the very Attributes of God, and in a sort, God
himself: I shall speak to both these, that you may first see the Differences,
and then the Agreement and blessed Harmony of these glorious Attributes.

1. The Difference; immediately after the Fall, the great question (which
before you heard of in the Decree and Councils of God) was actually propounded,
What should be done with sinful Man? in this case we must speak of God after
the manner of men; and I hope you will give me the liberty that others (I
suppose warrantably) take: Come, says God, What shall be done with sinful Man?
He has violated my Law, broken my Command, and as much as lies in him,
unpinn'd the Fabric of the World, spoiled my Glorious Work of Heaven, and
Earth, and Sea, and all therein: undone himself for ever and ever, and ever. O
what shall be done with this sinful, rebellious, forlorn unhappy Creature, Man?
Silence being a while in Heaven, and all struck into amaze, to see the great
God of Heaven stirred up in wrath, at last Mercy and Peace stand up, and they
seek with sweet, gentle entreaties to pacify Gods Anger: but Righteousness and
Truth are on the contrary side: and they provoke God Almighty to go on, and to
manifest himself (as he is indeed) a consuming Fire, a sin-revenging God. The
Plea is drawn up, and reported at large by Bernard, Andrews, and others.

1. Mercy began; for out of her readiness to do good, she is ever foremost: her
inclination is to pity, or rather she her self is an inclination to pity those
that are in misery: and if she can but relieve them, let them deserve what they
will, be sure she will relieve them: for she looks not to the party what he is,
nor what he has done, nor what he he deserved: but (which is the comfort of us
miserable sinners) she looks at what he suffers, and in how woeful and wretched
a case he is. Her Plea was thus; What Lord have thou made all Men in vain? will thou now destroy him for whom thou made the World? shall the householder be
cast out, and thrown into prison, and there remain till he has paid the utmost
Farthing? shall all the Men and Women in the World, from first to last, be
damned for ever and ever? alas! What profit is in their Blood? What will it
avail to crowd Men and Devils together in Hell-flames? Will not those Devils,
the grand Enemies of God, rejoice at this? And what then will become of thy
great Name on Earth? Is not this thy Name? The Lord, the Lord, Merciful, and
Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for
Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgressions and Sins? What will the Lord undo
his Name? Will the Lord cast off for ever? And will he be favorable no more?
Is his Mercy clean gone for ever? Will he be no more entreated? has God
forgotten to be gracious? Has he in Anger shut up his tender Bowels? With
these, and such like holy whisperings or mutterings did Mercy enter into Gods
bowels, and make them yern, and melt again into compassions.

But 2. Truth must be heard as well as Mercy; and she lays in matter of
exception, and her Plea was thus; What is God but his Word? Now this was thy
word to Adam, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death;
and this was thy word to all the Sons of Adam, (...) 17. (...) 8.10.
the soul that sins, that soul shall die. And God may not falsify his word:
his word is truth; falsify truth? That may not be: all men are liars: but God
is true, even truth it self. -- This Plea of Truth is seconded by
Righteousness; and thus she bespeaks God; shall not the Judge of all the world
do right? Thou have declared thy self over and over to be just and righteous;
(...) 15. (...) 19.13. (...) 6.5, 7. (...) ^5.17.
O Lord God of Israel thou art righteous: -- Righteous art thou, O Lord, and
upright are thy Judgments. -- Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast,
and shall be: -- Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy
Judgments, -- Yea the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works: and wherein consists this righteousness, but in rendering to every one
according to his due? And what is the sinners due, (...) ^.23.
but Death? The wages of sin is Death: What shall not those sinners die the
Death? That were (as before) to make Truth false, so here to do Right Wrong.

These were the Controversies at that time: so that Peace could not tell how to
speak a prevailing word amongst them: nay the controversy grew so high, that
they made it their own cases: what shall become of me (said Mercy) if God spare
not sinners? and what shall become of me (said Justice) if God do spare
sinners? what shall become of me (said Mercy) If God will show no mercy? And
what shall become of me (said Justice) if God will do no Justice? why, alas
perish (said Mercy) if thou will not pity: if man die, I die also: and I perish
(said Justice) if thou will have mercy: surely I die, if man die not. To this
it came, and in these terms brake up the Assembly, and away they went one from
another. Truth went to Heaven, and was a Stranger upon Earth, Righteousness
went with her, and would not so much as look down from Heaven: Mercy, she staid
below still; for where should Mercy be, if not with the miserable? As for
Peace, she went between both, to see if she could make them meet again in
better terms: in the mean while, our Salvation lies a bleeding; the Plea hangs,
and we stand as Prisoners at the Bar, and know not what shall become of us; for
though two be for us, yet two are against us, as strong, and more stiff than
they: so that much depends upon this meeting; for either they must be at peace
between themselves, or they cannot be at peace with us, nor can we be at peace
with God.

Many means were made before Christ's time for a blessed meeting, but it would
not be; Sacrifice and Burnt-Offering thou would not have: Heb. 10.5.
these means were not prevalent enough to cause a meeting. Where stuck it? you
will say: Surely it was not long of Mercy, she was easy to be entreated: she
looked up to Heaven, but Righteousness would not look down; and indeed here was
the business: Righteousness must and will have satisfaction, or else
Righteousness should not be Righteous; either some satisfaction for sin must be
given to God, or she will never meet more; better all men in the World were
damned, than that the Righteousness of God should be Unrighteous. And this now
puts on the great transaction of our Saviors Birth.

Well then, our Savior is born; and this birth occasions a gracious meeting of
the Attributes: such an attractive is this Birth, this Bud of Christ, that all
meet there; indeed they cannot otherwise but meet in him in whom all blessed
Attributes of God do meet. It is Christ is Mercy, and Christ is Truth, and
Christ is Righteousness, and Christ is Peace. 1. Christ is Mercy; thus
Zacharias prophesied: Luke 1.78.
That through the tender Mercy of our God the dayspring (or Branch) from on
high has visited us. And God the Father of Christ, is called the Father of
mercies; as if Mercy were his Son, who had no other Son but his dearly boloved
Son in whom he is well pleased. 2 Cor. 1.3. John 14.6.
-- 2. Christ is Truth; I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life. That Truth
in whom is accomplished whatsoever was prefigured of the Messiah. God shall
send forth his Mercy and his Truth: Psalm. 57.3. Psalm. 64.7. Exodus 34.6. Deuteronomy.
32.4. Psalm. 86.15. John 1.14, 17. Jer. 23.6. Mal. 4.2. 1 Car. 1.30. Heb. 7.2.
Isa. 9.6. Ephesians. 2.14. 2 These. 3.16.
And, O prepare Mercy and Truth. And this is his Name, the Lord, the Lord, --
abundant in Goodness and Truth. He is a God of Truth, says Moses; plenteous in
Mercy and Truth, says David; full of Grace and Truth, says John; for the Law
was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. He is Truth by
Name, and Truth by Nature, and Truth by Office. -- 3. Christ is Righteousness.
This is his Name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness. And,
unto you that fear my Name, shall the Son of Righteousness arise with healing
under his Wings. And, Christ of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption. And according to his Type Melchisedech, this
was his Style, King of Righteousness. -- 4. Christ is Peace. This is his Name
wherewith he is called, wonderful Councellor, the Mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace. And, Christ is our Peace, who has made both one,
and has broken down the middle Wall of Partition between us. And therefore
prays the Apostle, now the Lord of Peace himself (or, the Lord himself, who is
Peace) give you peace always by all means. And according to his Type
Melchisedech, as he was King of Righteousness, so also he was King of Salem,
which is King of Peace. -- Thus Christ is Mercy, Heb. 7.2.
and Christ is Truth, and Christ is Righteousness, and Christ is Peace: Now
where should all these meet but in him who is them all? Surely there they meet,
and at the meeting, they all ran first and kissed the Son; and that done, Truth
ran to Mercy, and embraced her, and Righteousness to Peace, and kissed her;
they that so long had been parted, and stood out in difference, now they meet,
and are made Friends again. O the blessed effects of this Birth of Christ! it
is Christ that reconciled them, and that reconciled us and them; He reconciled
all things (says the Apostle) whether they be things in Earth, or things in
Heaven. Col. 1.20.
Now is Heaven at peace with it self, and Heaven and Earth at peace one with
another; and that which glues all, and makes the Peace, is this Birth of
Christ; the budding of this Vine. Truth shall Bud out of the Earth, and then
Mercy and Truth shall meet together, etc.

3. For the Blossom. The nature of Vines is, in its season to Blossom, or to
bear sweet flowers. Pharaoh's Butler, you know, dreamed of a Vine, that not
only budded, but Blossomed; Her Blossoms shot forth: and thus Christ, our
Vine, Genesis 40.10.
both Budded and Blossomed; he was full of the sweetest Flowers; now what were
these Flowers and Blossoms of Christ, but his virtues and blessed graces? In
this only Christ differs from the Vine, in that in him was seen not only one
sort or kind of Flowers, but every kind. Bern. de passione Dom.
Bernard reckons up the violet of humility, the lilly of chastity, the rose of
patience, the saffron of abstinence; I may not so far enlarge my self; but in
reference to his Birth, I cannot but admire at his humility, patience, and
infinite condescentions; that the Creator should become a creature, though an
Angel, it were a great Gulf, which no created understanding could measure; but
that he should reject Angels, and take the Seed of Abraham: that he should be
made lower than the Angels, who is God over all; that he would be conceived,
who is the uncreated wisdom: in the dark Prison of the Womb, who is the Light
of the World: and that of a Woman, the weaker, first sinning sex, who is the
holy one and power of God; that he would be born, who bears all things: the
Lord of all, of a lowly handmaid: in fullness of time, who is eternity: in the
nightime, who is the Son of Righteousness: in the Winter, who gives life and
heat: in a time of public taxation, who is Lord of Lords: and that not at
Rome, the Lady of Nations; nor at Jerurusalem, the Glory of the East, but at
Bethlehem the least of the Thousands of Judah; not in a Palace prepared, nor in
his Mothers House, but in an Inn; not in the best Room, nor in any Room of the
House, but in a Stable of Beasts; not attended there with a royal Guard, but
with Joseph and Mary; not adorned in Robes, but swadled in Clouts; not stately
Enthronized, but laid in a Manger; nor lastly, his Birth Proclaimed by the
Kings at Arms, but by poor Shepherds.

That the Word should be an infant not able to speak a word; that life should
be mortal; that Power should be subject to a poor Carpenter; that the Lord of
the Covenant should be Circumcised; that the God of the Temple should be
presented in the Temple; that Wisdom should be instructed; infiniteness should
grow in stature; that the feeder of all things should be fed; that all these
are preludes, and but beginnings of his sufferings; O wonderful condescension!
O admirable patience! O rare humility! how strange are the Blooming Blossoms of
this Vine.

4. For the Fruit: the nature of Vines is to cast sweet savours, but to bear
sour Grapes: Christ that was blameless before God and Man, yet bore the heavy
burden of our sin. O the sweetness of his savours! because of the savor of thy
good Ointments, thy Name is an Ointment poured forth; Cant. 1.3.
whether by savours, we mean his words, the very Officers of the Jews can say,
Never Man speak like this Man: or whether by savours, we mean his deeds, Jo^
7.46.
his very Enemies confess him a just Man; so Pilate's Wife could send her
Husband word, Have thou nothing to do with that just Man: the wise Men that
brought their Offerings give him Gold, Matthew. 27.19. Mat. 2.11.
Frankincense, and Myrrh; Gold is given him as to a potent King, Frankincense
as to a gracious God, and Myrrh as to an holy Priest: He is a King to rule, a
God to save, and a Priest to mediate: thus far he casts sweet savours; but
digest them better, and they prove sour Grapes; a King he was, but mocked with
the Title, Mat. 27.29. Phil. 2.7.
Hail King of the Jews: a God he was, but he emptied himself; He made himself
of no Reputation: an holy Priest he was, but such a Priest as must offer up
himself for a Sacrifice: The wise men that came from the East, they saw his
Infirmity, and yet adore his power; they saw his infancy, yet adore his wisdom;
they saw his poverty, yet adore the riches of his mercy; they saw him whom they
enquired after, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? Mat. 2.2.
The very Title cast sweet savours, but it bears sower Grapes; he is a King,
that is a title of honor; but he is King of the Jews, that is a word of reproach.

All along his life you may see these two, sweet savours, but sour Grapes:
vidisti vilia, audi mirifica, says Ambrose; the things you see are mean, but
the things you s^e and hear are wonderful; mean it was to see a sort of
Shepherds, wonderful it is to see a troop of Angels; mean it was to hear one
say, laid in the Cratch below; wonderful it is to hear many sing Glory to God
on high; mean it was to see him man; wonderful it is to know him God. Here Is a
little Child fainting and groaning, yet a powerful God ruling and commanding;
hungry himself, to show our nature; yet feeding five thousand, to show his
power: dying on the Cross, as the Son of Adam; disposing of Paradise, as the
Son of God. As it was said of Bethlehem, Minima and non Minima; the least of
the thousands, Micah 5.2. Not the least of thousands, Mat. 2.6. So we say of
this Bethlehemite, Minimus and non Minimus; he shall sit upon the Throne of
David, Isa. 9.7. Yet he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, Isa.
53.4. His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 7.27. Yet his end shall be,
and he shall have nothing, Dan. 9.26. Thus all along from his Cratch to his
Cross, sweet Savours, but sour Grapes; at last indeed the Grapes grew to a
ripeness, and then he was pressed, and his dearest heart-blood run out in
abundant streams; this was the sweet juice of our Garden-Vine; God planted it,
the Heavens Water it, the Jews prune it; what remains now, but that we abide in
it? but of that when we come to the Directions how we are to look.

SECT. VII. Of some Consequents after Christ's Birth.
SOme Consequents after the Birth of Christ may be touched, whilst yet he was
but a Child of twelve years old. As, --

1. When he was but eight days old, he was Circumcised, and named Jesus. As
there was shame in his Birth, so there was pain in his Circumcision; a sharp
Razor paseth through his skin presently after he is born; not that he needed
this Ceremony, but that for us he was content to be legally impure. In this
early humiliation he plainly discovers the Riches of his Grace; now he sheds
his Blood in drops, and thereby gives an earnest of those Rivers which he
afterward poured out for the cleansing of our Nature, and extinguishing the
wrath of God; and for a further discovery of his Grace, at this time his Name
is given him, which was Jesus. This is the name which we should engrave in our
hearts; rest our Faith on, and place our help in, and love with the
overflowings of Charity, and Joy, and Adoration; above all things we had need
of a Jesus, a Savior for our Souls, and from our sins, and from the
everlasting destruction which sin will otherwise bring upon our Souls; hence
this Name Jesus and this Sign Circumcision are joined together; for by the
effusion of his blood he was to be our Jesus, our Savior: Without shedding of
Blood is no remission of Sins, no Salvation of Souls. Heb. 9.22. Romans 4.11.
Circumcision was the Seal, and now was it that our Jesus was under God's Great
Seal to take his Office: We have heard how he carried on the great Work of our
Salvation from Eternity; this very Name and Office of Jesus, a Savior, was
resolved on in Gods fore-councel, and given forth from the beginning; and we
have heard of late how it was promised and foretold by an Angel; John. 6.27.
but now it is Signed and Sealed with an absolute Commission and fullness of
Power; Him has God the Father fealed, John. 6.27. It is his Office and his
very profession to save, that all may repair unto him to that end: Mat. 11.28.
John 6.37. John 4.42.
Come unto me all ye that are weary; and him that comes unto me I will in no
wise cast out; in which respect he is called the Savior of the world (i.e.) of
Samaritans, Jews, Gentiles, Kings, Shepherds, and of all sorts of men.

2. When he was forty days old, he was brought to Jerusalem, and presented to
the Lord; as it is written in the Law of the Lord, every Male that opens the
womb shall be called Holy to the Lord. O wonder! there was no impurity in the
Son of God, and yet he is first circumcised, and then he is brought and offered
to the Lord; Luke 2.22, 23
he that came to be sin for us, would in our Persons be legally unclean, that
by satisfying the Law, he might take away our uncleanness; he that was above
the Law, would come under the Law, that he might free us from the Law; we are
all born sinners; but O the unspeakable Mercy of our Jesus, that provides a
remedy as early as our sin: first, he is conceived, and then he is born, to
sanctify our Conceptions and our Births; and after his Birth, he is first
Circumcised, and then he is presented to the Lord; that by two holy acts, that
which was naturally unholy might be hallowed unto God: Christ has not left our
very Infancy without redress, but by himself, thus offered, he cleanses us
presently from our filthiness. -- Now is Christ brought in his Mothers Arms to
his own House, the Temple; and as Man, he is presented to himself, as God. O
how Glorious did that Temple seem, now the Owner was within the walls of it!
Now was the Hour, and Guest come, in regard whereof the second Temple should
surpass the first; this was the House built for him, and dedicated to him;
there had he dwelt long in his Typical presence, nothing was done there whereby
he was not resembled; and now the body of these shadows is come, and presents
himself, where he had ever been represented. You will say, what is this to me,
or to my Soul? O yes! Jerusalem is now every where; there is no
Church-Assembly, no Christian heart which is not a Temple of the Living God;
and there is no Temple of God wherein Christ is not presented to his Father:
Thus we have the benefit of Christ's fulfilling the Law of Righteousness; God
sent his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, that he might redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Gal. 3.4,
5.
It is, as if the Father should have said to Christ, Come my dear Son, here are
certain Malefactors under the Law, to suffer and to be executed; what say you
to them? Why, I will become under the Law (says Christ) I will take upon me
their Execution, and suffer for them; and to this purpose he is first
circumcised; and then he is presented to the Lord.

3. When he was yet under one year old, as some; or about two, as others, he
fled into Egypt. As there was no room for him in Bethlehem, so now there is no
room for him in all Judea; no sooner he came to his own, but he must fly from
them; what a wonder is this? Could not Christ have quit himself from Herod a
thousand ways? what could an Arm of flesh have done against the God of
Spirits? had Jesus been of the spirit of some of his Disciples, he might have
commanded fire from Heaven on those that should have come to have apprehended
him; but hereby he taught us to bear the yoke even in our youth; thus would he
suffer, that he might sanctify to us our early afflictions, he flies into
Egypt, the slaughterhouse of Gods People, the sink of the world, the surnace
of Israel's ancient afflictions: what a change is here; Israel, the firstborn
of God ^lie out of Egypt into Judea; and Christ the firstborn of all Creatures
flies out of Judea into Egypt; Eusebius. de. demonst. l. 6. c. 20.
Eusebius reports that the Child Jesus arriving in Egypt, and being by design
carried into a Temple, all the Statutes of the Idol-Gods fell down like Dagon
at the presence of the Ark; and to this purpose he cites Isaiah's Prophecy;
Behold, the Lord shall come into Egypt, and the Idols of Egypt shall be moved
at his presence. Now is Egypt become the Sanctuary, and Judea the
inquisition-house of the Son of God; surely he that is every where the same,
Isa. 19.1.
knows how to make all places alike to his; he knows how to preserve Daniel in
the Lions den; the three Children in a fiery furnace; Jonah in a Whales belly,
and Christ in the midst of Egypt.

4. When he was now some five years old, say some; or but two years and a
quarter old, say others; an Angel appears again in a Dream to Joseph, saying,
Arise and take the young Child and his Mother, Mat. 2.19, 20.
and return again into the land of Israel, for they are dead which sought the
young Child's Life. Herod, that took away the lives of all the Infants in or
about Bethlehem, is now himself dead, and gone to his own place, and by this
means the Coast is clear for the return of that holy Family. O the wonderful
dispensation of Christ in concealing of himself from men! all this while he
carries himself as an Infant, and though he know all things, yet he neither
takes, nor gives any notice of his removal or disposing, but appoints that to
be done by his Angel, which the Angel could not have done but by him. As Christ
was pleased to take upon him our Nature, so in our Nature he was pleased to be
a perfect Child; for that is the word; take the young Child and his Mother; he
suppressed the manifestation and exercise of that Godhead, whereto the
Infant-nature was conjoined, as the Birth of Christ, so the infancy of Christ
was exceeding humble: Oh how should we magnify him, or deject our selves for
him, who himself became thus humble for our sakes?

5. When he was twelve years old, he with his Parents go up to Jerusalem after
the custom of the Feast. Luke. 2.42. V. 46.
This pious act of his younger years intends to lead our first years into
timely devotion; but I shall not insist on that; I would rather observe him
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them
Questions; whilst the Children of his age were a playing in the streets, he is
found of his parents sitting in the Temple; not to gaze on the outward glory of
that house, of the Golden Candlesticks, or Tables, or Cherubims, or the
Pillars, or the Molten Sea, or the Altar of Gold, or the Vessels of pure Gold;
no, no, but to hear and oppose the Doctors. He, who as God, gave them all the
Wisdom they had, does now, as the Son of man, hearken to the Wisdom he had
given them; and when he had heard, then he asks; and after that, no doubt he
answers; his very questions were instructions; for I cannot think that he meant
so much to learn, as to teach those Doctors of Israel. Surely these Rabbis had
never heard the voice of such a Tutor; they could not but see the very Wisdom
of God in this Child; V. 47.
and therefore, says the Text, they all wonder; or they were all astonished at
his understanding and answers; their eyes saw nothing but a Child, but their
ears heard the wonderful things of Gods Law; betwixt what they saw, and what
they heard, they could not but be distracted and amazed. But why did ye not (O
ye Jewish teachers) remember now the Star and the Sages, and the Angels, and
the Shepherds; why did ye not now bethink your selves of Herod, and of his
enquiry, and of your answer, that in Bethlehem of Judea Christ should be born?
You cited the prophets, and why did you not mind that Prophecy now, Isa. 56.
that, unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given, and his Name shall
be called Wonderful, Councellor, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of peace? Fruitless is the wonder that ends not in Faith; no Light is
sufficient, where the eyes were held through unbelief and prejudice.

6. After this, from twelve to the thirtieth year of his Age, we read nothing
of the Acts of Christ, Luke. 2.51.
but that he went down with his Parents unto Nazareth, and was subject to them;
as he went up to Jerusalem to Worship God, and in some sort to show himself
God; so now he goes down to Nazareth to attend his particular Calling. Luke
2.51.
This is the meaning of those words, and he was subject to them: Christ's
subjection to his Parents extends to the profession and exercise of his life;
certainly Christ was not all that time from twelve to thirty years, idle; as he
was educated by his Parents, so of his reputed Father he learnt to be a
Carpenter; this, I take it, is plain in these words, Is not this the Carpenter,
Mark 6.3.
the Son of Mary? It appears (say our English Annotations) that Christ
exercised that Trade in his younger years. I know Matthew renders it thus, Mat.
13.55.
Is not this the Carpenters Son, is not his Mother called Mary? But Mark thus,
is not this the Carpenter? etc. Some comment thus, that while Joseph was alive,
Christ wrought with him in the Trade of a Carpenter, and when Joseph died,
which happened before the manifestation of Jesus unto Israel, he wrought alone,
and was no more called the Carpenters Son, but the Carpenter himself: here is
comfort for men of the meanest Callings; as Husbandry was honored in the
Person and Condition of the first Adam before his Fall, so now the Handicraft.
O the Poverty, Humility, Severity of Jesus! it appears at this time especially,
in his Laboring, Working, Hewing of Wood, or the like; here is a sharp reproof
to all those that spend their time in idleness, or without a particular
Calling, that take no pains at all, unless in pursuit after Vain, Foolish,
Superfluous, Sinful things; what! are they wiser than Christ? Our Jesus would
not by any means thus spend his time. Indeed for the while he did nothing
famous, or of public note; Nihil faciendo fecit magnificn.
but neither was this without a Mystery: In doing nothing Public, says one,
He achieved great, and sumptuous, and praiseworthy acts: There is a season
and time to every purpose under heaven: as there is a time of silence, and a
time to speak, so there is a time for public, and a time for private
Negotiations; as yet Christ conceals his virtues, and conforms himself to the
conversation of men, that the Mystery of his Incarnation might not be thought a
Phantasme; then he would have his Virtues and Graces to shine out, when men
usually come to their vigor and strength both of body and mind. And besides,
as it was said of a Divine, that he would never Preach a Sermon, but he would
first endeavor to practice it himself; Mr. Bolton. Mat. 11.29. Acts 1.1.
so I am sure did Christ; he would not teach the World, saying, Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, but first he would practice; first do, then
teach; as Luke tells Theophilus, he had writ all that Jesus began both to do
and teach.

But concerning this time of his youth, because in Scripture there is so deep a
silence, I shall therefore pass it by.

Thus far have I propounded the Object we are to look unto; it is Jesus in his
first coming, or incarnation, whiles yet a Child of twelve years old: Our next
Work is to direct you in the Art or Mystery, how we are to look unto him in
this respect.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus as carrying on the great Work of our Salvation in
his Birth.
WHat Looking] comprehends, you have heard before: And that we may have an
inward experimental look on him whom our souls pant after, let us practice all
these Particulars: As --

1. Let us know Jesus, carrying on the great work of our Salvation in his
Coming or Incarnation. Come let us learn what he did for us when he came
amongst us. There is not one Passage in his first appearing, but it is of
mighty concernment unto us: Is it possible that the great God of Heaven and
Earth should so infinitely condescend (as we have heard) but on some great
Design? And what Design could there be, but only his Glory, and the Creatures
good? O my Soul! If thou have any interest in Christ, all this concerns thee;
the Lord Jesus in these very transactions had an eye to thee; he was Incarnate
for thee, he was conceived, and born for thee; look not on these things as
Notionals, or Generals; look not on the bare history of things; for that is but
unprofitable; the main duty is in eying the end, the meaning, and intent of
Christ; and especially as it relates to thee, not to others, but to thy self.
Alas! what comfort were it to a poor prisoner, if he should hear that the King
or Prince, of his mere grace and love, visited all the Prisoners in this and
that Dungeon, and that he made a Jail-delivery, and set all free, but he never
came near the Place where he poor wretch lies bound in Fetters and cold Irons?
or suppose he gives a visit to that very man, and offers him the tenders of
Grace and Freedom, if he will but accept of it; and (because of his
waywardness) Persuades, Entreats, Commands him to come out, and take his
liberty; and yet he will not regard, or apply it to himself, what comfort can
he have? what fruit, what benefit shall he receive? Dear soul, this is thy
case, if thou art not in Christ, if thou had not heard the Offer, and
embraced and closed with it, then what is Christ's Incarnation, Conception,
Nativity unto thee? Come! learn! not merely as a Scholar, to gain some
notional-knowledge; but as a Christian, as one that feels virtue coming out of
Christ in every of these respects: Study close this great transaction in
reference to thy self. I know not how it happ^ns, whether out of the generality
of some Preachers handling this Subject, or whether out of the Superstition of
the time wherein it usually has been handled, it either savours not with some
Christans, or it is seldom thought of by the most; O God forbid we throw out of
the doors, such a blessed necessary truth! If rightly applied, it is a
Christians joy; Behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy that shall be to
all People; for unto you is born in the City of David, Luke 2.10, 11.
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Sure the Birth of Christ is of mighty
concernment unto thee; Isa. 9.6.
unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; there is not any piece of
this transaction, but it is of special use and worth thy pains. How many break
their brains, and waste their Spirits in studying Arts and Sciences, things in
comparison of no value; whereas Paul otherwise determined not to know any thing
among you but Jesus Christ? To know Jesus Christ in every piece and point, 1
Cor. 2.2.
whether in Birth, or Life, or Death, it is saving knowledge. O stand not upon
Cost, whether Pains or Study, Tears or Prayers, Peace or Wealth, Goods or Name,
Life or Liberty; sell all for this Pearl. Christ is of that worth and use, that
thou can never over-buy him, though thou gave thy self and all the World
for him; the study of Christ is the study of studies; the knowledge of Christ
is the knowledge of every thing that is necessary, either for this World, or
for the World to come. O study Christ in every of the foresaid respects.

SECT. II. Considering Jesus in that respect.
2. LEt us consider Jesus, carrying on this great work of our Salvation at his
first Coming or Incarnation. It is not enough to study and know these great
Mysteries; but according to the Measure of Knowledge we have, we must Muse,
Meditate, Ponder, and Consider of them. Now this Consideration brings Christ
nearer and closer to the soul. Consideration gathers up all the long
fore-passed Acts and Monuments of Christ, and finds a deal of sweetness and
power to come flowing from them. Consideration fastens Christ more strongly to
the Soul, and as it were, rivets the Soul to Jesus Christ, and fastens him in
the heart. A soul that truly considers and meditates of Christ, thinks and
talks of nothing else but Christ; Prove. 4.13.
it takes hold, and will not let him go. I will keep to thee (says the soul in
meditation) for thou art my life. Why thus, O my Soul, consider thou of Christ,
and of what he did for thee when he was incarnate! and that thou may not
confound thy self in thy meditations, consider a part of these particulars. --
As, --

1. Consider Jesus in his Forerunner, and the blessed tidings of his coming in
the flesh; now the long-looked for time drew near, a glorious Angel is sent
from Heaven, and he comes with an Olive Branch of peace; first he presents
himself to Zachary, and then to Mary; to her he imparts the Message on which
God sent him into this nether World; Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus. Luke 1.31.
Till now Humane Nature was less than that of Angels; but by the Incarnation of
the Word, it was to be exalted above the Cherubims. What sweet News? What
blessed Tidings was this Message? The Decree of old must now be accomplished,
and an Angel proclaims it upon Earth; hear O ye Sons of Adam, this concerns you
as much as the Virgin: Were ye not all undone in the Loins of your first
Father? Was not my Soul, and thy Soul in danger of Hellfire; was not this our
case and condition; that after a little life upon Earth, we should have been
thrown into eternal torments, where had been nothing but Weeping, Wailing, and
Gnashing of Teeth? And now that God and Christ should bid an Angel tell the
News, Ye shall not die; lo, here a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and he
shall be your Jesus; he shall save you from this Hell, and Death, and Sin: he
shall deliver your Souls, he shall save you to the utmost; his Name is Jesus,
and he shall not bear his Name for naught; believe in him, and ye shall live
with him in Glory. O blessed news! Men may talk what they will of this and that
news, every one gapes after it: but there is no news so welcome to one even now
ready to perish, as to hear of a Savior; tell a man in his Sickness of one
that will make him well again: tell a man in Captivity of one that will rescue
him, and set him free again; tell a man in Prison, condemned to die, of one
with a pardon, that will save his life; and every one of these will say, this
is the best news that ever was heard: O then, if it be good tidings to hear of
a Savior, where is only a matter of loss of life, or of this Earth; how much
more when it comes to the loss of Heaven, to the danger of Hell, when our Souls
are at stake, and likely to be damned for evermore; what glad tidings would
that be to hear of one that could save our souls from that destroyer? is not
such a Savior worth the harkening after? were not the birth of such a one good
news? O my soul, ponder on these words, as if an Angel, seeing thee stand on
the brim of Hell, should speak to thee, even to thy soul.

2. Consider Jesus in his Conception; no sooner the news heard, but Christ is
conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Virgins Womb; this Conception is worthy our
consideration: what, that the great God of Heaven should condescend so far as
to take our Nature upon him, and to take it in the same way, and after the same
manner as we do? the Womb of the Virgin was surely no such place, but he might
well have abhorred it; true, but he meant by this to sanctify our very
Conceptions; and to that purpose, he is conceived in an holy manner, even by
the holy Ghost; we must not be too curious to enquire after the manner of the
holy Ghosts operation, who therefore overshadowed the Virgin; this is work for
our hearts, and not merely for our heads: humble Faith, and not curious
inquisition shall find the sweetness of this Mystery. It was David's Complaint,
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. O my
Soul, this was thy case in thy very first being or beginning, Psalm. 51.5.
and had thou died in that condition, the word is express, that nothing
defiled nor unclean shall enter into the City of Glory; but here is the remedy,
thy sinful Conception is sanctified by Christ's holy Conception: the holiness of
thy Jesus serves as a Cover to hide thy Original pollutions from the eyes of
God. O consider this! Jesus Christ was not conceived in vain; he was not idle,
doing nothing whiles he was in his Mothers Womb; he that from all eternity
began, he was then carrying on the great work of our salvation for us: O
consider this Conception thus, till thou bring'st it near and close to thy
soul; till thou feel some sweetness and power coming, and flowing from Jesus
in the Womb.

3. Consider the duplicity of Natures in Jesus Christ: The Word was made Flesh;
John 1.14.
no sooner was he conceived, but he was God-Man, Man-God; he was perfectly
framed, and instantly united to the eternal Word: God sent his Son, there is the
Nature Divine; made of a Woman, there is the Nature Humane. Certainly great is
this Mystery, that the Word is made Flesh; that the Son of God is made of a
Woman; Gal. 4.4.
that a Star gives Light to the Sun; that a Branch does bear the Vine; that a
Creature gives being to the Creator; that the Mother was younger than what she
bear, and a great deal lesser than what she contained. Admire O my Soul at
this! but withal consider, that all this was for us and our Salvation; he was
Man, that he might die for us: and he was God, that his death might be
sufficient to save us: had he been Man alone, not God, he might have suffered,
but he could never have satisfied for sin; he could not have been Jesus, a
Savior of Souls; and had he been God alone, not Man, he had not been of kin to
our Nature offending; and so he could not have satisfied the Justice of God in
the same Nature wherein it was offended; neither could he, as God alone, have
died for Sin; and the Decree was out, that our Redeemer must die for Sin: for
without shedding of Blood there is no Remission: and no shedding of Blood, Heb.
9.22.
no Passion could possibly befall the Godhead of Jesus Christ. I shall not
dispute the power of God, whether he was able to lay down another kind of way
of man's Redemption, than by the Incarnation of the Son of God: without
controversy this was the Will of God, and he appointed no other way, because
he would not. O my Soul, consider of this in relation to thy self, he is
God-man, that he might suffer and satisfy for thy sins: he is Godman, that he
might be able and fit, most fully to finish the work of thy salvation; as God,
he is able, and as man, he is fit to discharge the Office of Mediator; as God,
he is able to bear the punishment of sin; and as man, he is fit to suffer for
sin: O the wisdom of God in this very way! Man's Nature can suffer Death, but
not overcome it; the Divine Nature can overcome death and all things; but he
cannot suffer it: and hence there is a duplicity of natures in Jesus Christ: O
muse on this; it is a matter worthy of thy serious consideration.

4. Consider the real distinction of these two Natures in Christ. As the
unapproachable light of the Godhead was put into the dim and dark Lanthorn of
humane flesh, so these two natures remained entire, without any conversion,
commixion, or confusion; they were not as Wine and Water, that become one by
mixing; there is no such blending the divine and humane nature; they were not
as Snow and Water, that become one by dissolving of the Snow into the Water;
there is no such changing of the Humane Nature into the Divine, or of the
Divine Nature into the Humane: Some say indeed, that the Godhead was more
plentifully communicated with the Manhood after his Resurrection, than now at
his Conception; but howsoever, it did not then swallow up the Truth of his
Manhood, as a whole Sea would swallow up one drop of Oil; look as at first
moment of his Conception, he was God and man, so these two Natures continued
still, distinct in substance, properties, and actions. Why consider this, O my
soul, in reference to thy self; O there is comfort in this! by this means thou
have now free access unto the Throne of Grace, that thou may find help in
thy necessities; and as thou have free access, so thou may boldly draw near;
his Deity indeed confounds, but his Humanity comforts faint and feeble Souls;
his Divine Nature amazeth, but his Humane Nature incourageth us to come unto
him; even after his Resurrection he was pleased to send this comfortable
message to the sons of men, John. 20.17.
Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father and your Father,
and to my God and your God; now as long as he is not ashamed to call us
Brethren, Heb. 11.16.
God is not ashamed to be called our God. O the sweet fruit, that we may gather
of this Tree, the real distinction of two Natures in Christ. As long as Christ
is man as well as God, we have a motive strong enough to appease his Father,
and to turn his favorable countenance toward us; here is our happiness, that
there is one Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 1.5.
the Man Christ Jesus.

5. consider the Union of the two natures of Christ in one and the same Person;
as he was the branch of the Lord, and the fruit of the Earth, so these two
natures were tied with such a Gordian knot, as sin, hell, and the grave were
never able to untie; yea, though in the death of Christ there was a separation
of the soul from the body; yet in that separation, the hypostatical Union
remained firm, unshaken and indissoluble: in this Meditation thou have great
cause, O my Soul, to admire and adore; wonderful things are spoken of thee, O
Christ! he is God in a Person of a Godhead, so as neither the Father, nor the
Holy Ghost were made flesh; and he is man in the nature of man, not properly
the Person, the humane nature of Christ never having any Personal subsistence
out of the Godhead; this is a mystery, that no Angel, much less man is able to
comprehend: we have not another example of such an Union (as you have heard)
only the nearest similitude, or resemblance we can find, is that of the Branch
and Tree into which it is ingraffed; we see one Tree may be set into another,
and it grows in the Stock thereof, and becomes one and the same Tree, though
there be two natures or kinds of fruit still remaining therein; so in the Son
of God made man, though there be two natures, yet both being united into one
Person, there is but one Son of God and one Jesus Christ. If thou will consider
this great mystery of Godliness any further, review what has been said in the
object propounded, where this union is set forth more largely and particularly;
but especially consider the blessed effects of this union in reference to thy
self; as our nature in the person of Christ, is united to the Godhead, so our
persons in and by this Union of Christ, are brought nigh to God. Hence it is
that God does set his Sanctuary and Tabernacle among us; and that he dwells
with us; and which is more, that he makes us houses and habitations, wherein he
himself is pleased to dwell by his holy Spirit. Ye are the Temple of the Living
God, as God has said I will dewll in them, and walk in them, and I will be
their God, John. 17 20, 21, 22, 23.
and they shall be my People, 2. Cor. 6.16. Was not this Christ's Prayer in our
behalf? I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word, that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou
have sent me, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfect in one, and
that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me. By reason of this hypostatical union of Christ, Gal. 4.6.
the Spirit of Christ is given to us in the very moment of our regeneration.
And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father; and hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in
us, because he has given us of his Spirit. As the members of the Body
howsoever distinct amongst themselves, and all differing from the head, yet by
reason of one soul informing both the head and members, they all make one
compositum, or man; so all believers in Christ, howsoever distinct Persons
amongst themselves, and all distinct from the Person of Christ, and especially
from the Godhead which is incommunicable, yet by one and the same spirit
abiding in Christ, Ephesians. 4.4. 1 Cor. 6.17.
and all his Members, they become one, there is one body, and one spirit: he
that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. O my Soul, consider of this; and in
considering, believe thy part in this, and the rather, because the means of
this union on thy part is a true and lively faith; faith is the first effect
and instrument of the Spirit of Christ, disposing and enabling thy soul to
cleave unto Christ, and for this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ -- that Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. Ephesians. 3.14,
17.


6. Consider the birth of Christ, this man-God, God-man, who in his divine
generation was the Son of God, in his humane generation was born in a stable,
for the saving of the Children of men, who were as the ox and mule having no
understanding. It were a fruitful meditation to consider over and over that
sweet resemblance of Christ being a Vine; methinks I hear the Voice of my
beloved, Cant. 2.10, 13.
rise up my love -- the fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the vine
with the tender grapes gives a good smell; arise my love, my fair one, and come
away; if Christ knocks at the door, who will not awake, and arise? if Christ
comes in view, who will not look unto Jesus? if Christ the Vine calls us to
come see the vine with the tender grape, who will not taste the goodness, smell
the sweetness? and after a little taste of that goodness, and sweetness that is
in him, who would not long after more, till we come from the first fruits to
the last-fruits of the Spirit, even to those visions and fruitions of Christ in
Glory? Consider, O my soul, of this Vine, till thou have brought Christ near
and close unto thy self. Suppose thy heart, the Garden wherein this Vine was
planted, wherein it budded, blossomed, and bare fruit, suppose the holy Ghost
to come upon thee, and to form and fashion in thee Jesus Christ; (thus Paul
bespeaks the Galathians, my little Children, of whom I travel in Birth again
until Christ be formed in you,) would not this affect? would not the whole
soul be taken up with this? come, receive Christ into thy soul, or if that work
be done, if Christ be formed in thee, O Cherish him! (I speak of the Spiritual
birth) O keep him in thy heart! let him there bud, and blossom, and bear
fruit; let him fill thy soul, with his Divine Graces; O that thou could say
it feelingly, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: Gal. 2.20.
O that this were the Issue of thy meditation on Christ's Birth! even whiles
thou art going with the shepherds to Bethelem, and there find thy Savior
lying in a Cratch, that thou would bring him thence, and make thy heart to be
his Cradle! I would not give a farthing for a meditation merely on the History
of Christ's Birth; either draw virtue from him, by feeling him within, or thy
meditation will be fruitless. --

7. Consider those few consequents after Christ's Birth; every action of Christ
is our instruction; here are many particulars, but none in vain; Christ is
considered under much variety of notion, but he is still sweet under all. Is it
possible, O my soul, that thou should tire thy self in the contemplations of
Jesus Christ? if one flower yield thee not pleasure, or delight, go to a
second, a third; observe how the Bees gather honey, after a while that they
have sucked one flower, they go to another; so for a while observe the
circumcision of Jesus Christ, and suck there, and gather some honey out of that
flower; Christ had never been, Circumcised but that the same might be done to
our souls, that was done to his Body, O that the same Christ would do that in
us, that was done to him for us. Again, observe Christ's presentation in the
Temple, this was the Law of those that first opened the womb; now Christ was
the firstborn of Mary, and indeed the firstborn of all Creatures; and he was
consecrate unto God, that by him we might be consecrate, and made holy; and
that by him we might be accepted, when we are offered unto the Lord. Again,
observe Christ's flight into Egypt; though the infancy is usually most quiet,
and devoyd of trouble, yet here life and toil, began together; and see how
speedily this comes after Christ's dedication unto God: Alas! Alas! We are no
sooner born again, then we are persecuted; if the Church travel, and bring
forth a Male, she is in danger of the Dragons streams. Again, observe Christ's
return into Judea, Mat. 15.25.
he was not sent but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel; with them alone
he was personally to converse in his Ministry, in which respect he was called a
Minister of Circumcision. Romans 15.8.
And where should he be trained, and show himself, but amongst them to whom God
had sent him? The Gospel first began there, and as a preparation to it, Christ
now in his Childhood returns thither. Again, observe Christ Disputing with the
Doctors in the Temple; in his very nonage Christ gives a taste of his future
proof, see how early his divine graces put forth themselves, In Him were hid
(says the Apostle) all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; Col. 2.3.
all the treasures were hid in him, and yet some of those treasures appeared
very early betimes: his wisdom in his very infancy is admired at, nor is it
without our profit, for of God he is made wisdom unto us. 1 Cor. 1.38.
Again, observe how he spent the remainder of his Youth, in all his examples he
meant our Instructions, He went down with his Parents, and was subject to them;
Lam. 3.27.
he was not idely bred, but serves his Generation in the poor way of a
Carpenter; It is every way good for a Man to bear God's Yoke even from his
Infancy. Christ is enured betimes to the hardship of life, and to the strict
observation of the Law, both of God and Nature.

See, O my Soul, what a world of matter is before thee to consider of, here is
Jesus under many a Nation, here is the annuntiation of Jesus, the conception of
Jesus, the duplicity of natures in Jesus, the real distinction, the wonderful
union, the nativity of Jesus, together with some consequents after it. Go over
these with often and frequent thoughts, give not over till thou feel thy
Heart begin to warm; true Meditation is as the bellows of the Soul that does
kindle, and inflame holy affections, and by renewed, and more forcible
thoughts, as by renewed, and stronger blasts it does renew, and increase the
flame.

SECT. III. Of Desiring after Jesus in that Respect.
3. LEt us desire after Jesus, carrying on the great work of our Salvation at
his first coming, or incarnation. It is not enough to know, and consider, but
we must desire. Now, What is desire, but a certain Motion of the Appetite, by
which the Soul darts it self toward the absent good, purposely to draw near,
and to unite it self thereunto? The incarnation of Christ according to the
Letter, was the desire of Nations; so the Prophet, Hag. 2.7.
I will shake all Nations, and the Desire of all Nations shall come. O how they
that lived before Christ, Desired after this coming of Christ! Abraham Desired
to see that day, Two Thousand Years and more before it came: it was the
expectation of all the Patriarchs, O when will that day come? And surely the
incarnation of Christ in the fruit, or efficacy, or application is, or should
be the Desire of all Christians. There is merit, and virtue in Jesus Christ, in
every passage of Christ, in his conception, incarnation; in his birth, and in
those consequents after his birth; now to make these ours, that we may have our
share, and part, and interest in them, we must here begin; O my soul do thou
desire, do thou seek to possess thy self of Christ, set thy desire (as the
Needle point) aright, and all the rest will follow: never will union be with
the absent good, but the Soul by Desire, must first dart it self toward it.
True it is, and pity it is, Millions of Souls stand at a distance from Jesus
Christ, and why? they have no desire toward him: but, O that my soul, and thy
soul (whosoever thou art that read) would Desire! O that we could Desire,
and long after him until we languish, and be compelled to cry out with the
spouse, Cant. 2.5.
Stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with Apples, for I am Sick of Love.

Is there not good reason for it? What is there in Christ that is not
Desirable? view over all those excellencies of his conception; of his two
natures, really distinguished, and yet wonderfully united; of his birth; of
those few consequents after his birth: but above all, see the fruit of all; he
was conceived that our conceptions might be sanctified: he was the Son of man
that he might suffer for us, and the Son of God that he might satisfy divine
justice: he was God* and Man in one person, that we might be one with him,
Members of his Body, and of his Flesh, and of his Bones; Ephesians. 5.30.
he was born of the Virgin, that there might be a spiritual conception and
birth of Christ in our Virgin-hearts; or he was conceived, and born that we
might conceive the grace of Christ in our hearts, and bring it forth in our
lives; What? Are not these desirable things? Never tell me of thy present
enjoyments, for never was Christ so enjoyed in this life, but thou have cause
to desire yet more of Christ; It is worth thy observation, that Spiritual
desires after Christ, do neither load, nor cloy the heart, but rather open, and
enlarge it for more and more; Who was better acquainted with God than Moses?
Exodus 33.18. Phil. 1.23.
and yet, Who was more importunate to know him better? I beseech thee show me
thy glory: And, Who was more acquainted with Christ than Paul? and yet who was
more importunate to be with him nearer? I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. Further and further union with Christ, and communion with Christ,
are most desirable things, and are not these the fruits of his incarnation? the
effects of his hypostatical, personal union? more and more peace, and love, and
reconciliation betwixt God and us are desirable things; and are not these the
fruits of Christ's birth, the effects of his budding out of the earth, was it
not then That Righteousness looked down from Heaven? That Mercy and Truth met
together, and Righteousness and Peace kissed each other? an higher degree of
holiness, sanctification, likeness to God and Christ are desirable things; and
are not these the fruits of his circumcision, and presentation to the Lord? the
effects of all those consequents that follow after his birth? Come, Soul, and
stir up thy desires; true desires are not wavering and dull, but resolute and
full of quickness; observe how the nature of true desires in Scripture is set
forth by the most pathetical and strong similitudes of Hunger and Thirst, and
those not common neither, but by The panting of a tired Heart after the rivers
of waters, and by the gaping of dry ground after some seasonable showers. O
then! How is it that the passages of thy desires are so narrow, and almost shut
up? Nay, How is it that thy vessels are so full of contrary qualities, that
there is scarce any room in thy Soul for Christ, and all his Train? Will not
the desires of the Patriarchs witness against thee? How cried they after
Christ's coming in the Flesh, Bow the Heavens O Lord, and come down, Psalm.
144.5. Psalm. 144.5.
Oh that Thou would rent the Heavens, that Thou would come down, Isa.
64.1. Isa. 64.1.
Drop down ye Heavens from above, and let the Skies pour down Righteousness,
let the Earth open, and bring forth Salvation, Isa. 45.8. Isa. 45.8.
Is it possible that their desires should be more vehement after Christ than
ours? They lived on the dark-side of the cloud, but we on the bright-side; the
vail was upon their hearts, which vail is done away in Christ; they saw Christ
afar off, and their sight was very dim, and dark; But we all with open face, as
in a glass, behold the glory of the Lord. 2 Cor. 3.18.
One would think, the less any thing is known, the less it should be desired; O
my soul, either thou art more ignorant of Christ, than the Patriarchs of old,
or thy heart is more out of frame than theirs; suspect the latter, and blame
thy heart, it may be thy turpid and sluggish nature has laid thy desires
asleep; if an hungry man will sleep, his hunger will sleep with him: But, O
stir up, and awake thy desires! Present before them that glorious object, the
incarnation of Jesus Christ; it is an object which the very Angels desire to
look into; and, Art not thou more concerned in it than the Angels? is not the
fruit of the incarnation thine, more especially thine? Come then, stir up those
motions of thy appetite, by which the soul darts it self toward the absent
good; draw nearer and nearer till thou come to union and enjoyment, cry after
Christ, Judge. 5.28.
Why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariots?

SECT. IV. Of Hoping in Jesus in that Respect.
4. LEt us Hope in Jesus, carrying on the great Work of our Salvation at his
first coming, or incarnation. Only here remember, I speak not of every hope,
but only of such an hope as is grounded on some certainty and knowledge. This
is the main question, whether Christ's incarnation belongs unto me? the Prophet
tells us, that Unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given. Isa. 9.6.
But how may I Hope that this Child is born to me? and that this Son is given
to me? what ground for that? Out of these words of the Prophet, I shall draw a
double Evidence, which may be instead of all: our first Evidence from the
former words, Unto us a Child is born; our second Evidence from the latter
words, unto us a Son is given. 1. From the former words I lay down this
position, unto us a Child is born, if we are new born; the surest way to know
our interest in the birth of Christ, it is to know Christ born in us, or formed
in us, Gal. 4.19.
as the Apostle speaks. The new birth is the effect of Christ's birth, and a
sure sign that Christ is born to us. Say then, O my soul, Art thou born anew?
is there in thee a new nature, a new principle? is the Image of God, and of
Christ in thy soul? so the Apostle styles it, 1 Cor. 15.59.
the bearing of the Image of the heavenly; why then was Christ incarnate for
thee; if thy new birth be not clear enough, thou may try it further by these
following rules?

1. Where this new birth is, there is new desires, new comforts, new
contentments. Sometimes with the prodigal thou wast content with husks, but now
nothing will satisfy thee, but thy Fathers mansion, and thy Fathers feasts;
sometimes thou mindest only earthly things, but now the favor of God, the
light of his countenance, society with him, and enjoying of him, are thy chief
desires; This is a good sign! David's heart and flesh, Psalm. 84.2.
and all breathed after God; My soul longs; yea even faints for the Courts
of the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. Men truly
regenerate, do not judge it so happy to be wealthy, great, and honored in the
world, as to have the light of Gods favor shine upon them; O my soul, do
thou see the glory of the world, and thou fallest down to worship it? do thou
say in the increase of worldly comfort, it is good to be here? Then fear thy
self; but if these things compared with Christ, are vain, and light, and of
poor and mean esteem, then hope well, and be assured that thou art born again,
and that Christ is formed in thee.

2. Where this new birth is, there is new words, new works, new affections, a
new conversation, 2 Cor. 5.17. Acts 9.11. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Old things are passed away, behold, all things are become new. Paul once a
persecutor, but Behold now he prays. And Such were some of you, but now ye
are washed, now ye are sanctified, now ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; As every man is, so is he affected, so he
speaks, and so he lives; if thy life be supernatural, so is thy affections, so
is thy words, so is thy conversation; Paul lived a life once of a bloody
persecutor, he breathed out threatenings against all the Professors of the Lord
Jesus, but now it is otherwise; The life which I now live in the flesh, Gal.
2.20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
O my soul, Have thou the old conversation, the old affections, the old
discourse, the old passions thou used to have? What? Is thy heart a den of
lusts, a cage of unclean imaginations? Then fear thy self, there cannot from a
sweet fountain come forth bitter streams; there cannot from a refined spirit,
as refined, come forth corrupted actions or imaginations; a Thorn cannot send
forth Grapes, says Christ; so neither can a Vine send forth Thorns, say we. I
know there is in the best, something of flesh, as well as of the spirit; but if
thou art new born, then thou can not but strive against it, and wilt
endeavor to conquer it.

1 Pet. 3.4. 2 Pet. 1.4. Romans 7.22. 2 Cor. 5.17.
3. Where this new birth is, there is a new nature, a new principle; Peter calls
it the hidden man of the heart, the divine nature. Paul calls it the inward
man; the new creature, it is compared to a root, to a fountain, to a
foundation, and for want of this foundation, we see now in these sad times so
much inconstancy, and unsetledness in some professors themselves, many have
gotten new and strange notions, but they have not new natures, new principles
of grace; if grace were but rooted in their hearts, though the winds did blow,
and storms arise, they would continue firm and stable, as being founded upon a
Rock. Never tell me of profession, show, outward action, outward conversation,
outward duties of Religion; all this may be, and yet no new creature; you have
some bruits that can act many things like men, but because they have not an
humane nature, they are still brutish; so many things may be done in a way of
holiness, which yet come not from this inward principle of renovation, and
therefore it is but copper, and not gold; mistake not O my soul in this, which
is thy best and surest evidence: though I call the new birth a new creature, my
meaning is not as if a new faculty were infused into him that is new born; a
man when he is regenerate, has no more faculties in his soul than he had
before his regeneration; only in the work of regeneration, those ablities which
the man had before, are now improved, and made spiritual; and so they work now
spiritually, which before wrought naturally. As in the resurrection from the
dead, our bodies shall have no more, nor other parts and members than they had
before, only those parts and members which now are natural, shall then by the
power of God be made spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.44.
It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; there is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body; so the same faculties, and the same
abilities which before regeneration were but natural, are now spiritual, and
work spiritually, they are all brought under the government of the Spirit of
Christ; a lively resemblance of this change in the faculties of the soul, we
may discern in those natural and sensitive faculties, which we have common with
beasts; as to live, to move, to desire, to feel, the beasts having no higher
principle than sense, use them sensually; but a man enjoying the same faculties
under the command of a reasonable soul, he uses them rationally: so is it in a
regenerate man; his understanding, will, and affections, when they had no other
command but reason, he only used them rationally, but now being under the
guiding of the Spirit of Christ, they work spiritually, and he uses them
spiritually; and hence it is that a regenerate man is every where in Scripture,
Romans 8.1. Gal. 5.18, 25.
said to Walk after the Spirit; to be led by the Spirit, to walk in the Spirit;
the Spirit (by way of infusing or shedding) gives power, an ability, a seed, a
principle of spiritual life, which the soul had not before; and from this
principle of spiritual life planted in the Soul, flows or springs those
spiritual motions and operations (as the Spirit leads them out) according to
the habit, or principle of the new creature, the divine nature, the spiritual
life infused. Come then, look to it O my soul, What is thy principle within?
consider not so much the outward actions, the outward duties of Religion, as,
that root from whence they grow, that principle from whence they come: they are
fixed ones, settled ones by way of life in thee? Clocks have their motions, but
they are not motions of life, because they have no principles of life within.
Is there life within? then art thou born again, yea even unto thee a Child is
born. This is one evidence.

2. From the latter words, I lay down this position; unto us a Son is given, if
we are Gods Sons. The best way to know our Interest in the Son of God, it is to
know our selves to be Gods Sons by grace, as Christ was Gods Son by nature:
Christians to whom Christ is given, are coheirs with Christ, only Christ is the
firstborn, and has the pre-eminence in all things; our sonship is an effect
of Christ's sonship, and a sure sign that unto us a Son is given. Say then, O my
soul, Art thou a Son of God? Do thou resemble God (according to thy capacity)
being holy, even as he is holy? Why then? Christ was incarnate for thee, he was
given to thee. If thy sonship be not clear enough, thou may try it further by
these following Rules.

1. The Sons of God, Fear God, If I be a Father, Where is my Honor? Mal. 1.6.
(says God) if I be a Master, Where is my Fear? If I be a Son of God, there
will be an holy Fear and Trembling upon me in all my approaches unto God. I
know there is a servile mercinary Fear, and that is unworthy, and unbeseeming
the Son of God; but there is a filial Fear, and that is an excellent check, and
bridle to all our wantonness: What Son will not Fear the frowns and anger of
his loving Father? 1 Pet. 1.17.
I dare not do this (will he say) my Father will be offended; and I, whether
shall I go? Agreeable to this is the Apostles advice, If ye call on the Father,
pass your sojourning here with Fear.

2. The Sons of God Love God, and Obey God out of a principle of Love. Suppose
there were no Heaven, or Glory to bestow upon a regenerate person, yet would he
Obey God out of a principle of Love; not that it is unlawful for the Child of
God to have an Eye unto the recompense of reward; Heb. 11.26.
Moses reason of esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasure of Egypt, was, for that he had respect unto the recompense of reward:
he had respect, in the original, he had a fixed intent Eye; there was in him a
Love of the reward, and yet withal a Love of God, and therefore his Love of the
reward was not mercinary: but this, I say, though there were no reward at all,
a Child of God has such a principle of Love within him, that for Loves sake he
would Obey his God; he is led by the Spirit, and therefore he Obeys; now the
Spirit that leads him, is a Spirit of Love; and as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Romans 8.14.


3. The Sons of God imitate God in his Love and Goodness to all Men. Our
Savior amplifies this excellent property of God, He causes his Sun to shine
upon good and bad; and thence he concludes, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect. Mat. 5.48.
Goodness to bad men is the highest degree of Grace, and as it were the
perfection of all: O my Soul, Can thou imitate God in this? Consider how thy
Father bears it; though the wicked provoke him day by day, yet for all that he
does not quickly revenge; vengeance indeed is only his, and he may in justice
do what he will that way; and it is the opinion of some, that if the most
patient man in the world should but sit in Gods Throne one day, and see, and
observe the doings, and miscarriges of the Sons of Men, he would quickly set
all the World on Fire; yet God sees all, and for all that He does not make the
Earth presently to gape, and devour us; He puts not out the glorious Light of
the Sun, He does not dissolve the Work of Creation, He does not for Man's Sin
presently blast every thing into Dust: What an excellent pattern is this for
thee to Write after? Can thou but forgive thy Enemies? Do well to them that
do evil to thee? O this is a sure sign of Grace and Sonship! It is storyed of
some Heathens, who beating a Christian almost to Death, asked him, What great
matter Christ did ever do for him? Even this (said the Christian) That I can
forgive you, though you use me thus cruelly; here was a Child of God indeed: It
is a sweet resemblance of our Father, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, to Love
our Enemies, to Bless them that Curse us, to do Good unto them that Hate us, to
Pray for them that Despitefully use us, and Persecute us. O my Soul look to
this, 5.44.
consult this ground of Hope; if this Law be written in thy Heart, write it
down amongst thy Evidences, that thou art Gods Son, yea that even unto thee a
Son is given.

To Review the Grounds: What? is a Child born to me? and a Son given to me?
What? am I indeed new born? am I indeed Gods Son, or Daughter? do I upon the
search find in my Soul new desires, new comforts, new contentments? What? are
my words, my works, and affections, and conversation new? is there in me a new
nature, a new principle? has the Spirit by way of infusing or shedding, given
me a new Power, a new Ability, a Seed of Spiritual Life, which I had not
before? do I upon the search find that I fear God, and love God, and imitate
God in some good measure in his love and goodness toward all Men? can I
indeed, and really forgive an Enemy, and according to opportunity and my
ability, do good unto them that do evil unto me? Why should I not then
confidently and comfortably hope, that I have my share and interest in the
birth of Christ, in the blessed incarnation, and conception of Jesus Christ?
Away, away all despair, and dejections, and despondencies of Spirit! If these
be my grounds of Hope, it is time to hold up head, and heart, and hands, and
all with cheerfulness and confidence, and to say with the Spouse, I am my
beloveds, and my beloved is mine.

SECT. V. Of Believing in Jesus in that Respect.
5. LEt us Believe on Jesus, carrying on the great work of our Salvation at his
first coming or incarnation. I know many staggerings are often in Christians,
What, is it likely that Christ should be incarnate for me? That such a God
should do such a thing, for such a sinful, woeful, abominable wretch as I am? Ah
my Soul, put thy propriety in Christ's incarnation out of dispute, that thou
may be able to say, As God was manifest in the flesh, and I may not doubt it;
so God is manifest in me, and I dare not deny it.

But to help the Soul in this choice Duty, I shall first propose the
hindrances of Faith. 2. The helps of Faith in this Respect. 3. The manner how
to act our Faith. 4. The encouragements to bring on the soul to believe its
part in this blessed incarnation of Jesus Christ.

For the first, there are but three things that can hinder Faith; As --

1. The exceeding unworthiness of the soul; and to this purpose are those
complaints, What? Christ incarnate for me? for such a dead Dog as I am? What
King would dethrone himself, and become a Toad to save Toades? and am not I at
a greater distance from God, than a Toad is from me? has not sin made my soul
more ugly in Gods Eye, than any loathsome Toad can be in my Eye? O I am less
than the least of all Gods Mercies, I am fitter for Hell and Devils, than for
Union and Communion with God and Christ, I dare not, I cannot Believe.

2. The infinite exactness of divine justice which must be satisfied; a soul
deeply and seriously considering of this, it startles thereat, and cries, O
what will become of my soul? one of the least sins that I stand Guilty of,
deserves Death, and eternal Wrath, The wages of sin is death: and I cannot
satisfy; though I have trespassed to many millions of talents, I have not one
mite of mine own to pay; O then how should I believe? What thoughts can I
entertain of Gods Mercy and Love to me-ward? God's Law condemns me, my own
Conscience accuses me, and Justice will have its due.

3. The want of a Mediator, or some suitable Person, which may stand between
the Sinner and God. If on my part there be unworthiness, and on Gods part exact
and strict, and severe Justice; and withal I see no Mediator, which I may go
unto, and first close withal before I deal with the infinite glory of God
himself, how should I but despair, and cry out? O wretched man that I am! O
that I had never been! or if I must needs have a being; Oh that I had been a
toad, or serpent, or any venomous creature rather than a man; for when they dye
they perish, and there is an end of them; but the end of a reprobate sinner is
torments without end: O woe and alas! I cannot believe, there is no room for
faith in this case! these are the hindrances.

2. The helps of faith in this sad condition are these.

1. A consideration that God is pleased to pass by, and to overlook the
unworthiness of his poor creatures; this we see plain in the very act of his
incarnation; himself disdains not to be as his poor creatures, to wear their
own flesh, to take upon him humane nature; and in all things to become like
unto man, sin only excepted.

2. A consideration that God satisfies Justice, by setting up Christ who is
Justice it self; now was it that mercy and truth met together, and
righteousness and peace kissed each other; now was it that free grace and
merit, that fullness and nothingness were made one; now was it that all things
became nothing, and nothing all things; our nature which lay in rags, was
enriched with the unsearchable treasures of glory; now was it that God was made
flesh; and so that flesh which was so weak, as not able to save its own life,
was now enabled to save millions of souls, and to bring forth the greatest
designs of God; now was it that truth ran to mercy, and embraced her, and
righteousness to peace, and kissed her, in Christ they meet, yea in him was the
infinite exactness of God's Justice satisfied.

3. A consideration that God has set up Christ as a Mediator: that he was
incarnate in order to reconciliation, and salvation of souls, but for the
accomplishment of this design Christ had never been incarnate; the very end of
his uniting flesh unto him, was in order to the reconciliation of us poor
souls, alas we had sinned, and by sin deserved everlasting damnation, but to
save us, and to satisfy himself, God takes our nature and joins it to his Son,
and calls that Christ a Savior: This is the Gospel-notion of Christ, for what
is Christ, but God himself in our nature, transacting our peace? In this Christ
is that fullness, and righteousness, and love, and bowels to receive the first
acts of our faith; and to have immediate union and communion with us; indeed we
pitch not our faith first or immediately on God himself; yet at last we come to
him, and our faith lives in God (as one says sweetly) before it is aware,
through the sweet intervention of that person which is God himself, only called
by another name, the Lord Jesus Christ; and these are the helps of faith in
reference to our unworthiness, Gods justice, and the want of a Mediator betwixt
God and us.

3. The manner how to act our faith on Christ incarnate, is this --

1. Faith must directly go to Christ: we find indeed in the Bible some
particular promises of this and that grace: and in proper speaking the way to
live by faith, it is to live upon the promises in the want of the thing, or to
apprehend the thing it self contained in the promise: but the promises are not
given to the elect immediately without Christ; no, no, first Christ, and then
all other things, Incline your ears, and come unto me; 1. Come unto Christ, and
then, I will make an everlasting Covenant, (which contains all the promises)
even the sure Mercies of David. As in marriage, the woman first consents to
have the man, and then all the benefits that necessarily follow; so the soul by
faith, first pitcheth upon Christ himself, and then on the privileges that
flow from Christ. Say Soul, do thou want any temporal Blessing? suppose it be
the payment of Debts, thy daily Bread, Health, etc. Why? look now through the
Scripture for promises of these things, and let thy faith act thus, If God has
given me Christ, the greatest blessing, then certainly he will give me all
these things so far as they may be for my good: in the twenty thirst Psalm we
find a bundle of promises, but he begins thus, The Lord is my Shepherd, says
David, and what then? Therefore I shall not want; the believing Patriarchs
through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stoped the mouths of Lions, did wonders in the world; but what did they chiefly
look to in this their Faith? Surely to the promise to come, and to that better
thing, Christ himself; and therefore the Apostle concludes, having such a cloud
of witnesses, that thus lived and died by faith, let us look unto Jesus, the
Author and finisher of our Faith.

2. Faith must directly go to Christ as God in our flesh; some think it a
carnal apprehension of Jesus Christ, to know him as in flesh; I confess to know
him only so, and absolutely so; to consider Jesus no other way, but as having
flesh, and going up and down in weakness; it is no better than a carnal
apprehension; but to consider Christ as God in flesh, and to consider that
flesh as acted by God, and filled with God, it is not a carnal, but a true and
spiritual apprehension of Jesus Christ; and hither is faith to be directed
immediately, and in the first place; suppose a case of danger by some enemies,
and I find a promise of protection from my enemies, I look on that; but in the
first place thus I argue, if the Lord has given me Christ (God in the flesh)
to save me from Hell, then much more will he save me from these fleshly
enemies. Thus Juda had a promise, that Syria should not prevail against Judah,
they doubted of this, Isa. 7.14.
but how does the Lord seek to assure them? why thus, a Virgin shall conceive
and bear a Son, and his name shall be Immanuel: this seems a strong reason to
flesh and blood; I knew one turn Infidel, and to deny Jesus Christ upon this
very argument. Ah (thought he) what a grand imposture is this, that Christ's
conception, and Christ's birth many years after, should be a present sign of
ruin of Rezin King of Aram, and of the preservation of Ahaz King of Judah? alas
poor soul, he was not acquainted with this art of living by faith; he might
have seen the very same reason elsewhere, the yoke of their burden, Isa. 9.4,
6.
and the stuff of their shoulder, and the rod of their oppressor shall be
broken -- for unto us a child is born, and unto us a Son is given; if their
faith had not first respected Christ incarnate, they could never have expected
any temporal deliverance by that promise of deliverance, first laid down; But
in this way they might, and so may we. -- You will say what is this to us? they
looked for Christ to come in the flesh, but now he is come, and that time and
design is gone and past many a year since; I answer no, the time is gone, but
the design is not; Christ remains God in the flesh to this very day; he came
not as once to manifest himself in flesh, to satisfy Gods justice in the flesh
for sin, and so to lay it down again; that flesh remains, and shall remain; nor
is it without use, for all the spirit and life which the Saints now have, or
which the Saints shall have unto the end of the World, it is to be conveyed
through that flesh, yea the Spirit it self dwells in it, and is conveyed
through it, and therefore if they had so much Gospel Spirit in the time of the
Old Testament (which indeed was rare) how much more should we go to Christ as
God in the flesh, and look upon it as a standing Ordinance, and believe
perfectly on it?

3. Faith must go and lie at the feet of Christ; faith must fix and fasten it
self on this God in our flesh: some go to Christ, and look on Jesus with loose
and transient glances, they bring in but flashy, secondary, ordinary actings of
faith, they have but course and common apprehensions of Jesus Christ. Oh but we
should come to Christ with solemn serious spirits; we should look on Jesus
piercingly, till we see him as God is in him, and as such a person thus and
thus qualified from Heaven; we should labor to apprehend what is the riches of
this glorious mystery of Christ's Incarnation; we should dive into the depths
of his glorious actings; we should study this mystery above all other studies;
nothing is so pleasant, and nothing is more deep; that one person should be God
and Man, that God should be man in our nature, and yet not assume the person of
a man; that blessedness should be made a curse, that Heaven should be let down
into Hell, that the God of the world would shut himself up (as it were) in a
body; that the invisible God should be made visible to sense; that all things
should become nothing, and make it self of no reputation; that God should make
our nature, which had sinned against him, to be the great Ordinance of
Reconciling us unto himself, that God should take our flesh, and dwell in it
with all his fullness, and make that flesh more Glorious than the Angels, and
advance that flesh into oneness with himself, and through that flesh open all
his councels and rich discoveries of love and free grace unto the Sons of men;
that this Man-God, God-Man should be our Savior, Redeemer, Reconciler, Father,
Friend; Oh what mysteries are these! no wonder if when Christ was born, John
1.14.
the Apostle cries, we saw his glory, as of the only begotten Son of God;
noting out, that at first sight of him, so much glory sparkled from him as
could appear from none, but a God walking up and down the world. O my soul, let
not such a treasury be unlookt into; set faith on work with a redoubled
strength; surely we live not like men under this great design, if our eye of
faith be not firmly and steadfastly set on this. O that we were but insighted
into these glories! that we were but acquainted with these lively discoveries?
Gal. 2.20.
how blessedly might we live by the Faith of the Son of God who loved us, and
gave himself for us?

4. Faith must look principally to the end and meaning of Christ as God coming
in the Flesh. Now what was the design and meaning of Christ in this? The
Apostle answers, Romans 8.3. Romans 8.3.
God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, to condemn sin in the Flesh,
(i.e.) God the Father sent into the World his eternal and only begotten Son,
whom in his eternal counsel he had designed to the Office of a Mediator, to
take away or abolish in the first place Original Sin. Mark these two words, he
condemned Sin in the Flesh; the first word condemned] is by a Metonymy put for
that which follows Condemnation, namely for the abolishing of sin; as condemned
persons used to be cut off, and to be taken out of the World, that they may be
no more; so Christ has condemned or abolished this Sin. For the second word,
in the Flesh] is meant that Humane Nature which Christ assumed: he abolished
sin altogether in his own nature; and that Flesh of his being perfectly holy,
and the holiness of it being imputed unto us, it takes away our guilt in
respect of the impureness of our Nature also. Some may object, if this were so,
then were we without Original sin? I answer, the Flesh or the Nature which
Christ took upon him, was altogether without sin; and by imputation of it we
are in proportion freed from sin; Christ had not the least spot of Original
sin; and if we are Christ's, then is this sin in some measure abolished and
taken out of our hearts. But howsoever the filth of this sin may remain in
part, yet the guilt is removed: in this respect the purity of Christ's Humane
Nature is no less reckoned to us for the curing of our defiled Nature, than the
sufferings of Christ are reckoned to us, for the remission of our actual Sins.
O my Soul, look to this end of Christ as God in the Flesh; if thou consider him
as made Flesh and Blood, and laid in a Manger, think withal, that his meaning
was to condemn sin in our Flesh; there flows from the Holiness of Christ's
Nature such a power, as countermands the power of our Original sin, and acquits
and discharges from the condemnation of the same Sin: not only the Death, and
Life, but also the Conception and Birth of Christ has its influence into our
Justification. Oh the sweet that a lively Faith may draw from this Head!

4. The Encouragements to bring on Souls to believe on Christ Incarnate, we may
draw --

1. From the excellency of this Object. This very Incarnation of Christ is the
Foundation of all other actings of God for us; it is the very Hinge or Pole on
which all turn; it is the Cabinet wherein all the Designs of God do lie;
Election, Redemption, Justification, Adoption, Glorification, are all wrapped up
in it; it is the highest pitch of the Declaration of Gods Wisdom, Goodness,
Power and Glory; Oh what a sweet Object of Faith is this! I know there are some
other things in in Christ which are most proper for some Acts of Faith; as
Christ dying is most proper for the pardon of actual sin; and Christ rising
from the dead is most proper for the evidencing of our Justification; but the
strongest purest Acts of Faith are those which take in Christ as such a Person,
laid out in all this Glory. Christ's Incarnation is more general than Christ's
Passion, or Christ's Resurrection, and (as some would have it) includes all;
Christ's Incarnation holds forth in some sort Christ in his fullness, and so it
is the full and complete subject of our Faith; or if it be only more
comprehensive, why then it requires more comprehensive Acts of Faith, and by
consequence we have more enjoyments of Christ this way, than any other way:
Come poor Soul, I feel, I feel thy eyes are running to and fro the World, to
find comforts and happiness on Earth: O come, cast thy eyes back, and see
Heaven and Earth in one Object! look fixedly on Christ Incarnate! there is more
in this, than in all the variety of this World, or of that World to come. Here
is an Object of Faith, and Love, and Joy, and Delight; here is a Compendium of
all Glories; here is one for a heart to be taken with to all Eternity. O lay
thy mouth to this Fountain; suck and be satisfied with the breasts of his
Consolation; Isa. 66.11.
Milk out and be delighted with the brightness of his Glory.

2. From the sutableness of this Object. Christ Incarnate is most suitable for
our Faith to act upon. We are indeed to believe on God; but God essentially is
the utmost Object of Faith; we cannot come to God, but in and through Christ;
alas, God is offended, and therefore we cannot find ground immediately to go to
God; hence you heard that Faith must directly go to Christ as God in our Flesh.
O the infinite condescentions of God in Christ! God takes up our Nature, and
joins it to himself as one person, and lays out that before our Faith; so that
here is God, and God suited to the particular state and condition of the
sinner. Oh now with what boldness may our souls draw nigh to God? Why art thou
strange poor soul? Why stand thou afar off, as if it were death to draw
nigh? Of whom art thou afraid? Is God come down amongst men, and can thou
not see him, lest thou die and perish? Oh look once more, and be not
discouraged! See, God is not come down in fire, God is not descended in the
Armor of Justice and everlasting burnings; No, no, he is clothed with the
Garments of Flesh, he sweetly desires to converse with thee after thine own
form; he is come down to beseech thee, to see with thine own eyes thy eternal
happiness. q. d. Come poor Soul, come, put in thy hands, and feel my heart how
it beats in love toward thee. O the wonder of Heaven! it is the cry of some
poor souls. Oh that I might see God! lo here God is come down in the likeness
of man, he walks in our own shape amongst us; it is the cry often others, O that
I might have my heart united to God! Why he is come down on this very purpose,
and has united our nature unto himself. Surely God has left all the World
without excuse: Oh that ever there should be an heart of unbelief, after these
sensible demonstrations of Divine Glory and Love? Why soul, will thou now stand
off? Tell me, what would thou have God do more? Can he manifest himself in a
more taking, alluring, suitable way to thy condition? Is there any thing below
flesh wherein the great God can humble himself for thy good? Come, think of
another, and a better way, or else for ever believe. Methinks it is sad to see
Believers shy in their approaches to God, or doubtful of their acceptance with
God, when God himself stoops first, and is so in love with our acquaintance,
that he will be of the some nature that we are. O let not such a Rock of
strength be slighted, but every day entertain sweet and precious thoughts of
Christ being incarnate; enure thy heart to a way of believing on this Jesus, as
he carries on the great Work of thy Slavation at his first Coming or
Incarnation.

3. From the Gospel-tenders and offers of this blessed Object to our Souls. As
Christ is come in our natue to satisfy, so he comes in the Gospel freely and
fully to offer thee terms of Love; therein are set out the most rich and
alluring expressions that possibly can be; therein is set out that this
Incarnation of Christ was Gods own acting, out of his own Love and Grace, and
Glory; therein is set out the Birth, and Life, and Death of Christ; and this he
could not do, but he must be Incarnate: God takes our Flesh, and he uses that
as an Organ, or Instrument whereby to Act; he was Flesh to suffer, as he was
Spirit to satisfy for our sins. Methinks I might challenge Unbelief, and bid
it come forth; let it appear if it dare before this Consideration: What is not
God Incarnate enough to satisfy thy Conscience? Come nigh poor Soul! hear the
Voice of Christ inviting, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden with Sin; and O let these
rich and glorious openings of the heart of Christ overcome thy heart: Suppose
the case thus; what if God should have done no more than this? Had he only
looked down from Heaven, and hearing sinners cry out, O woe, woe unto us for
ever! we have broke Gods Law, incurred the penalty, damned our own souls; O who
should deliver us? Who will save us from the Wrath to Come? Who will keep us
out of Hell, our deserved Dungeon, where the fury of the great Judge burns in a
fiery Brimstone, and his revenge boyls in a fiery Torrent limitless and
unquenchable. In this case, if God hearing sinners thus crying out; had he, I
say, only looked down and told them in sweet Language, Poor souls, I will
pardon your Sins by my own Prerogative, I made the Law, and I will dispense
with it; fear not, I have the Keys of Life and Death, and upon my word you
shall not perish; What soul would not have been raised up even from the bottom
of Hell at this very voice? I know a poor soul would have scrupled at this, and
have said, What then should become of infinite Justice? shall that be
dishonored to save my Soul? This would have been a scruple indeed, especially
considering that great controversy (as we have heard) of Mercy and Truth, and
Righteousness and Peace: but to remove all controversies, God has not only
spoken from Heaven by himself, but he himself is come down from Heaven to Earth
to speak unto us: O see this Miracle of Mercy! God is come down in Flesh, he is
come as a price; he himself will pay himself according to all the demands of
his Justice and Righteousness before our eyes; and all this done, now he offers
and tenders himself unto thy soul. Oh my soul, why should thou fear to cast
thy self upon thy God? I know thy Objection of vileness; notwithstanding all
thy vileness, God himself offers himself to lead thee by the hand; and to
remove all doubts, God himself has put a price sufficient in the hands of
Justice to stop her Mouth: or if yet thou fear to come to God, why come then
to thy own Flesh, go to Christ, as having thy own nature; it is he that calls
thee: How? Go to Flesh? Go to thy own Nature? What can be said more to draw on
thy trembling heart? If God himself, and God so fitted and qualified (as I may
say) will not allure, must not men die and perish in unbelief? What, O my soul!
(give me leave to chide thee) Is God come down so low to thee? and do thou
now stand questioning whether thou should go, or come to him? What is this
but to say, all that God is, or does, or says, is too little to persuade me
into Faith? I cannot tell, but one would think that unbelief should be
strangled, quite slain upon this consideration; all this, O my soul, thou
hear in the Gospel; there is Christ incarnate set forth to the life; there
is Christ suing thy Loves, and offering himself as thy beloved in thy own
naure; there it is written that God is come down in flesh, with an Olive Branch
of eternal peace in his hand, and bids you all be witness, he is not come to
destroy, but to save. Oh that this encouragement might be of force to improve
Christ's glorious design to the supplying of all thy wants, and to the making up
of all thy losses! believe, Oh believe thy part in Christ incarnate!

SECT. VI. Of loving Jesus in that respect.
LEt us love Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our Salvation at his first
Coming or Incarnation. Now what is Love but an expansion or egress of the heart
and spirits to the Object loved; or to the Object whereby it is drawn or
attracted? Mark O my soul, whatsoever has an attractive power, it is in that
respect an Object, or general cause of Love; and can thou possibly light on
any Object more attractive than the Incarnation of Jesus Christ? If Love be the
Lodestone of Love, what an attractive is this before thee? methinks the very
sight of Christ incarnate is enough to ravish thee with the apprehension of his
infinite goodness: see how he calls out, or (as it were) draws out the soul to
Union, Vision, and Participation of his Glory! O come, and yield up thy self
unto him; give him thy self, and conform all thy Affections and Actions to his
Will: O love him, not with a divided, but with all thy heart.

But to excite this Love, I shall only propound the Object, which will be
Argument enough. Love causes Love; now as Gods first Love to man was in making
man like himself; so his second great Love was in making himself like to man;
stay then a while upon this Love; for (I take it) this is the greater Love of
the two: Nay, if I must speak freely, I believe this was the fullest visible
demonstration of Gods Love that ever was: The Evangelist expresses it thus,
God so loved the World, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son; he gave him to be incarnate, to be made
flesh, and to suffer Death; but the extention of his Love lies in that
expression, he so loved] So! how? Why, so fully, so fatherly, so freely, as no
Tongue can tell, no heart can think: In this Love God did not only let out a
mercy, give out a bare grace in self, but he took our nature upon him. It is
usually said, that it is a greater love of God to save a soul, than to make a
World; and I think it was a greater Love of God to take our nature, than simply
to save our souls; for a King to dispense with the Law, and by his own
prerogative to save a Murderer from the Gallows, is not such an Act of Love and
Mercy as to take the Murderers Clothes, and to wear them as their Richest
Livery? Why, God in taking our nature has done thus, and more than thus; he
would not save us by his mere Prerogative; but he takes our Clothes, our Flesh,
and in that Flesh he personates us, and in that Flesh he will die for us, that
we might not die, but live through him for evermore. Surely this was Love, that
God will be no more God (as it were) simply, but he will take up another
nature, rather than the brightness of his Glory shall undo our souls.

It will not be amiss (whilst I am endeavoring to draw a Line of Gods love in
Christ, from first to last in saving Souls) that here we look back a little,
and summarily contract the passages of Love from that eternity before all
Worlds, unto this present. 1. God had an eternal design to discover his
infinite love to some besides himself; O the wonder of this! was there any need
or necessity of such a discovery? Though God was one, Deus unus licet solus non
solitarius.
and in that respect alone (as we may imagine) yet God was not solitary; in
that eternity within his own proper essence or substance, there were three
Divine Persons, and betwixt them there was a blessed Communication of Love;
Christ on Earth could say, I am not alone, because the Father is with me: and
then before the Earth was, might the Father say, I am not alone, for the Son is
with me; and the Son might say, I am not alone, John 16.32.
for the Father is with me; and the Holy Ghost might say, I am not alone, for
both the Father and the Son are with me; though in that eternity there was no
Creature to whom these three Persons should communicate their Love; yet was
there a glorious communication, and breaking out of Love from one to another;
before there was a World, the Father, John 17.15.
Son, and Holy Ghost did infinitely glorify themselves, Joh. 17.5. Surely they
loved one another, and they rejoiced in the fruition of one another, Prove.
8.30. Prove. 8.30.
What need then was there of the discovery of Gods love to any one besides
himself? O my soul, I know no necessity for it, only thus was the pleasure of
God; Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight: such was the love of
God, that it would not contain it self within that infinite Ocean of himself,
but it would needs have Rivers and Channels, into which it might run and
overflow.

2. God in prosecution of his design, creates a World of Creatures; some
rational, and only capable of Love; others irrational, and serviceable to that
one Creature, which he makes the top of the whole Creation; then it was that he
set up one man Adam, as a common person, to represent the rest; to him he gives
abundance of glorious qualifications, and him he sets over all the work of his
hands, as if he were the very Darling of Love; if we should view the excellency
of this Creature either in the outward, or the inner man, who would not wonder?
his body had its excellency, which made the Psalmist say, I will praise thee,
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, -- and curiously wrought in the lowest
part of the Earth. Psalm. 139.14, 15.
It is a speech borrowed from those who work Arras-work; the body of man is a
piece of curious Tapestry, or Arras-work, consisting of Skin, Bones, Muscles,
Sinews, and the like; what a goodly thing the body of man was before the Fall,
may be guessed by the excellent gifts found in the bodies of some men since the
Fall; as the Complexion of David, 1 Samuel 16.12. the swiftness of Hazael, 2 Samuel 2.18. the beauty of Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.25. If all these were but joined in
one, as certainly, they were in Adam, what a rare Body would such a one be? but
what was this body in comparison of that soul? the soul was it, that was
especially made after the Image of God; the soul was it, that was tempered in
the same Mortar with the Heavenly Spirits; the soul was Gods sparkle, a beam of
his divine Glory, a ray, or emanation of God himself; as man was the principal
part of the Creation, so the Soul was the principal part of man: here was it
that Gods Love and Glory were centred for the time; here was it that Gods love
set and fixed it self in a special man, whence flowed that Communion of God with
Adam, and that familiarity of Adam with God.

3. Within a while, this man, the object of Gods Love, fell away from God, and
as he fell, so all that were in him; even the whole World fell together with
him; and hereupon Gods Face was hid; not a sight of him but in flaming fire,
ready to seize on the Sons of Men. And yet Gods Love would not thus leave the
Object; he had yet a further reach of Love, and out of this dark Cloud he lets
fall some glimpses of another discovery: These glimpses were sweet: but alas,
they were so dark that very few could spell them, or make any sense, or
comfortable application of them: but by degrees God hints it out more; he
points it out with the Finger by Types and Shadows, he makes some models of it
in outward Ceremonies, and yet so hid and dark, that in four thousand years,
men were but guessing, and hoping through promises, for a manifestation of Gods
Love; this is the meaning of the Apostle, who tells us of the Mystery that was
hid from Ages, and from Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints:
Col. 1.26.
This Love of God was hid in the breast of God from the Sons of Men for an Age,
so that they knew not what to make of this great Design: I speak of the
generality of men; for in respect of some Particulars, as to Adam, and Abraham,
and Moses, and David, and the Patriarchs, you have heard the Lord made his
Loves clear to them in a Covenant-Way; and still the nearer to Christ, the
clearer and clearer was the Covenant of Grace.

4. At last God fully opens himself; in the fullness of time God takes the flesh
of those poor sinners which he had so loved, and joins it to himself, and calls
it Christ, a Savior: O! now was it that God descended, and lay in the Womb of
a Virgin; now was it that he is born as we are born; now was it that he joined
our Flesh so nigh to himself, as that there is a Communication of properties
betwixt them both, that being attributed to God which is proper to Flesh, as to
be born, to suffer; and that being attributed to flesh which is proper to God,
as to create, to redeem: who can choose but wonder when he thinks of this
phrase, that a piece of Flesh should be called God? and that God should be made
flesh and dwell amongst us? that flesh should infinitely provoke God, and yet
God in the same flesh should be infinitely pleased? that God should veil
himself and darken his Glory with our flesh, and yet unveile at the same time
the deepest and darkest of his designs in a comfortable way to our souls? O my
soul, how should thou contain thy self within thy self? how should thou but
leap out of thy self (if I may so speak) as one that is lost in the admiration
of this Love? Surely God never manifested himself in such a strain of Love as
this before; herein was love manifested and commended indeed, that God would
come down in our nature to us. One observes sweetly, that God did so love the
very Nature of his Elect, that though for the present he had them not all with
him in Heaven, yet he must have their Picture in his Son to see them in, and
love them in; in this respect I may call Christ incarnate, a Statue and
Monument of Gods own infinite Love unto his Elect for ever.

Well, hitherto we have followed the passages of his Love; and now we see it in
the Spring, or at full Sea; If any thing will beget our love to God, surely
Christ incarnate will do it: Come then, O my Soul, I cannot but call on thee to
love thy Jesus; and to provoke thy Love, O fix thy eye on this lovely Object;
come, put thy Candle to this Flame; what? does not thy heart yet burn within
thee? do thou not at least begin to warm? why, draw yet a little nearer;
consider, what an heart of Love is in this Design: God is in thy own nature, to
take upon him all the miseries of thy Nature; mark it well, this is none other
than Gods heart leaping out of it self into our bosoms; q. d. Poor souls, I
cannot keep from you, I love your very Nature; I will be nothing, so you may be
something; my Glory shall not hinder me, but I will vail it rather than it
shall hurt you; so I may but show my self kind and tender unto you, and so I
may but have Communion with you, and you with me, I care not if I become one
with you, and live with you in your very flesh. Oh my heart, art thou yet cold
in thy Loves to Jesus Christ? can thou love him but a little, who has loved
thee so much? how should I then but complain of thee to Christ? and for thy
sake beg hard of God, Oh thou sweet Jesus, that cloathest thy self with the
Clouds as with a garment, and as now thou cloathest thy self with the Nature of
a man: O thou that would inflame my Spirit with a Love of thee, that nothing
but thy self might be dear unto me, because it so pleased thee to vilify thy
self, thine own self for my sake.

SECT. VII. Of joying in Jesus in that respect.
7. LEt us joy in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our Salvation for us
at his Coming or Incarnation. If it be so that by our Desire, and Hope, and
Faith, and Love, we have indeed and truth reached the Object which our souls
pant after, how then should we but joy and delight therein? the end of our
motion is to attain quiet and rest; now what is joy, but a sweet and
delightful Tranquillity of mind, resting in the fruition and possession of some
good? what! have thou in some measure attained the presence and fruition of
Christ (as God incarnate) in thy Soul? it is then time to joy in Jesus; it is
then time to keep a Sabbath of thy thoughts, and to be quiet and calm in thy
Spirit: But you will say, how should this be before we come to Heaven? I
answer, there is not indeed any perfection of joy whilst we are here, because
there is no perfection of Union on this side Heaven; but so far as Union is,
our joy must be; examine the grounds of thy Hope, and the actings of thy Faith,
and if thou art but satisfied in them, why then lead up thy joy, and bring it
up to this Blessed Object; here is matter for it to work upon; if thou can
possibly rejoice in any thing at all, O rejoice in the Lord, and again I say
rejoice.

Is there not cause? read and spell what is the meaning of the Gospel of Christ?
what is Gospel, but Good spell, or good tidings? and wherein lies the good
ridings according to its emency? is it not in the glorious incarnation of the
Son of God? Luke 2.10.11.
behold I bring you a Gospel, so it is in the Original, or, behold I bring you
good tidings of great joy which shall be to all People; for unto you is born
this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. The Birth of
Christ to them that have but touched hearts, is the comfort of comforts, and
the sweetest balm and confection that ever was. Oh my Soul what ailes thee? Why
art thou cast down and disquieted within me? Is it because thou art a sinner?
why, unto thee is born a Savior; his Name is Savior, and therefore Savior,
because he will save his people from their sins. Come then, and bring out thy
Sins, and weigh them to the utmost aggravation of them, and take in every
Circumstance both of Law and Gospel, and set but this in the other Scale, that
unto thee is born a Savior, surely all thy iniquities will seem lighter than
vanity, yea they will be as nothing in comparison thereof; My Soul does
Magnify the Lord (said Mary) and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Luke
1.46.47.
Her soul and her spirit within her rejoiced at this Birth of Christ; there is
cause that every Soul, and every Spirit should rejoice, that has any interest
in this Birth of Christ: O my soul, how should thou but rejoice if thou will
consider these particulars.

1. God himself is come down into the World; because it was impossible for thee
to come to him, he is come to thee; this consideration made the Prophet cry
out, Rejoice greatly O thou Daughter of Zion, Z^ch. 9.9.
shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto thee; he is called
a King, and therefore he is able; and he is thy King, and therefore he is
willing; but in that thy King comes unto thee, here is the marvilous love and
mercy of God in Christ; Kings do not usually come to visit and wait upon their
Subjects; it is well if poor Subjects may come to them, and be admitted into
their Presence to wait on them: O but see the great King of Heaven and Earth,
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords stooping, and bowing the heavens to come
down to thee; surely this is good tidings of great joy, and therefore rejoice
greatly O Daughter of Zion. A little joy is too scant and narrow for this news;
hearts should be enlarged, the doors and gates should be set wide open for this
King of Glory to come in: as Balaam said of Israel, God is with him and the
shout of a King is amongst them? Number. 23.21.
so now may we say, God is with us, and the shout of a King is amongst us;
Rejoice Zion, Shout O Daughter of Jerusalem.

2. God is come down in flesh; he has laid aside, as it were, his own Glory,
whilst he converseth with thee; when God manifested himself, as on Mount
Sinai, he came down in Thunder and Lightning; and if now he had appeared in
Thunder and Lightning, if now he had been guarded with an innumerable Company
of Angels, all having their Swords of vengeance and justice drawn, well might
poor souls have trembled, and have run into corners; for who could ever be able
to endure his coming in this way? but lo poor Soul, God is come down in flesh,
he has made his appearance as a man, as one of us, and there is not in this
regard the least distance betwixt him and us. Surely this is fuel for joy to
feed upon: O why should God come down so sutably, so lowly, as in our nature,
if he would have thy poor soul to be afraid of him? does not this very design
intend consolation to thy soul? O gather up thy Spirit, anoint thy heart with
the Oil of gladness; see God himself is come down in flesh to live amongst us,
he professes he will have no other life but amongst the Sons of men; see what
a sweet way of familiarity and intercourse is made betwixt God and us, now he
is come down in humane frailty.

3. God has took on him our Nature as a vast pipe to his Godhead, that it may
flow out in all manner of sweetness upon our hearts; if God had come down in
flesh, only to have been seen of us, Exodus 33.12.
it had been a wonderful condescension, and a great mercy: if I have found
favor in thy eyes (said Moses) show me thy way that I may know thee; but to
come down in flesh, and to come down in flesh, not only to be seen, but to
dispatch the great business of our souls Salvation, here is comfort indeed: with
what joy should we draw water out of this well of salvation? Surely the great
reason of the shallowness of our Comforts, shortness of our Hopes, the
faintness of our spirits, the lowness of our Graces, is from the not knowing,
or the not heeding of this particular; Christ in flesh stands not for a Cipher,
but it is an Organ of life and grace unto us; it is a fountain of comfort that
can never run dry. In this flesh there is laid in on purpose such a fullness of
the Godhead, that of his fullness we might receive in our measure grace for
grace. O my soul, thou art daily busy in eying this and that; but above all,
know that all the fullness God lies in Christ incarnate, to be emptied upon
thee: this was the meaning of Christ taking on him flesh, that through his
flesh he might convey to thee whatsoever is in himself as God. As for instance,
God in himself is Good, and Gracious, and Powerful, and All-sufficient, and
Merciful, and what not? Now by his being in flesh, he suites all this, and
conveyes all this to thee; observe this for thy eternal comfort, God in and
through the flesh makes all his Attributes and Glory serviceable to thy soul.

4. God in our Nature has laid out the Model and Draught of what he will do
unto all his Saints for ever; humane nature was never so advanced before; what?
to be glorified above the Angels? to be united in a Personal union with the
second person of the Godhead? surely hence may be expected great matters;
here is a fair step for the bringing of our Persons up to the enjoyment of God;
if God be come down in the likeness of man, why, then he will bring us up into
the likeness of God; look what was done to our nature in Christ, the very same
(as far as we are capable) shall be done to our persons in Heaven. Think of it,
O my soul, why has God made flesh so glorious, but to show that he will by
that make thee glorious also? Christ is the great Epitome of all the designs of
God, so that in him thou may see what thou art designed unto, and how high
and rich thou shall be in the other world. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God,
1 John 3.2.
and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know when he shall appear,
we shall be like him; he is now like us, but then (says the Apostle) we shall
be like unto him; Phil. 3.21.
he will change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious
body. Oh consider what a frame of eternal comfort may we raise up from this
ground of Christ incarnate, God in the flesh?

5. God in the flesh is the first opening of his eternal plot to do us good;
the Seed of the woman was the first word of comfort that ever was heard in the
world after man was fallen; the Plot was of old, but the execution was not till
after the Creation, and then was a dim discovery of it, even in the beginning
of time, though no clear manifestation till the fullness of time. Well, take it
as we please, whether in the beginning of time, or in the fullness of time;
whether in the promise, or in performance, this discovering of Christ incarnate
is the first opening of all Gods heart and Glory unto the Sons of men; and from
this we may raise a world of comfort; for if God in the execution of his
Decrees, begins so gloriously, how will he end? if God be so full of love, as
to come down in flesh now in this world, Oh what matter of hope is laid up
before us, of what God will be to us in that world to come? if the Glory of God
be let out to our souls so fully at first, what Glorious openings of all the
Glory of God will be let out to our souls at last? Christians! what do you
think will God do with us, or bring us unto, when we shall be with him in
heaven? you see now he is manifested in flesh, and he has laid out a world of
Glory in that: but the Apostle tells us of another manifestation, for we shall
see him as he is; he shall at last be manifest in himself; 1 John 3.2.
now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now we know in part,
but then we shall know even as also we are known. To what an height of knowledge
or manifestation this does arise, I am now to seek, and so I must be whilst I
am on this side Heaven; but this I believe, the manifestation of God and Christ
is more in Heaven, than is, or ever has been, or ever shall be upon earth;
thine eyes shall see the King in his Beauty, Isa. 33.17.
or in his Glory says Esaias: there is a great deal of difference betwixt seeing
the King in his ordinary, and seeing him in his Robes, and upon his Throne,
with his Crown on his head, and his Scepter in his hand, and his Nobles about
him in all his Glory: the first openings of Christ are glorious; but O, what
will it be to see him in his greatest Glory that ever he will manifest himself
in? we usually say that workmen do their meanest work at first, and if the
Glorious incarnation of Christ be but the beginning of Gods works, in reference
to our souls salvation, what are those last works?

O my soul, weigh all these passages, and make an application of them to thy
self; and then tell me if yet thou have not matter enough to raise up thy
heart, and to fill it with joy unspeakable and full of Glory; Mat. 2.10.
when the wise men saw but the Star of Christ, they rejoiced with an exceeding
great joy; how much more when they saw Christ himself? Your Father Abraham
(said Christ to the Jews) rejoiced to see my day, John 8.5^.
and he saw it, and was glad; he saw it indeed, but afar of, with the eyes of
Faith; they before Christ, had the promise, but we see the performance; how then
should we rejoice? how glad should thou be, O my Soul, at the sight and
effect of Christ's Incarnation? if John the Baptist could leap for joy in his
Mothers belly, when Christ was but yet in the womb, how should thy heart leap
for joy, who can say with the Prophet, Luke 2.28.
unto me a Child is born, and unto me a Son is given? if Simeon waiting for the
consolation of Israel, took him up in his arms for joy, and blessed God; how
should thou with joy embrace him with both arms, who know his coming in
the flesh, and who have heard him come in the Gospel, in the richest and most
alluring expressions of his Love? If the Angels of God, yea, if multitudes of
Angels could sing for joy at his Birth, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, and good will toward men;
how much more should thou, whom it concerns more than the Angels, join with
them in consort, and sing for joy this joyful song of good will toward men?
Awake, awake O my Soul, awake, awake, uttter a Song! tell over these passages,
that God is come down into the world, that God is come down in flesh, that God
is come down in flesh in order to thy reconciliation; that God is come down in
the likeness of man, that he may bring thee up into the likeness of God; and
that all these are but the first openings of the Grace, and goodness, and Glory
of God in Christ unto thy Soul; and Oh what work will these make in thy Soul,
if the Spirit come in, who is the comforter.

SECT. VIII. Of Calling on Jesus in that Respect.
8. LEt us call on Jesus, or on God the Father in and through Jesus. Now this
calling on Jesus contains Prayer and Praise. 1. We must pray that all these
transactions of Jesus at his first coming or incarnation may be ours; and is
not here encouragement for our Prayers? If we observe it, this very point of
Christ's Incarnation opens a door of rich entrance into the presence of God; we
may call it a blessed Portal into Heaven, b. 10. 20.
not of Iron, or Brass, but of our own flesh; this is that new and living way
which he has consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is to say, his flesh;
with what boldness and freeness may we now enter into the Holiest, and draw
near unto the Throne of Grace? why, Christ is incarnate, God is come down in
the flesh; though his Deity may confound us (if we should immediately and
solely apply our selves unto it) yet his humanity comforts our faint and feeble
souls, God in his humility animates our souls to come unto him, and to seek of
him whatsoever is needful for us. Go then to Christ; away, away O my soul, to
Jesus, or to God the Father, in and through Jesus; and O desire that the
effect, the fruit, the benefit of his Conception, Birth, and of the wonderful
union of the two natures of Christ may be all thine. What? do thou hope in
Jesus, and believe thy part in this Incarnation of Christ? why then pray in
hope, and pray in Faith; what is prayer, but the stream and river of Faith, an
issue of the desire of that which I joyfully believe? 2 Samuel 7.27.
Thou, O Lord God of Hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy Servant,
saying, I will build thee an house, therefore has thy servant found in his
heart, to pray this Prayer unto thee.

2. We must praise. This was the special duty practiced by all Saints and
Angels at Christ's Birth, Luke 1.46. Luke 1.68.
My Soul does magnify the Lord (says Mary) and my Spirit rejoices in God my
Savior. And blessed be the Lord God of Israel (said Zachary) for he has
visited and redeemed his People; and Glory to God in the highest, said the
Heavenly Host; only one Angel had before brought the News, Luke 2.11.
unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord: but immediately after there were many to sing praises; not only six
Cherubims as Isaiah saw; nor only four and twenty Elders, as John saw; but a
multitude of Heavenly Angels like Armies, that by their Heavenly Hallelujahs
gave Glory to God. O my soul, do thou endeavor to keep consort with those many
Angels: O sing Praises, sing Praises unto God, sing Praises. Never was like
case since the first Creation: never was the wisdom, truth, justice, mercy, and
goodness of God so manifest before; I shall never forget that last speech of a
dying Saint upon the stage, Blessed be God for Jesus Christ. O my soul, living
and dying let this be thought on: What? Christ incarnate for me? why bless the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name.

SECT. IX. Of conforming to Jesus in that respect.
9. LEt us conform to Jesus in reference to this great transaction of his
Incarnation. Looking to Jesus contains this, and is the cause of this; the
sight of God will make us like to God; and the sight of Christ will make us
like to Christ; for as a Looking-Glass cannot be exposed to the Sun, but it
will shine like the same; so God receives none to contemplate his face, but he
transforms them into his own likeness by the irradiation of his light; and
Christ has none that dive into these depths of his glorious and blessed
Incarnation, but they carry along with them sweet impressions of an abiding and
transforming nature. Come then, let us once more look on Jesus in his
Incarnation, that we may conform, and be like to Jesus in that respect.

But wherein lies this conformity or likeness to Jesus? I answer, in these and
the like particulars. --

1. Christ was conceived in Mary by the Holy Ghost; so must Christ be conceived
in us by the same holy Ghost. To this purpose is the seed of the Word cast in,
and principles of Grace are by the Holy Ghost infused; he has begotten us by
the Word, says the Apostle, Jam. 1.18. James 1.18.
How Mean, Contemptible, or Impotent Men may esteem it, yet God has appointed
no other means to convey supernatural life, but after this manner: Where no
Vision is, the People perish: where no preaching is, there is a worse judgment
than that of Egypt, when there was one dead in every Family. By the Word and
Spirit the Seeds of all Grace are sown in the heart at once, and the heart
closing with it, immediately Christ is conceived in the heart.

Concerning this spiritual Conception or Reception of Christ in us, there is a
great question, Whether it be possible for any man to discern how it is
wrought? But for the Negative are these Texts, Our Life is hid with Christ in
God, Col. 3.3. and the Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes, Joh.
3.8. It is a wonderful, hidden and secret Conception. The holy Ghost sets out
that state of unregeneracy, in which Christ finds us, by the name of Death,
Ephesians. 2.1. So that it must needs be as impossible for us to discover how it is
wrought, as it is impossible for one to know how he receives his own life. Some
say, the first act of infusing or receiving Christ or Grace (they are all one)
is wrought in an instant, and not by degrees; and therefore it is impossible to
discern the manner: And yet we grant that we may discern both the preparations
to Grace, and the first operations of Grace. 1. The preparations to Grace are
discernable; such are those terrors and spiritual agonies, which are often
before the work of Regeneration; they may be resembled to the heating of metals
before they melt, and are cast into the Mold to be fashioned; now by the help
of Natural Reason one may discern these. 2. Much more may the first Motion and
Operations of Grace be discerned by one truly regenerate, because that in them
his Spirit works together with the Spirit of Christ; such are sorrow for sin as
sin, and seek rightly for comfort, an hungring desire after Christ and his
Merits; neither do I think it impossible for a regenerate man to feel the very
first illapse of the Spirit into the Soul; for it may bring that sense with it
self, as to be easily discerned, although it does not always see, nor perhaps
usually see; it is true that the giving of Spiritual Life, and the giving of
the sense of it, are two distinct acts of the Spirit; yet who can deny, but
that both these acts may go together; though always they do not go together?
Howsoever it is, yet even in such Persons as in the instant of Regeneration may
feel themselves in a regenerate estate: this Conclusion stands firm, viz. They
may know what is wrought in them, but how it is wrought, they cannot know, nor
understand; we feel the Wind, and perceive it in the motions, and operations
thereof; but the Originals of it we are not able exactly to describe: some
think the beginnings of Winds are from the flux of the Air, others from the
exhalations of the Earth; but there is no certainty: so it is in the manner of
this Conception, or passive Reception of Christ and Grace into our hearts; we
know not how it is wrought, but it nearly concerns us to know that it is
wrought; look we to his conformity, that as Christ was conceived in Mary by the
Holy Ghost; so, that Christ be conceived in us, in a spiritual sense, by the
same Holy Ghost.

2. Christ was sanctified in the Virgins Womb; so must we be sanctified in our
selves, following the Commandment of God; Be ye holy as I am holy: Souls
regenerate must be sanctified; Every man (says the Apostle) that has this
hope in him, 1 John 3.3.
purifieth himself even as he is pure. I know our hearts are (as it were) Seas
of corruptions, yet we must daily cleanse our selves of them by little and
little: Christ could not have been a fit Savior for us, unless first he had
been sanctified; neither can we be fit Members unto him, unless we be in some
measure purged from our sins, and sanctified by his Spirit. To this purpose is
that of the Apostle; I beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that ye
present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, Holy, acceptable unto God. Romans 12.1.
In the Old Testament they did after a corporal manner slay and kill Beasts,
presenting them, and offering them unto the Lord; but now we are in a spiritual
manner to crucify and mortify the flesh with the affections and lusts, all our
inordinate passions, all our evil affections of anger, love, joy, hatred, are
to be crucified; and all that is ours must be given up to God; there must be no
love in us but of God; and in reference to God; no Joy in us, but in God, and
in reference to God; no fear in us, but of God, and in reference to God; and
thus of all other the like passions. O that we would look to Jesus, and be like
unto Jesus in this thing! if there be any Honor, any Happiness, any
Excellency, it is in this, even in this; we are not fit for any holy duty, or
any religious approach unto God without sanctification; 1 These. 4.5.
this is the Will of God (says the Apostle) even your Sanctification. All the
commands of God tend to this; and for the comfort of us Christians, we have
under the Gospel, promises of sanctification to be in a larger measure made out
unto us: Zech. 14.20, 21.
In that day there shall be upon the Bells of the Horses Holiness unto the
Lord; -- yea every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be Holiness unto the Lord;
every Vessel under Christ and the Gospel, must have written upon it Holiness to
the Lord; thus our spiritual services, figured by the Ancient Ceremonial
services, are set out by a larger measure of holiness than was in old time: it
is a sweet resemblance of Christ to be holy; Acts 4.27.
for so he is styled, the holy Child Jesus: he was sanctified from the womb,
and sanctified in the womb for our imitation: for their sakes I sanctify my
self, (says Christ) that they also might be sanctified. John 17.19.


3. Christ the son of man is by nature the son of God; so we poor sons of men
must by Grace become the sons of God; even of the same God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ; Gal. 4.4, 5, 7.
for this very end God sent his own Son made of a woman, that we might receive
the Adoption of Sons, -- wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and
if a Son, then an heir of God through Christ. This intimates that what relation
Christ has unto the Father by nature, we should have the same by Grace; by
nature he is the only begotten Son of the Father, and as many as received him
(says John John 1.14. V. 12.
) to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on
his Name. It is true, Christ reserves to himself the pre-eminence; Romans 8.29.
he is in a peculiar manner the first born among many Brethren; yet in him, and
for him all the rest of the brethren are accounted as first borns: Exodus 4.22,
23.
So God bids Moses say unto Pharaoh, Israel is my son, even my first born; And
I say unto thee, let my Son go, that he may serve me; and if thou refuse to let
him go, behold I will slay thy Son, even thy firstborn, And the whole Church
of God, consisting of Jew and Gentile, is in the same sort described by the
Apostle to be the General Assembly and Church of the firstborn enrolled in
Heaven; Heb. 12.23. Romans 8.17.
by the same reason that we are sons, we are first-borns; if we are Children,
then are we heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. O who would not
endeavor after this privilege? who would not conform to Christ in this respect?

4. Christ the Son of God, was yet the Son of Man; there was yet in him a
duplicity of Natures really distinguished; and in this respect, the greatest
Majesty, and the greatest humility that ever was, are found in Christ; so we,
though sons of God, must remember our selves to be but sons of men; our
privileges are not so high, but our poor conditions, frailties, infirmities,
sins, may make us low: who was higher than the Son of God? and who was lower
than the son of man? as he is God, he is in the bosom of his Father; as he is
man, he is in the Womb of his Mother; as he is God, his Throne is in Heaven;
and he fills all things by his emmensity; as he is man, he is circumscribed in
a cradle, I mean a Manger, a most uneasy Cradle sure; as he is God, he is
clothed in a robe of Glory; as he is man, he is wrapped in a few course
swaddling bands; as he is God, he is encircled with millions of bright Angels;
as he man, he is in company of Joseph and Mary, and the Beasts; as he is God,
he is the eternal Word of the Father, all-sufficient, and without need; as he
is man, he submits himself to a condition imperfect, inglorious, indigent, and
necessitous: well, let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8.
who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but
he made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and
was made in the likeness of men, and being founded in fashion as a man, he
humble himself: he that thought it no robbery to be equal with God, humbled
himself to become man; we should have found it no robbery to be equal with
Devils, and are we too proud to learn of God? what an intolerable disproportion
is this, to behold an humble God, and a proud man? who can endure to see a
Prince on foot, and his Vassal mounted! shall the Son of God be thus humble for
us, and shall not we be humble for our selves? I say for our selves, that
deserve to be cast down amongst the lowest Worms, the damnedst Creatures? What
are we in our best condition here on earth; had we the best natures, purest
conversations, happiest indowments that accompany the Saints, pride overthrows
all; it thrust proud Nebuchadnezzer out of Babel, proud Haman out of the Court,
proud Saul out of his Kingdom, proud Lucifer out of Heaven; poor man how ill it
becomes thee to be proud, when God himself is become thus humble? O learn of me
(says Christ) for I am meek, and humble, and lowly in spirit, Math. 11.29.
and you shall find rest unto your souls.

5. The two natures of Christ, though really distinguished, yet were they
inseparably joined, and made not two, but one person; so must our natures and
persons though at greatest distance from God, be inseparably joined and united
to Christ, and thereby also to God. John 17.21.
I Pray (says Christ) that they all may be one as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us. That union of Christ's two natures we
call a personal hypostatical union, and this union of Christ with us, we call a
mystical and Spiritual union; yet though it be mystical and Spiritual, this
hinders not but that it is a true, real, essential, substantial union, whereby
the person of the believer is indissolubly united to the glorious person of the
Son of God. For our better understanding we may consider (if you please) of a
threefold unity, either of persons of one nature, or of natures in one person,
or of natures and Persons in one spirit; in the first is one God; in the second
is one Christ; in the third is one Church with Christ; our union unto Christ is
the last of these, whereby he and we are all spiritually united to the making
up of one mystical body, O what a privilege is this! a poor believer, be he
never so mean or miserable in the eye of the world, yet he is one with Christ,
as Christ is one with the Father; our fellowship is with the Father, 1 John 1.3.
and with his Son Jesus Christ: every Saint is Christ's fellow; there is a kind
of analogical proportion between Christ and his Saints in every thing; if we
take a view of all Christ, what he is in his Person, in his Glory, in his
Spirit, in his Graces, in his Fathers Love, and in the access he has to the
Father, in all these we are in a sort fellows with Christ; only with this
difference, that Christ has the pre-eminence in all things; all comes from the
Father first to Christ, and all we have is by Marriage with Jesus Christ;
Christ by his union has all good things without measure, but we by our union
have them only in measure, as it pleases him to distribute. But herein if we
resemble Christ, whether in his union with the Father, or in his union of the
two natures in one Person of a Mediator; if by looking on Christ, we come to
this likeness, to be one with Jesus Christ, Oh what a privilege is this! had we
not good warrant for so high a challeng, it could be no less than a Blasphemous
arrogance to lay claim to the Royal blood of Heaven; but the Lord is pleased to
dignifie a poor worm, that every believer may truly say, I am one with Jesus
Christ, and Jesus Christ is one with me.

To sweeten this union to our thoughts I shall acquaint you with the privilege
flowing from it, and let the same stir you up to conform.

Hence it is that Christ lives in us, and that Christ both gives life, and is
our life. When Christ which is our life shall appear, Christ is to me to live,
and I live, yet not I, Col. 3.4. Phil. 2.21. Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me. There is a spiritual and natural life; for the
natural life what is it but a bubble, a vapor, a shadow, a dream, a nothing?
but this Spiritual life is an excellent life, it is wrought in us by the Spirit
of Christ; there is a world of difference betwixt the natural and the spiritual
life, and that makes the difference betwixt what I do as a man, and what I do
as a Christian; as a man I have eyes, ears, motions, affections,
understandings, naturally as my own; but as a Christian I have all these from
him with whom I am spiritually one, the Lord Jesus Christ; as a man I have
bodily eyes, and I behold bodily and material things; but as a Christian I have
spiritual eyes, and I see invisible and eternal things, as it is said of Moses,
that he endured, Heb. 11 27.
as seeing him who is invisible; as a man I have outward ears, and I hear
outward sounds of all sorts whether articulate, or inarticulate; but as a
Christian I have inward ears, and so I hear the voice of Christ, and of Gods
Spirit, speaking to my soul; as a man I have bodily feet, and by them I move in
my own secular ways; but as a Christian I have spiritual feet, and on them I
walk with God in all the ways of his Commandments; as a man I have natural
affections, and so I love beauty, and fear pain, and hate an enemy, and I
rejoice in outward prosperity, or the like; but as a Christian I have renewed
affections, and so I loved goodness, and hate nothing but sin; and I fear above
all the displeasure of my God, and I rejoice in Gods favor, which is better
than life. Surely this is a blessed life; and as soon as ever I am united to
Christ, why then I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. First, Christ is
conceived, and then Christ is formed, and then Christ is born, and then grows
in me to a blessed fullness: Gal. 4.19.
My little Children of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in
you; formation follows conception, and travail implies a birth: then after this
we are babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. 1 John 2.14. Ephesians. 4.13.
or Christ is as a babe in us; from thence we grow up to strength of youth. I
have written unto you young men because ye are strong; and at last we come to
Gospel perfection even toward the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Is this all? nay, if my union be firm, and Christ live in me, why then
I go on, Romans 6.8. Romans 6.4, 1. Col 3 1. Romans 8.17.
and in this condition I am dead with Christ, and I am buried with Christ, and
I am alive again unto God through Christ, and I am risen with Christ, and I am
glorified with Christ. Nay, yet more, my sufferings are Christ's, Col. 1.24. and
Christ's sufferings are mine, Romans 8.17. I am in Christ an ^eir of Glory, Romans
8.17. and Christ is in me the hope of Glory, Col. 12 7. O my Christ, my life,
what am I, or what is my Fathers house that thou should come down into me,
that thou should be conceived in the womb of my poor sinful heart, that thou
should give my soul a new and spiritual life, a life begun in Grace and
ending in eternal Glory? I shall not reckon up any more privileges of this
union, methinks I should not need; if I tell you of Grace and Glory, what can
I more? Glory is the highest pitch, and Christ tells you concerning it, the
Glory which thou gave me, John 17.22.
I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one. Ah my brethren!
to be so like Christ as to be one with Christ, it is near indeed: O let us
conform to Christ in this; he is one with our nature in an hypostatical,
personal union; let us be one with him in a spiritual, holy and a mystical
union; if God be not in our persons as truly, though not as fully as in our
nature, we have no particular comfort from this design of his personal,
hypostatical, and wonderful union.

6. Christ was born, so must we be newborn; to this I have spoken when I laid
it down as an evidence that unto us a Child is born, and unto us a son is
given; only one word more, we must be new born; as once born by nature, so new
born by Grace; there must be some resemblances in us of Christ born amongst us.
As 1. Christ born, had a Father in Heaven, and a Mother on Earth; so in our new
Birth we must look on God as our Father in Heaven, and on the Church as our
Mother on Earth; it was usually said, out of the Church no salvation; and to
this the Apostle alludes, Jerusalem which is above is free, Gal. 4.26.
which is the Mother of us all: indeed out of the Church there is no means of
Salvation, no Word to teach, no Sacraments to confirm, nothing at all to hold
forth Christ to a soul, and without Christ how should there be the Salvation of
souls? ^o that we must look on the Church as our Mother, and on God as our
Father; not that we deny some to be as spiritual Fathers unto others. Paul
tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15.
that he was their Father, though yea have ten thousand instructers in Christ,
yet have ye not many Fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through
the Gospel; but al^s, such Fathers are but ministerial Fathers; and therefore
Paul seems to correct himself, 1 Cor. 3.7.
who is ^aul? and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom yea believed, even as
the Lord gave to every man? it is God only is our Father principally,
originally, supreamly; God only puts Grace and virtue into the womb of the
Soul; it is not possible that any creature should be a Creator of the new
Creature. O then let us look up to Heaven and say, O Lord n^w make me, n^w
Create me, O be thou my Father.

2. When Christ was born all Jerusalem was troubled; so when this new birth is,
we must look for it, that much commotion, and much division of heart will be;
the Devi^ could not be cast out of the professed person, but he would
exc^edingly fear and ^orment, and vex the poss^ssed person; the truth is, we
cannot expect that Christ should expel Satan from those holds and dominions he
has over us, but he will be sure to put us to great fear and terror in heart.
Besides, not only the evil Spirit, but Gods Spirit is for a while a Spirit of
Bondage, to make every thing as a mighty burden unto us; there are many
pr^tenders to the grace of God in Christ, but they cannot abide to hear of any
pains or pangs in this new Birth; O this is legal, but I pray thee tell me,
do thou ever know any woman bring forth in her sleep, or in a dream, without
feeling any pain? and how then should the heart of man be thus new changed and
molded without several pangs? look as it is in the natural birth, there are
many pangs and troubles, in in sorrow shall thou bring forth Children; so it
is, and must be in our spiritual birth; there is usually (I will not say
always to such or such a degree) many pangs and troubles, there is many a
throb, and many an heart-ach ere Christ can be formed in us.

3. When Christ was born, there was a discovery of many of the Glorious
attributes of God; then Mercy and Truth met together, and righteousness and
peace kissed each other; then especially was a discovery of the Goodness, and
Power, and Wisdom, and Holiness of God. So when this New Birth is, we must look
upon it as a glorious discovery of those lovely Attributes. As, 1. Of his
Mercy, Goodness, Love; how often is this called his Grace, and the riches of
his Grace? Christians! you that know what the New Birth means, do you not say,
The Goodness of God appears in this? surely it was Gods Goodness to make a
World, but this is the riches of his Goodness to create a New Heart in you;
when Man by his sin was fallen, he might have been thrown away as refuse, fit
fuel only, for everlasting flames; it might have been with mankind as it was
with Devils, in their deluge God did not provide an Ark to save so many as
eight persons, not one Angel that fell was the Object of Gods Grace; And that
God should pass by all those Angels, and many thousands of the Sons Men, and
yet that he should look upon you in your Blood, and bid you Live: O the
goodness of God!

2. As of the Goodness, so in this New Birth there is a discovery of Gods power:
and hence it is called a New Creature. The very same Power that framed the
World, Gal. 6.15.
is the framer of this New Creature; the work of Conversion is set forth by the
Work of Creation; God only creates Man, and God only converts Man; in the
Creation God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light; in our conversion
God says, Let there be Light; and presently the same God shines in our hearts;
Nay, this Power of conversion in some sense far passes the Creation, To whom
is the Arm of the Lo^d revealed? Isa. 53.1.
the Lord puts to his Arm, his Power, his Strength indeed in Conversion of
Souls; when he made the World, he met with nothing to resist him, he only spoke
the word and it was do^e; but in the conversion of a sinner, God meets with the
whole frame of all creatures opposing and resisting him; the Devil and the
World without, and sin and corruption within; here then must needs be a Power
against all Power.

3. As of the Goodness and Power of God, so in this New Birth there is a
discovery of the Wisdom of God. I might instance in many particulars; As, 1. In
that the regenerate are most-what of the meanest and contemptiblest persons;
not many wise, 1 Cor. 1.27.
not many noble, etc. 2. In that many times God takes the worst Weeds and makes
them the sweetest Flowers; thus Paul, Zacheus, the Publicans, and Harlots. 3.
In that the regenerate are of the fewest, and least number; many are called,
but few are chosen. 4. In that God chooses such a time to be his time of love,
wherein he usually discovers many concurrences of strange love meeting
together; read Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6, 8, 9. in all these particulars is his Wisdom
wonderful.

4. As of the Goodness, Power, and Wisdom of God, so in this New Birth there is
a discovery of the holiness of God. If a clod of Earth, or a piece of Muck
should be made a glorious Star in Heaven, it is not more wonderful, than for a
sinner to be made like an Angel, doing the Will of God; it argues the Holiness
of God, and his love of Holiness to make man holy; He tells us that without
Holiness, none shall see God; and therefore first he will make us holy, and
then he will bring us to himself; O here is a blessed Conformity! as Christ was
Born, let us be New Born.

7. Christ after his Birth did and suffered many things in his Childhood, (I
should be too large to spea^ to every particular) so should we learn to bear
Gods Yoke even in our Youth. It is good to imitate Christ even betimes, Lam.
3.27. Eccles. 12.1.
Rememb^r now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say* I have no pleasure in them.
Do ye not see by experience what a blessed thing a gracious and an holy
education is? Train up a Child in the way he should go, Prove. 22.6.
and when he is old he will not depart from it. O ye Parents, that ye should do
your duties, and in that respect imitate Joseph and Mary in their care and
nature of the Holy Child Jesus; and O ye Children, that you would do your
duties, and imitate Jesus, the Blessedst pattern that ever was, that as you
grow in Stature, Luke 2.52.
you also might grow in favor with God and Man. Observe him in the Temple when
he was but twelve years Old, see Him in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing
them, and asking them Questions; Children whiles little (if but capable of
instruction) should with their Parents wait on God in the midst of our
assemblies; Exodus 10.9.
Mos^s told Pharaoh they must have their young ones with them to the solemn
Worship; and when Joshua read the Law of God to the Congregation of Israel,
Josh. 8.35.
they had their little ones with them in that solemn assembly. Observe Christ
also in Nazareth, where during his minority he was ever subject to his Parents;
so Children obey your Parents in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1, 2.
for this is right: not only the Law of God, but the Gospel of Christ makes
mention of this, Honor thy father and Mother, which is the first Commandment
with Promise; I know the subjection of Christ's extends to his particular
calling, and this also is for your imitaion; in obedience to his supposed
Father the Holy Child would have a particular employment, something must be
done for the support of that holy Family wherein Jesus lived, and to that
purpose he puts to his own hands, and works in the trade of a Carpenter; such
as will live idle, and without a calling, that serve for no other use but to
devour Gods Creatures, and to make a dearth, O how unlike are they to Jesus
Christ? It is noted for a grievous sin, and a chief part of the corruption of
our nature to be unprofitable to the Generation with whom we live; They are
altogether become unprofitable, Romans 3.12.
there is none that does good; Religion and Grace where ever it prevails,
makes Men profitable; and in this respect the poorest Servant and drudge may
have more comfort in his estate, than the greatest Gentleman that has nothing
to do but to Eat, and Drink, and Play.

Thus far we have looked on Jesus as our Jesus in his Incarnation, or his first
coming in the Flesh. Our next work is to look on Jesus carrying on the great
work of Man's Salvation during his life, from John's Baptism, until his
suffering and dying on the Cross. LOOKING UNTO JESUS In His Life. The Fifth
Book. PART II.
CHAP. I.
1 John 1.2. For the Life was manifested, and we have seen it.
SECT. I. Of the Beginning of the Gospel.
IN this piece, as in the former, we must first lay down the Object, and then
direct you how to look to it.

The Object is Jesus carrying on the work of Man's Salvation during the time of
his Life. Now in all the transactions of this time, we shall observe them as
they were carried on successively in those three years and an half of his
ministerial Office, or if you will in those four complete Years before his
Passion and Death.

For the first Year, and his actings therein, the Evangelist Mark begins thus,
Mark 1.1.
The Beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God; q. d. the
beginning of that age of the World, which the Prophets pointed out for the time
of good things to come; or the beginning of the exhibition and completion of
that Gospel, which in respect of the promise, figures, and signification was
from the beginning of the World. This beginning of the Gospel, the Prophets
sometimes expressed by the term of the last days, Isa. 2.2.
and it shall come to pass in the last days: sometimes by the term of the
acceptable year of the Lord, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord: Mica. 4.1.
sometimes by the term of the Kingdom of God; And in the days of these Kings,
Isa. 61.1, 2. Dan. 2.44. Isa. 65.17.
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed.
Sometimes by the term of a New Heaven, and a New Earth, behold I create New
Heavens, and a New Earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come in
mind. Howsoever it is called, this is concluded, that the beginning of the
Gospel is not to be reckoned from the birth of Christ, but from the beginning
of the Ministry and Preaching of John the Baptist; Mat. 11.12, 15.
from the days of John the Baptist until now (said Christ) the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence; for all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until
John; and when the Apostles were ready in the Room of Judas to choose a new
Apostle, it is said, Act. 11.21, 22.
that of those men which companied with them all the time that the Lord Jesus
went in and out amongst them, beginning from the baptism of John, unto the day
that he was taken up, must one be ordained to be a witness. And Peter Preaching
to Cornelius and his friends, Acts 10.37.
he tells them that the Word (or Gospel) was published throughout all Judea,
and began from Galilee, after the Baptism which John preached: Mark. 1.1, 2.
and see but how immediately these words follow, The beginning of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ the Son of God: as it is written in the Prophets behold I send my
Messenger before thy face, which shall prepare the way before thee: I know that
John's Ministry was six months before Christ's; and yet that now was the
beginning of the Gospel, it appears, 1. In that Baptism (which was only used
amongst the Jews for the admission of Proselites or Heathens to their Church)
is now published and proposed to the Jews themselves; showing, 1. That now they
were to be entered and transplanted into a new Profession; and, 2. That the
Gentiles, and they were now to be knit into one Church and Body. And, 2. It
appears in that the Doctrine and Preaching of John was of a different strain,
from the litteral Doctrine of the Law; as it is taken in the sense of the Jews;
for that called all for works; and for exact performance, do this and live; but
John called for Repentance, and for renewing of the mind, and for belief in him
that was coming after, disclaiming all righteousness by the works of the Law;
so that here was new Heavens, and a new Earth began to be created, a new
Commandment given, a new Church founded, Justification by works cried down, and
the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance advanced and set up.

Hence one observes that the Evangelist Luke points out this year in a special
manner; it was the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar; Lightf. Harm. of the Four
Evang Luke 3.1, 2.
at which time (says he) Pilate was Governor of Judea, Herod was Tetrarch of
Galilee, Philip was Tetrarch of Iturea, Lysanias was Tetrach of Abilene, and
Annas and Caiaphas were high Priests. And then, even then, the Word of God came
unto John, the Son of Zacharias, in the Wilderness. See how exact the
Evangelist seems, that so remarkable a year of the beginning of the Gospel
might be fixed and made known to all the World. In this respect, I shall begin
the first year of Christ's Life with the beginning of John's Preaching, which
was sixs months current before the Ministry of Christ; and in the compass of
this first year, I shall handle these Particulars, --

1. The Preaching of John Baptist. 2. The Baptism of Christ Jesus. 3. The
Fasting and Temptation of Christ in the wilderness. 4. The first manifestation
of Jesus by his several witnesses. 5. Christ whipping the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple. Observe that every of these four years, I shall end at one
of the passeovers, of which we read during Christ Ministry; as of the first
Passover in John. 2.13. of the second Passover in John 5.1. of the third
Passover, John 6.4. of the fourth Passover, John 13.1. And first, of the first
year to end at the first Passover.

SECT. II. Of the Preaching of John Baptist.
FOr the Preaching of John the Baptist; now was it that the Gospel began to
dawn, and John like the Morning Star, or the blushing day, springing from the
windows of the East, foretells the approaching of the sun of Righteousness; now
was it that he laid the first rough, hard, and unhewen stone of the building in
Mortification, self-denial, and doing violence to our natural affections. I
read not that ever John wrought a Miracle; but he was a man of an austere Life:
and good Works convince more than Miracles themselves. It is storied of one
Pachomius, a soldier under Constantine the Emperor, that his Army being
well-near starved for want of necessary Provision, he came to a City of
Christians, and they of their own Charity relieved them speedily and freely; he
wondering at their so free and cheerful dispensation, enquired what kind of
people those were whom he saw so bountiful? It was Answered, they were
Christians, whose profession is to hurt no man, and to do good to every man;
hereupon the soldier convinced of the excellency of this Religion, he threw
away his Arms, and became a Christian and a Saint. To this purpose, I suppose,
John the Baptist spent his time in Prayer, Meditation, affections, and
Colloquies with God, eating flies and wild honey in the wilderness, that he
might be made a fit Instrument of preparation, and dissemination of the Gospel
of Christ.

In his Sermon he sometimes gave particular Schedules of Duty to several states
of Persons; he sharply reproved the Pharisees for their hypocrisy and impiety;
he gently guided others into the ways of Righteousness, calling them the
straight ways of the Lord; and by such discourses and a Baptism, he disposed
the spirits of men for the entertaining of the Messiah, and the Doctrine of the
Gospel. John's Sermons were to the Sermons of Jesus as a Preface to a Discourse.

But observe this, that his most usual Note was Repentance, the Axe to the
Root, the Fan to the Floor, the Chaff to the Fire: As his Raiment was rough, so
was his Tongue; and thus must the way be made for Christ in stubborn obstinate
hearts; plausibility, or pleasing of the flesh is no fit Preface to
Regeneration; if the heart of Man had continued upright, Christ might have been
entertained without contradiction; but now violence must be offered to our
Corruptions, ere we can have room for Grace; if the great way-maker do not cast
down Hills, and raise up Valleys in the bosoms of Men, there is no passage for
Christ; never will Christ come into that soul, where the Herald of Repentance,
either on one motive or other has not been before him.

Shall we hear that Sermon that John Preached in his own words? Matthew in
brief gives it in thus; Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand: Mat.
3.2.
these are the words when he first began to Preach the Gospel of Christ; and
indeed we find Christ himself does preach the same Doctrine in the same words:
Jesus began to Preach, and to say, Mat. 4.17.
Repent; for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand. In this Sermon we must observe
these two parts: here is, 1. A Duty; and, 2. A Motive to this Duty. 1. The Duty
is Repent.] It is not a Legal, but an Evangelical Repentance that is here
meant; indeed the Law strictly takes no notice of Repentance, but the Gospel;
true, and through, and consummate repentance is a Gospel Grace. 2. The Motive
is this; for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand. This Phrase, The Kingdom of
Heaven, has several acceptations, and accordingly it has occasioned some
differences. 1. Sometimes it is taken for that glorious condition of the other
World; this may be implied; but this I suppose few understand to be the sense
of this place. 2. Sometimes it is taken for the Church of Christ, q. d. Repent,
for now the Pedagogy of the Jews is expiring, or breathing its last; and the
Church of Christ is at hand, a People that shall bear the very style of
Christians; that shall profess Christ, and close with Christ as their Savior
and Messiah; of which Church, that you may be a part, prepare for it; Repent.
3. Sometimes it is taken for the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, in opposition to
those earthly temporal Kingdoms which bear the sway, and domineered over all
the World with Cruelty and Tyranny before Christ's coming; of this Daniel Dan.
2.44.
prophesied; And in the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a
Kingdom which shall never be destroyed. Now what was this Kingdom, but the
Kingdom of Grace? It is by an Hebraism called the Kingdom of Heaven, that is an
Heavenly Kingdom; the Jews expected the Messiah, and dreamed of an outward,
glorious and pompous Kingdom: now, says John, the Messiah is come, and his
Kingdom is come; but it is not an Earthly, but an Heavenly Kingdom; and
therefore Repent. 4. Sometimes it is taken for the Preaching of the Gospel, or
for the preaching of the Kingdom of Grace and Mercy of God in Christ unto men;
q. d. O Sirs! look about you, there is now a discovery made of the Glory and
Grace of God in another way than ever formerly; and therefore prepare for it:
Repent. 5. Sometimes it is taken for the Gosspel of Christ, as it is Published
and Preached unto all Nations: Observe, I do not only say, for the Gospel as it
is Preached; but as it is Preached to the Gentiles, or among all Nations, and
this shows how proper and pregnant an Argument this was to enforce the Doctrine
and Practice of Repentance upon the Jews, because the calling of the Gentiles
was near at hand, which would prove their rejection and casting off, if they
did not repent.

Oh how seasonable is this Sermon to us? Christians! has not the Kingdom of
Heaven approacht unto us? Take the Kingdom of Heaven for the Kingdom of Glory,
are we not near to the door of Glory, to the Confines of Eternity? What is our
Life but a Vapor that appears for a little time, and after it vanishes
away? We know not but ere the Sun have run one Round, our souls may be in that
World of souls, and so either in Heaven or Hell. Or take the Kingdom of Heaven
for the Church of Christ, and what expectations have we now of the flourishing
state of Christ's Church here upon Earth? Then shall the Children of Israel and
Judah be gathered together -- for great shall be the day of Jezreel, Hos. 1.11.
A time is at hand, that Israel and Judah shall be called together, that the
fullness of the Gentiles shall come in: and what is this but the great day of
Jezreel? Oh then what manner of Persons ought we to be? How Spiritual? How
Heavenly-minded? Arise, arise, shake off thy dust; for thy Light is coming, and
the glory of the Lord is rising upon thee. Or, take the Kingdom of Heaven for
the Preaching of the Gospel of Grace, Mercy and Goodness of God in Christ, what
Preachings are now in comparison of what have been formerly? How does the Lord
set forth his free Love, and free Grace in the Churches of Christ? No question
but many former ages have enjoyed their discoveries in some sweet measure, and
yet after-ages wonder that they have known no more; and how much of the Kingdom
of Heaven do Saints find in this Age, as if there were a new manifestation of
God unto the World? And yet I must tell you, that the Ages to come shall know
more of this Kingdom, there shall be further and further openings of this great
Mystery of Grace unto the Sons of Men. Mark the Apostle, That in the ages to
come he might show the exceeding riches of his Grace, in his kindness toward
us through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.7. Ephesians. 2.7.
How is this? Had not God revealed grace enough in the former ages? Or had not
God revealed Grace enough in that present Age? Did he not then call in the
Gentiles? were not many thousands converted at one only Sermon? What a deal of
that Grace had Paul himself received? He tells us that the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ was exceeding abundant to him-wards; 1 Timothy 1.14.
and is there yet more Grace to be revealed? O yes! herein lies the Mystery of
Grace, that he has reserved exceeding riches of Grace for the Ages to come;
Grace that never saw Light before; and I believe there is yet a fuller Magazine
of the Riches of his Grace for latter Ages, even for the Ages to come, to be
discovered, that ever was yet. Oh then repent, repent; Why? For the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. The very openings of Gods Love and Grace unto Souls, is a
Way and Motive to draw our Souls unto God. Or, take the Kingdom of Heaven for
the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, Jews and Gentiles, what fears and
jealousies may this breed in us as well as the Jews: O boast not against the
Branches! it may be thou will say, The Branches were broken off, that I might
be graffed in: well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by Faith; be not high-minded, but fear: For if God spared not the
natural Branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the
goodness and severity of God; on them which felt severity: but toward thee,
goodness, if thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou shall be cut off.
But I will not dwell on this: my design is to consider of Jesus, and of the
transactions of Jesus in reference to our souls health: now John's Sermons were
only a preparative to the manifestation of Jesus; he was only the Forerunner of
Christ, and not Christ himself, as himself witnesses.

SECT. III. Of the Baptism of Jesus.
2. FOr the Baptism of Christ. He that formerly was circumcised, would now be
baptized; he was circumcised to sanctify his Church that was, and he was
baptized to sanctify his Church that should be; we find him in both Testaments
opening a way into Heaven. This was the first appearing of Christ in reference
to his Ministerial Office, he that lay hid in the counsel of God from all
eternity, and he that lay hid in the womb of his Mother for the space of forty
weeks, and he that lay hid in Nazareth for the space of thirty years; now at
last he begins to show himself to the World, and He comes from Galilee to
Jordan, Mat. 3.13.
to John to be baptized of him. The day was but a little broke in John the
Baptist, but Christ the Son of Righteousness soon entered upon our Hemisphere;
indeed now was the full time come, that Jesus took his leave of his Mother, and
his Trade, to begin his Fathers work, in order to the Redemption of the World.
For the clearer understanding of Christ's Baptism, we shall examine these
Particulars. --

1. What Reason had Christ to be Baptized?

2. How was it that John knew him to be Christ?

3. Wherein was the glory of Christ's Baptism?

4. What was the Prayer of Christ, at, or after his Baptism?

5. Why was it that the Holy Ghost descended on Jesus?

6. Upon what account was it that the Holy Ghost should reveal himself at this
time? and why in the form of a Dove rather than some other form?

1. What reason had Christ to be Baptized? we find John himself wondering at
this; I have need to be Baptized of thee, Mat. 3.15.
and come thou to me? Many Reasons are given for Christ's Baptism: As, 1. That
by this symbol he might enter himself into the Society of Christians; just
like a King, to endear himself to any City of his Subjects, he condescends to
be made a freeman of that City. 2. That he might bear witness to the Preaching
and Baptism of John, and might reciprocally receive a Testimony from John. 3.
That by his own Baptism, he might sanctify the water of Baptism to his own
Church. 4. That he might give an example himself of the performance of that,
which he enjoined others. 5. That he might receive Testimony from Heaven, that
he was the Son of God. 6. That he might fulfill all Righteousness: not only the
Moral, but the Figurative, Ceremonial and Typical: Some think, that the
Ceremony, to which our Savior looked at in these words, was the washing of the
Priests in water, when they entered into their Function: Exodus 29.4. Lev. 8.6.
And Aaron and his Sons thou shall bring to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and shall wash them with water. And surely this was the main
reason of Christ's being Baptized, that by this Baptism he might be installed
into his Ministerial Office.

2. How did John know him to be Christ? It is very probable he had never seen
his Face before; they had in their Infancy been driven to several places, and
they were designed to several employments, and never met (as we may well
conceive) till now: besides, the Baptist speaks expressly, I knew him not, John
1.33.
but he that sent me to Baptize with water, the same said unto me, on
whomsoever thou shall see the Spirit descending, and abiding on him, the same
is he that Baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. Now this descent of the Holy Ghost,
was not till after Baptism; how then did he know him to be Christ?

The Answer is given by some thus; that John knew Christ in some measure before
his Baptism; but he knew him not so fully as after, when the Holy Ghost had
descended on him. Others thus; that John knew Christ before his Baptism, by a
present revelation, and after Baptism by a present sign; it is not unlikely but
John knew Christ at his first arrival by revelation; for if whiles he was in
his Mothers womb, he knew Christ being yet unborn, how much more might he know
and acknowledge him now at his Baptism? Thus Samuel knew Saul; and thus John
might know Christ. But for that knowledge he had after Baptism, it was a further
confirmation of that same knowledge that he had before Baptism, and that not so
much for his own sake, as for the Peoples. John 1.34.
I saw, and bear record that this is the Son of God.

3. Wherein was the Glory or excellency of Christ's Baptism? The Ancients give
many Encomiums to it, and in some respects prefer it to the Birth of Christ;
Aug. Sermon. 36.
thus Augustine; Many great Miracles were at Christ's Birth, but they were far
greater at his Baptism; the Holy Ghost overshadowed him in the Womb, but he
brightly shone on him in the River; then was the Father silent, not a word from
him, but now a loud voice is heard from Heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased; then was the Mother under suspicion, because she was found
with Child without a Father; but now is the Mother greatly honored, in that
the Holy Child is Fathered by God himself: then was Christ hid to the world;
and this made John the Baptist say, there stands one amongst you whom ye know
not: He was before his Baptism as the Sun in a Cloud, or a Pearl in a shell, or
a Goldmine in a Field: but now he appears in public; and to manifest his
Glory, the Heavens open, and from the Heavens the Holy Ghost descends, and
alights upon his sacred head; and God the Father gives a voice from Heaven,
declaring his Divinity to the world. If the Jews require a sign, here is not
one, but many signs at once; which as Beams do discover a Sun, so they discover
this Sun of Righteousness to be risen amongst them; and herein was the Glory of
Christ's Baptism.

4. What was the Prayer of Christ, at, or after his Baptism? The Evangelist
Luke Luke 3.21.
speaks of his Prayer. It came to pass that Jesus being Baptized, and Praying,
the Heavens were opened. This was the manner of those that were Baptized,
as soon as they were Baptized, to come out of the water and Pray; and some think
that these words, Mat. 3.36.
they were Baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins, has reference to
this: if so, then Christ having no sins to confess of his own, the tenor of
his prayer must needs be to some other purpose: But to what purpose? some say,
to the same purpose as his Prayers were usually; as in John 17. that his Father
would preserve his Church in Unity and Truth; and that he would Glorify his
Church, that they also might be one, even as he and his Father are one; and
especially that many might be converted by his Ministry, which he was now
beginning. Others think that this Prayer at this time, was for that which
followed upon his very prayer (i.e.) that the Holy Ghost might descend, and
that the Father would Glorify the Son by a Testimony from Heaven: Indeed, the
Text has laid his Prayer, and the opening of the Heavens so close together, as
that it seems to point out what was the tenor of his Prayer, by the consequent
of it. Before the Heaven was mured up, no Dove to be seen, no Voice to be
heard, but straight upon it (as if they had but waited the last word of his
prayer) all of them follow: and in another place, we find the like return upon
the like prayer; John 12.28.
Father, Glorify thy Name: then came there a voice from Heaven, saying, I have
both Glorified it, and I will Glorify it again: one reason more, if we
consider that Christ was now to enter upon the great Work of our Redemption,
and the preaching of the Gospel, it will be no less strange to conceive that he
prayed for the visible sealing of him to that Work and Office, by the coming of
the Holy Ghost. John 6.27.
To this purpose is that of the Evangelist; for him has God the Father sealed;
it is a Phrase borrowed from them, who give their Commissions under hand and
seal; and this is certain that upon his Prayer God sent the holy Spirit, who
sealed him, or allowed, and confirmed him to the Office of our Redemption; and
therefore very probable it is, that his Prayer might tend to that purpose; but
herein take heed of excluding what was mentioned in the former opinion; for my
part, I suppose Christ's prayer was both for himself, and all Believers; that
the holy Ghost might now be joined to the water; and that all others as should
ever after believe in his Name (as afterward he enlarges his Prayer) might
have the Holy Ghost descend upon them, John 17.20.

5. Why was it that the Holy Ghost descended on Jesus? I answer, for these
reasons, 1. That John the Baptist might be satisfied; for this Token was given
John, when he first began to preach, John 1.33.
that upon whom he should see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the
same is He which Baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. It was a sure sign to the
Baptist, whereby to know the Christ, whose Harbinger and Prodromus he was. 2.
That Christ himself might be anointed or installed to his Function. Isa. 61.1,
2.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to Preach
good tidings unto the meek, etc. As Aaron and his Sons were anointed with
material Oil, when they entered into their Offices, so Christ was by the Spirit
(as it were) anointed, that so he might receive this Consecration and
Institution for the Office that he was to enter on, viz. the Preaching and
Ministry of the Gospel.

6. Upon what account was it that the Holy Ghost should reveal himself at this
time? and why in form of a Dove, rather than some other form?

To the first I answer, the Holy Ghost now revealed himself, because the
Spiritual Kingdom and Scepter of Christ, in and by which he was to rule all
Nations for ever, was now at hand. Dr. Lightf. Harm. of the Evang.
It was agreeable (says my Author) that the spiritualness of this Kingdom
should be sealed and confirmed by the Holy Spirits showing himself even in the
beginning of it. The carnal Rites of Moses were now to vanish, and his Corporal
and Ceremonial Observances were now to be changed into a Spiritual Worship; and
neither at Jerusalem, or at Mount Gerazim, nor elsewhere, must there be any
more adoration with fleshly and earthly Ceremonies; John 4.21, 24.
but he that will Worship God, must worship him in Spirit and Truth; and
therefore it is no wonder, if now the Holy Ghost does reveal himself; I say
now, when his Spiritual Dominion by sanctification is to begin. Secondly,
Because the Holy Ghost was now in especial manner to be restored again: Some
observe, that he was visibly departed from Israel after the Death of the last
Prophets; and therefore now at his restoring, he comes in a visible and
apparent form; and he lights on him, to whom it belongs to give the Spirit, and
his gifts to whom he pleases. As John had preached that Christ should baptize
with the Holy Ghost, so now the Holy Ghost comes and abides on Jesus Christ, in
the sight of John; as if the Father should have said, Now I seal that Power and
Privilege to Christ my Son, which John has spoken: now the Holy Ghost is upon
himself, and hereafter he shall baptize others with the same Holy Ghost.
Thirdly, Because at the beginning of the Gospel it was most suitable, that a
full, clear, and sensible demonstration of the whole Trinity should be made.
The Learned observe, that the Holy Ghost in Scripture has a special regard to
express this Mystery of the Trinity upon singular occasions; so the very first
thing that is taught in all the Bible, Genesis 1.1, 2, 3.
is this same Mystery; In the Beginning God Created; there is the Father: and
God said; there is the Word, or the Son; and the Spirit of God moved; there is
the Holy Ghost. And the very first word of the Bible that speaks of a man, it
holds out the Trinity as creating him: and God said, Let us make Man in our own
Image; he says, let us] to show the Trinity of persons; Genesis 1.26.
and he says in our Image] not in our Images, to show the Unity of Essence.
And when Moses begins to rehearse the Law to Israel, the first thing he
teaches them, is the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. Hear, O Israel,
the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
the Lord is one. The last word One denotes the Unity; the three words, the
Lord our God, answer the three Persons; and the middle word our God, deciphers
fitly the second Person, who assumed our Nature: how fit then was it, that at
the beginning of the new world, and the new Law, and the Baptism of Christ, the
three persons should be revealed; especially since he ordained Baptism to be
admitted in all their names? Baptising them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, Mat. 28.19.
and of the holy Ghost: But where is it revealed? see Mat. 3.16, 17. where the
Father speaks from Heaven, the Son comes out of the water, and the holy Ghost
appears in the likeness of a Dove. This was the greatest meeting that ever was
upon the earth; every person of the Trinity gives some sensible evidence of his
presence at it.

To the second; why in the form of a Dove, rather than some other form? Many
reasons are given; as, --

1. To show Christ's innocence, purity, simplicity, charity, and love.

2. To show what innocence and harmlesness should be in those that are baptized.

3. To answer the Figure in Noah's Flood; for as a Dove at that time brought
tidings of the abatings of the waters, so now it brings tidings of the abating
of Gods wrath upon the preaching of the Gospel: the first Dove we find in the
Bible, is Noah's Dove, with the Olive Branch in her Bill, proclaiming peace; the
next is David's Dove with Feathers silver-white, as noteing sincerity; then
Esays Dove, mourning with her voice, as signifying patience; and lastly,
Christ's Dove, innocent and harmless; now all these properties meet in this
Dove, the Spirit of God. Much more might I add to these; but I desire to hasten
to some more edifying truths.

From this Baptism of Christ, we may learn a practical necessary Truth; Use.
There is a Generation that cries down Baptism of water, and upon this score,
because they suppose it was proper to John to Baptize only with water; and to
Christ to Baptize only with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Indeed Christ in his
own person Baptized none otherwise, but with the holy Ghost; immediately after
his Ascension, he sent his Spirit upon the Church, and baptized them with fire,
the spirit appearing like a flame; and to this day (though not visibly) he
Baptizeth all his Saints with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: but for all this,
he appointed John, and not only John, but all his Apostles, and their
Successors for ever, to Baptize with water; and they did so, and yet do so,
obeying the preceptive words of Christ, which are almost the last words that he
spoke upon the earth. And though Christ did not Baptize with water, yet Christ
himself (we see here) was Baptized with water; he himself enters at that door,
by which his Disciples must for ever follow after him; and indeed therefore he
went in at that door of Baptism, that he might hallow, or sanctify the
entrance which himself made to the house he was now a Building. And for the
difference they make betwixt Christ's Baptism, and John's Baptism: what is this
to the purpose? we all know, that in Baptism are two parts, the outward part,
and the inward part; you may call them (if you please) the outward Baptism, and
the inward Baptism: the outward Baptism is of the Minister, but the inward
Baptism is of Christ. But must we separate these? or rather Join them (if these
in ordinary must be joined) as we find them in Christ, Mark 1.4.
and as we desire they may be in us? I cannot see, but the Baptism we use, and
the Baptism of John are in nature and substance one, and the very same. 1. Mat.
3.15. Luke 7.29, 30.
John preached the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of Sins; they have
therefore the same Doctrine; and the same Promise. 2. The Baptism Ministered by
John, pertained to the fulfilling of all Righteousness; and Luke testifies,
that the Publicans and People being Baptized of John, they Justified God; but
the Pharisees despised the Council of God against themselves, and were not
Baptized: only herein lies the difference, that John Baptized in Christ that
should die and rise again: but we Baptize into the Name of Christ that is dead,
and risen again; it is a difference in respect of Circumstance, but not of the
Substance: Oh take heed of throwing away the Baptism of water, upon the
pretense of Baptism, only with Fire! Christ (we see) has joined them together,
and let no man separate them asunder: Christ himself was Baptized with fire,
and yet Christ himself was Baptized with water.

SECT. IV. Of the Fasting and Temptation of Christ.
3. FOr the Fasting and Temptation of Christ in the Wilderness. No sooner is
Christ come out of the water of Baptism, but he presently enters into the fire
of temptarion; no sooner is the holy Spirit descended upon his head, but he is
led by the same holy Spirit to be tempted in the wilderness; no sooner does God
say, This my Son; but Satan puts it to the question, if thou be the Son of God;
all these are but Ghrists preparatives to his Prophetical Office; in the former
Section, Christ was prepared by a solemn Consecration, and now he is to be
further prepared by Satan's Temptations; there is much in this particular, and
therefore in the same method as the Evangelist lays it down, Mat. 4.1.2, 3. to
v. 12. Mat. 4.1, to 12.
I shall proceed. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil, etc. In the whole, we may observe these several Branches,
as, First, the place where the Temptation was; to wit, the Wilderness.
Secondly, the cause of Christ's going into the Wilderness; the Spirits leading.
Thirdly, the end of the spirits leading Christ into the wilderness; to be
tempted of the Devil. Fourthly, the time and occasion of the Devils onset; at
the end of forty days fast, and when he was an hungered. Fifthly, the
Temptations themselves which are in number three; to which are added as many
Victories, which Christ had over the Tempter; who therefore left him, and so
the Angels came, and ministered unto him. I shall begin first with the place
where the Temptation was; to wit, in the Wilderness.

This wilderness was not that same wilderness, or not that same place of the
wilderness wherein John Baptist lived, Mat. 3.1. For that wherein John Baptist
lived, was a place inhabited; there was in that place Cities and Towns, and a
number of people to whom John Preached; but this wilderness was devoid of men,
full of wild beasts; so says Mark, Mark. 1.13.
He was tempted of Satan, and was with the wild Beasts. As Adam in his
Innocence lived with wild Beasts and they hurt him not; so Christ, the second
Adam lives, here in a wilderness with wild Beasts, and he has no hurt at all;
he is Adam-like in his safety and security; but above Adam in the resisting of
temptation. Some say that in this wilderness, during his forty days abode,
Christ was perpetually disturbed and assaulted with evil Spirits; however the
last brunt is only expressed, because it was most violent; now whether they
appeared in any horrid and affrighting shapes during that time, it is not
certain; but it is most likely, that to a Person of so great sanctity, and high
designation as Jesus was, they would appear more angelical and immaterial, and
in representments intellectual, because Jesus was not a Person of those low
weaknesses, to be affrighted or troubled with any ugly phantasmes; it is not
much material to enquire of this; but in the wilderness (say they) Christ was
perpetually tempted; and in this respect I know not, but the Devil had more
advantage now he had Christ in a wilderness; solitariness is no small help to
the speed of a Temptation; Woe to him that is alone, for if he fall, there is
not a second to take him up. Others say, that in this wilderness, during his
forty days abode, Christ was continually exercised in Prayer and Fasting; all
that while he had his immediate Addresses and Colloquies with God; he knew he
had a great work of Redemption to promote; and therefore his Conversation for
this interval must be preparatory to it; in this respect I know not but the
wilderness might be an advantage to Christ's Design: In this solitary place he
could not but breath out more pure inspiration; Heaven usually is more open,
and God usually is more familier and frequent in his visits in such places. I
know not what other experiences may be; but if I have found any thing of God,
or of his Grace, I may thank a Wood, a Wilderness, a Desert, a solitary place,
for its accommodation; and have I not a blessed Pattern here before me? It was
Solitude and Retirement in which Jesus kept his Vigils; the desert places heard
him pray; in a privacy he was born, in the wilderness he fed his thousands,
upon a Mountain apart he was transfigured, upon a Mountain he died, and from a
Mountain he ascended to his Father: I make no question but in these Retirements
his Devotion received the advantage of convenient Circumstances, especially of
time and place. And yet I dare not deny the firster opinion; for I suppose both
Christ and the Devil had their advantages of this Wilderness, the one is to
pray, and the other to tempt.

2. The cause of Christ's going into the Wilderness was the Spirits leading.
Then was Jesus led of the Spirit into the Wilderness; Christ was led by the
good Spirit, to be tempted by the evil Spirit: O wonder! that same Spirit which
was one with the Father and the Son; that same Spirit whereby Christ was
conceived, now drives him or leads him into the wilderness to be tempted of the
Devil: The manner of Christ's leading is a question; some think he was led or
caught away from Jordan in some visible rapture toward the wilderness: But to
leave that, and to come to Truths more necessary; Christ taught us to Pray unto
his Father, Lead us not into temptation; and yet he himself is now led into the
same temptation which we must pray against; surely this is for our instruction:
we are not to thrust our selves upon temptation; Christ himself would not go
into the Combat uncalled, unwarranted, how then should we poor weaklings
presume upon any abilities of our own? who dares grapple with the Devil in his
own strength? O take heed! if we are to pray not to be led into temptation,
much more are we to pray not to run into temptation before we are led; and yet
for the comfort of God's people, if it be so that we are led; if by divine
permission, or by an inspiration of the holy Spirit, we are engaged in an
action, or in a course of life that is full of temptations, and empty of
comforts, let us look upon it as an issue of divine Providence in which we must
Glorify God; but no argument of disfavour or dislove of God: and why? because
Christ himself who could have driven the Devil away by the breath of his mouth,
yet was, by the Spirit of his Father, led to a Trial by the Spirits of
Darkness. My Brethren, count it all joy (says James James 1.2.
) when ye enter into diverse temptations, knowing that the trial of your Faith
works Patience.

3. The end of the Spirits leading Christ into the wilderness, it was either
immediate, or remote. 1. For the immediate end; it was to be tempted of the
Devil: to this purpose was Christ brought thither, that Satan might tempt him.
One would think it a very strange design that the Son of God should be brought
into a wilderness to be set on by all the Devils in Hell; but in this also God
had another remote end (i.e.) his own Glory, and our good. 1. His own Glory
appeared in this; had not Satan tempted Christ, how should Christ have overcome
Satan? The first Adam was tempted, and vanquished; the second Adam, to repay
and repair that Foil, does vanquish in being tempted; now herein was the Power
of Christ exceedingly manifested: the Devil having the Chain let loose, he lets
fly at Christ with all his might; and Christ, that without blows could not
have got a Victory, by this furious assault of Satan, he both overcomes him,
and triumphs over him. And herein were the Graces of Christ exceedingly
manifested; how was the Faith, Patience, Humility, Zeal and Valor of Christ
set forth, which they could not have been, if he had always lain quietly in
Garrison, and never had come into the Skirmish? Who could have felt the
Odoriferous smells of those Aromatical Spices, if they had not been punned and
bruised in this Mortar of Temptation? It was by this means that the Graces of
Christ clearly shined forth to his eternal Praise. 2. As it was for his Glory,
so also for our Good. Now we see what manner of Adversary we have, how he
fights, and how he is resisted, and how overcome; now we see the dearer we are
to God, the more obnoxious we are to a trial of temptation; now we see that the
best of Saints may be tempted or allured to the worst of evils; since Christ
himself is solicited to Infidelity, Covetousness and Idolatry: now we see that
we have not a Savior and High Priest, Heb. 4.15, 16.
that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but such a one as
was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin; and therefore we may
go boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may receive Mercy, and find Grace of
help in time of need.

4. The time and occasion of the Devils Onset; it was at the end of forty days
Fast, and when he was an hungered. Some say (as you have heard) that all those
forty days, when Christ was in the Wilderness, he was tempted only invisibly:
for Satan during that time, assumed not any visible or conspicious shape, which
it the end of forty days, (say they) he did: my meaning is not to controvert
these points. Howsoever for his tempting, yet for his fasting forty days and
forty nights, there is no controversy; and of that we had some Types before
Christ came into the World; thus Moses fasted forty days at the delivery of
the Law; and Elias fasted forty days at the restitution of the Law; and to
fulfill the time of both these Types, Christ thinks it fit to fast forty days
at the accomplishment of the Law, and the promulgation of the Gospel. In
fasting so long, Christ manifests his Almighty Power; and in fasting no longer,
Christ manifests the truth of his Manhood, and of his weakness: that he might
approve that there was no difference betwixt him and us, but sin, he both
fasted, and was an hungered; we know well enough, that Christ could have lived
without meat, and he could have fasted without hunger; it had been an easy
matter for him to have supported his Body without any means of nourishment or
Life; but to show that he was man, as well as God, and so fit a Mediator
betwixt God and Man, he would both feed and fast; make use of the Creature, and
withal suffer hunger. -- And now our Savior is an hungered; this gives
occasion to Satan to set upon him with his fierce and violent temptations; he
knows well what baits to fish withal, and when and how to lay them; he has
Temptations of all sorts; he has Apples to cozen Children, and Gold for Men;
he has the Vanities of the World for the intemperate, and the Kingdoms of the
world for the ambitious; he considers the temper and constitution of the Person
he is to tempt; and he observes all our exterior Accidents, Occasions, and
Opportunities; but of this hereafter.

5. The Temptations themselves are in number three; whereof the first was this:
If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. What an
horrible Entrance is this? if thou be the Son of God; no question Satan had
heard the glad tidings of the Angel, he saw the Star, and the Journey, and the
Offerings of the Sages; he could not but take notice of the gratulations of
Zachary, Simeon, Anna; and of late he saw the Heavens open, and he heard the
Voice that came down from Heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased: and yet now that he saw Christ fainting with hunger, as not
comprehending how infirmities could consist with a Godhead, he puts it to the
question, if thou be the Son of God. Oh here is a point in which lies all our
happiness! how miserable were we, if Christ were not indeed and in truth the
Son of God? Satan strikes at the root in this supposition; If thou be the Son
of God: Surely all the work of our Redemption, and all the work of our
Salvation depends upon this one necessary Truth, that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God. If Christ had not been the Son of God, how should he have ransomed the
world? how should he have done, or how should he have suffered that which was
satisfactory to his Fathers wrath? how should his Life or Death have been
valuable to the sins of all the world? If Christ be not the Son of God, we are
all gone; we are lost, we are undon, we are damned for ever: O alas! farewell
Glory, farewell happiness, farewell Heaven: If Christ be not the Son of God, we
must never come there; well Satan, thou beginnest thy assault like a Devil
indeed, if thou be the Son of God; but what then? Command that these stones be
made Bread. He knew Jesus was hungry; and therefore he invites him to eat Bread
only of his own providing, that so he might refresh his Humanity, and prove his
Divinity: Come, says he, break thy fast upon the expense of a Miracle; turn
these stones into Bread, and it will be some Argument thou art the Son of God.
There is nothing more ordinary with our Spiritual enemy, than by occasion of
want to move us to unwarrantable courses; If thou art poor, then steal; if thou
can not rise by honest means, then use indirect means: I know Christ might
as lawfully have turned stones into Bread, as he turned water into Wine: but to
do this in a distrust of his Fathers Providence, to work a Miracle of Satan's
choice, and at Satan's bidding, it could not be agreeable with the Son of God:
And hence Jesus refuses to be relieved; he would rather deny to manifest the
Divinity of his Person, than he would do any act which had in it the intimation
of a different spirit. O Christians! it is a sinful, impious, wicked care, to
take evil courses to provide for our necessities: Come, it may be thou have
found a way to thrive, which thou could not do before; O take heed; was it
not of the Devils prompting to change stones into Bread? sadness into sensual
Comforts? if so, then Satan has prevailed: alas, alas, he cannot endure thou
should live a life of austerity, or self-denial, or of mortification; if he
can but get thee to satisfy thy senses, and to please thy natural desires, he
then has a fair field for the Battle; it were a thousand times better for us
to make stones our meat, and tears our drink, than to swim in our ill-gotten
Goods, and in the fullness of Voluptuousness.

But what was Christ's Answer? why thus; it is written, man shall not live by
Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the month of God. 1. It
is written] He easily could have confounded Satan by the Power of his Godhead,
but he rather chooses to vanquish him by the Sword of the Spirit; surely this
was for our Instruction; by this means he teaches us how to resist and to
overcome; nothing in Heaven or Earth can beat the Forces of Hell, if the Word
of God cannot do it: O then how should we pray with David, Teach me, O Lord,
the way of thy statutes -- and take not from me the words of truth, let them be
my songs in the house of my pilgrimage, -- so shall I make answer to my
blasphemers. 2. Man shall not live by bread, etc. Whiles we are in Gods work,
God has made a promise of the supply of all provisions necessary for us; now
this was the present case of Jesus, he was now in his Father's work, and
promoting of our interest, and therefore he was sure to be provided for
according to God's Word. Christians! are we in God's service? God will
certainly give us bread; and till he does, we can live by the breath of his
mouth, by the light of his countinance, by the refreshment of his promises, by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God; every word of God's mouth
can create a grace, and every grace, can supply two necessities, both of the
body, and of the Spirit: I remember one kept straightly in prison, and sorely
threatened with famine, he replied, That if he must have no bread, God would so
provide, that he should have no stomach; if our stock be spent, God can lessen
our necessities: If a Tyrant will take away our meat, God our Father knows how
to alter our faint, and feeble, and hungry appetites.

The second temptation is not so sensual; the Devil sees that was too low for
Christ, and therefore he comes again with a temptation something more
spiritual; Ver. 5, 6.
He sets him on a Pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him, if thou be the Son
of God, cast thy self down, for it is written, he shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, etc. He that was content to be led from Jordan into the
Wilderness, for the advantage of the first temptation, he yields to be led from
the Wilderness to Jerusalem, for advantage of the second; the Wilderness was
fit for a temptation arising from want, and Jerusalem is fit for a temptation
arising from vainglory; Jerusalem was the glory of the World, the Temple was
the glory of Jerusalem, the pinnacle was the highest piece of the Temple, and
there is Christ content to be set for the opportunity of temptation. O that
Christ would suffer his pure and sacred body to be transported and hurried
through the air by the malicious hand of the old Tempter! But all this was for
us, he cared not what the Devil did in this way with him, so that he might but
free us from the Devil. Methinks it is a sweet contemplation of an Holy Divine:
He supposed as if he had seen Christ on the highest Battlements of the Temple,
and Satan standing by him, with this Speech in his mouth, Well then, since in
the matter of nourishment, Dr. Hall.
thou will needs depend upon thy Fathers providence, take now a further trial
of that providence, in thy miraculous preservation, cast down thy self from
this height; behold, thou art here in Jerusalem, the famous and holy City of
the World; here thou art on the top of the Pinnacle of that Temple which was
dedicated to thy Father; and if thou be God, why now the eyes of all men are
fixed upon thee, there cannot be devised a more ready way to spread thy Glory,
and to proclaim thy Deity, than by casting thy self headlong to the Earth; all
the World will say, there is more in thee than a man; and for danger (if thou
art the Son of God) there can be none: what can hurt him that is the Son of
God? and wherefore serves that glorious Guard of Angels, which have by Divine
Commission taken upon them the Charge of thy Humanity? Come, cast thy self
down; here lies the temptation, Come, cast thy self down (says Satan) but why
did not Satan cast him down? He carried him up thither; and was it not more
easy to throw him down thence? O no, the Devil may persuade us to a fall, but
he cannot percipitate us without our own act; his malice is infinite, but his
power is limited; he cannot do us any harm, but by persuading us to do it our
selves; and therefore says he to Christ, cast thy self down.

To this Christ answers, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Though it is
true, Ver. 7.
that God must be trusted in, yet he must not be tempted; if means be allowed,
we must not throw them away upon a pretense of God's protection: we read of one
Heron, an Inhabitant of the Desert, that he suffered the same temptation, and
was overcome by it; he would needs cast himself down, presuming on God's
promise, and he sinfully died with his fall. Christ knew well enough that there
were ordinary descents by stairs from the top of the Temple, and therefore he
would not so tempt God to throw him himself headlong; What? To make trial of
God's Power, and Justice, and Mercy, and extraordinary preservation, where
there was no need: all the Devils in Hell could not so tempt Christ, as to make
him tempt his God.

The third temptation is yet more horrid; the Temple was not high enough; so
that now Satan takes him up to the top of an exceeding high mountain, Ver. 8, 9.
and he shows him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, saying,
all these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Not to
insist on those many Queries; how should all the Kingdoms of the World be
presented to Christ's eye? Or if they were only presented to his imagination,
why could not the Valley have served the Devil's turn, as well as an hill? or
whether was not Rome the object that the Devil presented? because at that time,
Rome was the top of all the Kingdoms of the world, and the Glory of them? For
my part, I think, in this Temptation, the Devil united all his Power of
stratagems, and by an angelical Power he drew into one center, the several
Species and Idea's, from all the Kingdoms and Glories of the world; and he made
an admirable Map of Beauties; and represented them to the eyes of Jesus; he
thought Ambition more likely to ruin him, because he knew it was that which
prevailed upon himself, and all those fallen stars, the Angels of darkness; and
therefore, come (says Satan) all these will I give thee, if thou will fall
down and worship me. How? God worship the Devil? was ever the like Blasphemy
since the first Creation? indeed now we have many fearful, execrable, cursed
Blasphemies belched out, and Idolatry, I believe, is the spreading'st sin in
the World; but was ever the like Blasphemy, or Idolatry to this, that not only
a Creature, but the Creator himself must fall down before the Devil, and give
worship unto him? The Lamb of God, that heard all the former Temptations with
patience; he could by no means endure this; our own injuries are opportunities
of patience; but when the Glory of God, and his immediate Honor is the
question, then our Zeal should be all on a flame; now Christ bids him avoid;
as soon as he observes his demands so impudent and Blasphemous; he commands him
away, and tells him, it is written, Ver. 10.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Now was
the Devil put to flight, and in his stead the Angels came and ministered unto
Jesus; (i.e.) after his Fast, they ministered such things as his necessities
required of them.

Use.
O Christians! what shall we say to this? if Christ was thus tempted by Satan,
what may we look for: Sometimes it chears my heart to think that Christ was
tempted; because thereby he knows how to succor those that are tempted; and
sometimes it affrights my Soul to think that Satan durst be so bold with Jesus
Christ: Oh what may he do with me? how easily may he prevail against my Soul?
when he came to tempt Christ, he found nothing in him to join with him in the
temptation, but in my heart is a world of Corruptions; and unless the Lord
prevent, I am quickly gone. I may not here fall on the Doctrine of Temptations;
only a few words. 1. Of Satan's Stratagems. 7. Of some general means to
withstand his Stratagems, and I have done.

1. His Stratagems are very many, and very dangerous; As, --

1. He observes, and fits his temptations to our dispositions; for example, if
he find a man ambitiously affected, then he covers his hook with the Bait of
Honors; and thus he tempted Abimelech to murder his Brethren, that he might
obtain the Sovereignty; or if he find a man Voluptuously given, then he tempts
him with the bait of Pleasures, and thus he allured Noah to Drunkenness; David
to Adultery; Solomon to Idolatry: or if he find a man Covetously given, then he
lets in the Golden hook; and thus he enticed Balaam, by offering him money to
curse the people, whom God had Blessed; and thus he allured Judas for thirty
pieces of Silver to betray his Master; but what need we Instances, when we see
this day so many thousands entangled in this golden Net?

2. He observes, and fits his Temptations to our Complections; and thus he
tempts the choleric to quarrels and brawls; the phlegmatic to idleness and
sloth; the melancholy to malice and revenge; the sanguine to pleasure and
fleshly lusts; and hence it is that the Apostles tells us, James 1.14.
that whosoever is tempted, he is drawn away by his own Concupiscence. Satan
never assaults us, but he is sure there is something within us, that will
further him in his temptations.

3. He observes, and fits his temptations to our outward conditions; thus if we
are in prosperity, then he tempts us to pride and forgetfulness of God, to
contempt of our Brethren, to the love of the world, to coldness in Religion,
carnal security, and the like: or if we are in adversity, then he tempts us to
the use of unlawful means, to the distrusting of God's all-ruling providence,
and never deceiving-promises; or, it may be, to despair, murmur, and repining
against God; by this temptation he confidently presumed to have moved Christ to
distrust God's providence, and to shift for himself, by turning stones into
Bread.

4. He observes, and fits his temptations to our spiritual estate; thus, if we
are notoriously wicked, then he tempts us to Atheism, contempt of God's
worship, swearing, blaspheming, prophaining of the Lords days; to
disobedience, murders, adulteries, drunkenness, theft, covetuousness, and all
devilish practices; or if we are civilized, and run not with others into such
an excess of riot and sin, why then he tempts us to a good opinion of such a
condition, I thank thee, O Father, that I am not as other men, etc. I deal
justly and uprightly with all my Neighbors; I have a good meaning toward God,
though I am ignorant of Scripture, and of the Principles of Religion: or if we
are professors of God's Truth, and can tip our tongues with Glorious words of
Religion, Holiness, Christ, why then he tempts us with resting on this: What
needs more? If I can but outwardly perform the Duties of Piety, as the hearing
of God's word, receiving of the Sacraments, public and private calling on God;
in this I am a true Protestant: that Charity, Love, good Works, and all the
duties of the second Table can never Justify me, or save me, but only Faith; I
believe, and I make a profession of Religion, and I hope this will suffice: Or
if we are sincere professors, and but weak in the Faith, why then he tempts us
with sad thoughts of our sins; he sets before us their number, and nature, and
odiousness in every aggravation; and if therewith he cannot overwhelm us, he
adds (it may be) unto them some of his own sins; thus he casts into our minds
many outrageous Blasphemies, such Blasphemies as he propounded to Christ, to
worship him for our God, to deny Jesus Christ as our God, our Lord, our
Savior, our Redeemer; to say in our hearts there is no God, but Nature; no
Scripture, no Holy Ghost: many a precious Soul feels these injections of Satan;
and I cannot wonder at it, when I see the Devil tempting Christ himself to
diffidence, presumption, Vainglory, yea, and to the worshipping of the Devil
himself; or if we are strong Christians, grown men, and still growing toward
the fullness of Christ, why then he tempts us to sins of presumption against
knowledge; or if he cannot so prevail, he will Transform himself into an Angel
of light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
and tempt us to the doing a less good, that we may neglect a greater; or to
the doing of a greater good, but very unseasonably. When as some other duties
in respect of present occasion are more necessary far; thus many times in the
hearing of God's Word, he will cast into our minds meditations of this or that
excellent subject, on purpose to distract our minds, and to make us hear
without profit; and in Prayer to God, he will bring into our memories this or
that profitable instruction, which we have heard at such, or such a Sermon, on
purpose to disturb our Spirits in that holy exercise, and to keep us from
lifting up our hearts wholly and purely unto God: I might add a thousand of
these stratagems of the Devil, and yet not perhaps tell one of a thousand: the
Apostle could say indeed, 2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians. 6.11. Rev. 2.24. Ephesians. 6.16.
that he was not ignorant of his devices; and of some of his devices, you see,
we are not ignorant; but alas! who can discover all his Methods, Wiles, Depths,
fiery Darts? For my part I cannot do it, I am yet to learn.

2. The general means to withstand his Stratagems are such as these. --

1. A continual reminding of Christ's Commands in this very thing; Be strong in
the Power of his might: put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.10, 11. 1 Pet.
5.8.
that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil; him resist in the
Faith.

2. An avoiding of the first suggestions of Satan; if this gliding Serpent can
but thrust in his head, he will easily make room for his body; and therefore we
must nip, and bruise him in the head; Give no place to the Devil.

3. An objecting of Christ against all his temptations; for example, Ephesians. 4.27.
if Satan tell us that we are miserable sinners; we may answer, Mat. 9.13. Isa.
53.5.
that Christ came into the World to save sinners; and that he was wounded for
our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, -- and with his stripes are
we healed: If Satan tell us that we are subject to God's wrath; we may answer,
that Christ did bear his Fathers wrath, that he might make our peace: If he
tells us, that we are subject to the Curse of the Law; we may answer, that
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, when he was made a Curse for
us: If he tell us, that we are his bondslaves, we may answer, that we were so
indeed in times past; Gal. 3.13.
but Christ has paid his Father the price of our Redemption, and has set us
free* if he tell us, that we are unjust, and therefore shall be condemned
before God's judgment seat, we may answer, that Christ, who was Innocent, was
therefore condemned, that we, who are guilty, might thereby be acquitted; and
that he that came to save us, will himself judge us, and therefore we need not
doubt of mercy, if we plead the merits of Christ: or if Satan will not be thus
answered by us; why then Christians! there is no other way, but to send him to
Christ: to this purpose, we may tell him that Christ is our Advocate; and if he
will needs dispute, let him go to Jesus; he is both able to plead our cause,
and to answer to all the Suits that are made against us.

4. I may add hearing, reading, meditating on God's Word, holy Conferences,
busy employment in the works of our particular callings; living by Faith, I
must not stay on all these means, Mat. 26.41.
only remember amongst the rest, that one of Christ: Watch and Pray, that ye
enter not into temptation; Praying against it, is a denying of it, and a great
part of the victory; for it is a disclaiming the entertainment of it; it is a
positive rejection of the crime; it is a calling in auxiliaries from above, to
make the victory more certain to us. Hence one sweetly advises, If temptation
sets upon thee, do thou set upon God; for he is as soon overcome as thou art;
as soon moved to good, as thou art to evil; he is as quickly invited to pity
thee, as thou art to ask him; provided thou do not finally rest in the
Petition, but pass into action, and endeavor by all means to quench the flame
newly kindled in thy bowels, before it come to devour the marrow that is in thy
bones: indeed a strong prayer, and a lazy, incurious, unobservant walking are
contradictions in Religion; and therefore Watch and Pray, and pray and watch.

SECT. V. Of the first Manifestation of Christ.
4. FOr the first Manifestation of Jesus by his several witnesses; now it was
time that the Sun of Righteousness should arise, and shine in the view of the
world: and (because of unbelief which had blinded the world) that some especial
witnesses should be chosen out, John 1.45. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 1.20.
both to anoint our eyes, and to point to the light, saying, This is he of whom
Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the Son of
Joseph: to this purpose we read much of the manifestation of Jesus; God was
manifest in the flesh. And Christ verily was foreordained before the
foundations of the World, but was manifest in these last times for you. In that
first Miracle that ever he wrought, this is written upon it, John 2.11. 1 John
1.2.
he manifested forth his Glory. And John the Divine, in his setting out of
Jesus, he tells us, that the Life was manifested; and we have seen it, and bear
witness, and show unto you that eternal Life which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us.

And there is reason for this manifestation. 1. Because every manifestation was
an approbation of his Mission and Divinity. 2. Because in the manifestation of
Christ, there was a manifestation of the Grace of God; and this was the Will of
God, that he would not only act free Grace, but he would have it known, and
published to all the world; this is the Glory of Grace, and sets it out: And
therefore says the Apostle, The grace of God that brings salvation, Tit.
2.11. Tit. 3.4.
has appeared to all men. At the opening and discovery of Jesus Christ, the
kindness, and pity, and love of God our Savior toward man appeared. 3.
Because this manifestation has something in it of the removal of sin; it is
the voice of Christ unto such as are in sin, Isa. 65.1.
Behold me; the first step toward the remission of Sins, is the beholding of
Christ; now we cannot behold him that will not come into view: 1 John 3.5.
and therefore says the Apostle, ye know that he was manifested to take away
our sins. 4. Because this manifestation has something in it to the
overthrowing of Satan; for the while that Christ hid himself, Satan blinded the
minds of men; but when once Christ the Image of God shone forth, then Satan,
like Lightning fell down from Heaven; 1 John 3.8.
for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil. 5. Because this manifestation tends to our believing in
Christ, and by consequence to our Salvation through Christ: John 20.30, 31.
Many signs Christ did in the presence of his disciples which are not written;
but these are written, (says John) that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ
the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have life through his Name.

Well, but wherein was this first manifestation of Jesus? I answer, in those
several witnesses that held him forth: John 8.17.
It is written in the Law (says Christ) that the testimony of of two men is
true; but to manifest Christ, were many witnesses. As, 1. From Heaven the
Father is witness; John 8.18. John 8.14.
for see, says Christ, the Father that sent me, bears witness of me: and the
Son is witness; for so says Christ: I am one that bear witness of my self; and
though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true; for I know whence I
came, and whither I go: Heb. 10.19.
and the Holy Ghost is witness; so faith Paul: The Holy Ghost also is a witness
to us: and to that purpose he descended like a Dove, and light upon him. 2. On
Earth John the Baptist is witness: Mat. 3.16. John 5.33. John 1.7.
for so says Christ; ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth, --
he came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through
Christ might believe. No sooner was John confirmed by a sign from Heaven, that
Jesus was the Christ, but he immediately manifests it to the Jews; and first to
the Priests and Levites sent in legation from the Sanhedrim, he professed
indefinitely in answer to their question, that himself was not the Christ, nor
Elias, nor that Prophet, whom they by a special tradition expected to be
revealed, though they knew not when; and secondly, to all the People he
professes definitely, wheresoever he saw Jesus Christ, this is he: yea, he
points him out with his finger, John 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. Then he shows
him to Andrew, Simon Peter's Brother, and then to another Disciple with him,
who both followed Jesus, and abode with him all night. John 1.39.
Andrew brings his Brother Simon with him, and Christ changes his Name from
Simon to Peter, or Cephas, which signifies a Sone. Ver. 42. Ver. 43. Ver. 44.
Ver. 47.
Then Jesus himself finds out Philip of Bethsaida, and bade him follow him;
and Philip finds out Nathanael, and bids him come and see, for the Messiah was
found; when Nathanael came to Jesus, Christ saw his heart, and gave him a
blessed Character; Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile. Thus
we see no less than five Disciples found out at first, which must be as so many
witnesses of Jesus Christ.

And yet we find more witnesses; The works (says Christ) that I do, in my
Fathers name, they bear witness of me. These Works or Miracles of Christ were
many; John 10.25.
but because we are speaking of his first manifestation, I shall instance only
in his first work, which was at a Marriage in Cana of Galilee. The power of
Miracles had now ceased since their return out of Captivity; the last Miracle
that was done by man till this very time, was Daniel's tying up the mouth of
the Lions; and now Christ begins. He that made the first Marriage in Paradise,
bestows his first Miracle upon a Marriage Feast: O happy Feast, where Christ is
a Guest! I believe this was no rich or sumptuous Bridal; who ever found Christ
at the magnificent Feasts, or Triumphs of the great? The state of a Servant (in
which state Christ was) does not well agree with the proud pomp of the World:
This poor needy Bridegroom wants drink for his Guests; and as soon as the Holy
Virgin has notice of it, she complains to her Son: whether we want Bread, or
Water, or Wine, Necessaries, or Comforts, whether should we go but to Christ?
The Lord is my Shepherd; and if that be so, it wall surely follow, I shall not
want: Psalm. 23.1. John 2.4.
But Jesus answered her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not
yet come. This shows, that the work he was to do, must not be done to satisfy
her importunity, but to prosecute the great work of divine designation. In
works spiritual and religious, all outward relation cease: Matters of Miracle
concerned the Godhead only; and in this case, O Woman, what have I to do with
thee? We must not deny Love, and Duty to Relations; but in the things of God,
natural Endearments must pass into spiritual; and like Stars, in the presence
of the Sun, must not appear. Paul could say, Henceforth know we no man after
the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16.
yet now henceforth know we him no more.

At the Command of Jesus, the water pots were filled with water, and the water
by his Divine Power is turned into Wine; where the different dispensation of
God and the world is highly observable: Every man sets forth good Wine at first
and then the worse: But Christ not only turns water into Wine, but into such
Wine that at the last Draught is most pleasant: the world presents us with fair
hopes of pleasures, honors, and preferments, but there is bitterness in the
end: every sin smiles in the first address; but when we have well drunk, then
comes that which is worse; only Christ turns our water into Wine; if we fill
our water-pots with water; if with David, we water our Couch with our tears for
sin, Christ will come with the Wine of gladness sooner or latter; and he will
give the best wine at the last. O how delicate is that new Wine, which we shall
one day drink with Christ in his Fathers Kingdom? These were the first
manifestations of Jesus: you see he had several witnesses to set him forth;
some from Heaven, and some on earth; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost witness
from Heaven; The Baptist, Disciples, and his works witness on earth; and
there is no disagreement in their witness, but all bring in this testimony of
Jesus, that he is the Messiah; that is being interpreted, John. 1.41.
the Christ.

But what are those manifestations to us? Use.
or to that great design of Christ in carrying on our souls salvation? Much
every way. For either must Christ be manifested to us even by these witnesses,
in the preaching of the Gospel, and manifested in us by that one witness, his
holy spirit, or we are undone for ever.

1. Christ must be manifested to us in the preaching of the Gospel: This mercy
we have this day; nay, you see every Sabbath day all the witnesses speak in us:
What do we, but in God's stead, in the Baptist's stead, in the Disciples stead,
manifest Christ to you in every Sermon? It is the Commission which Christ has
given us of the Ministry, Go, preach the Gospel to every Creature. Mark 16.15.
Observe but how open Christ's heart is toward you; he cannot contain his Love
and Grace within himself, he cannot keep his own councels that are for the good
of your souls, but all must be manifest, and that in the openest way, by
Preaching and Proclaiming them to the world, Christ must be laid out to open
view: Christ will have nothing of his Love kept back; he wills and commands us
of the Ministry, instead of all those former witnesses, to make all known what
he is, and what he has done and suffered for you. Oh Christians! how cheap are
the mysteries of the Gospel to you ward? you may know them, if you will but
lend an ear, and listen to them: the word is nigh you, even in your mouths;
Christ is proclaimed in your very streets; you may have him if you will,
without money or mony-worth: Come, buy Wine, Isa. 55.1.
and Milk, without Money, and without Price: Do you not hear? Christ is laid
open for every man's good and profit: Christ deals not underhand with you; he
must be manifested, that you may see what you buy: if I should tell you the
meaning of the Commission which Christ has put into our hands, he bids me say
thus to your souls, Come poor Creatures, you that stand in need of Jesus
Christ, here is Christ for you; take him and do with him in an holy manner what
you will, he is of infinite use for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. What is our preaching, but a manifesting of Christ in this manner?
what is the sum of all our Sermons, but a discovery of this, that life and
light is in Christ for you, that eternal Love waits and attends on you, that
whatever may do you good, is provided and made ready for you? Oh will souls now
refuse Christ, when thus and thus manifested? God forbid.

2. Christ must be manifested in us by his holy Spirit. Christians! look to
your hearts; what manifestations of Christ are there? When Paul speaks of the
Gospel in general, Gal. 1.16. 2 Pet. 1.10. Rev. 22.16.
he adds in particular, that it pleased God to reveal Christ in me. And when
Peter speaks of the Word of God, he adds that we take heed thereunto, -- until
the day dawn, and the day star (that is, Christ, Rev. 22.16.) arise in our
hearts; till then, though we be circled with Gospel discoveries, our hearts
will be full of darkness; but when Christ, Mal. 4.2.
whom the Prophet calls the Son of Righteousness, and Peter the day star shall
arise within us, we shall be full of light. Sometimes, I confess, I wonder that
in these days there should be such glorious discoveries of the beauties, and
sweetness, and excellencies of Jesus Christ, and yet that men's hearts are
generally so full of darkness: but this takes off the wonder, John 1.5.
hearts are carnal, Light shines in darkness, but darkness comprehends it
not: Lead a blind man through a glorious City, and though there be such and
such things in it, yet he tells you, he cannot prize them; he sees them not:
though Jerusalem should come down from God out of Heaven (as John saw it in his
Vision) prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband; Rev. 21.2.
yet the natural man sees neither Walls, nor Gates, nor Streets; you may tell
him, all is Gold, and Jasper, and Precious Stones, but for all this, he cannot
prize them; alas, he sees them not: how many glorious Objects do the
unregenerate slight? they see no beauty in Jesus Christ; they feel no sweet in
Ordinances, the Sabbath is a trouble, and no delight to them; and whence all
this? it is because there is no light, no manifestation of Christ within them;
the Spirit of Christ has not witnessed Christ, has not manifested Christ
within their souls, and therefore they remain in darkness.

SECT. VI. Of Christ's Whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple.
5. COncerning Christ's whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple: we
read in the Gospel, That the Jews Passover being at hand, Jesus went up to
Jerusalem: Thither, John 2.13.
if we follow him, the first place that we find him in, is the Temple; where,
by the occasion of the National Assembly, was an opportune Scene for Christ's
transactions of his Fathers business. In that Temple Christ first espies a
Mart; there were diverse Merchants, and Exchangers of Money, that brought Beasts
thither to be sold for sacrifice against that great Solemnity; at the sight of
which, Jesus being moved with Zeal and Indignation, he makes a Whip of Cords,
and according to the custom of the Zealots of the Nation, he takes upon him the
Office of a private inflictor of punishment, he drives them all out of the
Temple, he overthrows the accounting Tables, and commands them that sold the
Doves, to take them from thence; and being required to give a sign of this
fact; he only foretells the Resurrection of his Body, after three days death,
expressing it in the Metaphor of the Temple, which was never rightly understood
till it was accomplished.

In this heroical act, we may see how Christ is carried on with a Zeal for God,
insomuch, that it brings to mind that saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 69.9.
The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up; a Metaphor taken from Men that
receive nourishment, which after its several concoctions, is assimilated into
the nature of them that receive it. Zeal does totally surprise us in what
concerns God; in our Zeal we do so mind the things of God, as if we minded no
nothing else. To what dangers, hazards, and censures, did Christ here in the
exercise of the Zeal expose himself? His eminent Zeal appears, --

1. In the weakness of his means, whereby he did both attempt, and effect the
work: we find him not armed with any weapons, that might carry dread and
terror with them; at most but with a Whip made of a few small Cords, which
probably were scattered by the Drovers which came thither to sell their Cattle.
-- 2. In the strength that the opposite power did hold out, which makes the
encounter so much the more dangerous: As, 1. A Garrison of Soldiers ready at
hand, to appease occasional tumults. 2. The temper of those men's spirits with
whom the business was; Cham. in loc.
they were men set upon gain, the World's God. 3. The great Confluence of the
people, it being the most solemn Mart of the Passover: O what a Zeal was this!
that neither the weakness of the means, on the one side, to effect it, nor the
greatness of the power, on the other side, to hinder it, did at all dismay him,
or cause him to desist; seem he never so weak, or be they never so strong, he
whips them out of the Temple, and bids them be gone.

This action of Christ fulfils that Prophecy of Malachy, Mal. 3.1, 2, 3.
The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple; but who may abide the
day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for he is like
Refiners fire, and like Fullers Soap; and he shall sit as a Refiner and
Purifier of Silver, and he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as
Gold and as Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an Offering in
Righteousness.

From the main we may observe, that a persuasion of Christ's presence in our
Church Assemblies, is a special means or motive to bring all into order.

But what is this presence of Christ in Church-assembles? If by Christ's
presence, we mean his bodily presence, it is true, that Christ in his Humanity,
whipped the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple of Jerusalem; then in his
Manhood he was upon Earth, and accordingly he vouchsafed his bodily presence to
their assemblies and public places; but now his Manhood is in Heaven; Acts
3.21.
and the Heavens must contain him till the times of restitution of all things:
Now therefore we cannot expect his bodily presence, unless we will maintain the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or of Consubstantiation; which far be it from
us.

2. If by Christ's presence, we mean his spiritual presence; then the question
is, what is this spiritual presence of Christ? for if we say, it is his
presence as he is God, I should then query, how God is said to be present with
men in one place more than another? God in his essence is fully every where,
and inclusively no where: Heaven is his Throne, and Earth is his Footstool, and
yet nor Earth, nor Heaven, nor the Heaven of Heavens is able to contain him:
whiles we speak spiritually of Christ's presence in the assemblies of his
People, we cannot mean his Universal presence, but his especial presence; and
therefore as yet I suppose we have not the meaning of it.

3. If by Christ's presence we mean the presence, of his Spirit either in
himself, or especially in his workings, stirrings, actings and movings in our
Spirit, I should then subscribe; only I think this is not all that is included
in his especial presence; true it is that when Christ was upon Earth, he told
his Disciples that he must go away; for if he went not away, the Comforter
would not come unto them; John 16.7.
But if I depart (said he) I will send him unto you; and accordingly, when that
Church-assembly was convened at Pentecost, God sent the Holy Ghost; much people
being then gathered at Jerusalem, that it might be divulged to all the World.
To all the Assemblies of the Saints, Christ promised his Spirit, though not
always in a visible manner; Mat. 8.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name (says Christ) there I am
in the midst of them. Christ in his Spirit is in the midst of us, stirring and
moving in our spirits: or the spirit of Unity is with united spirits. O he is a
sweet Spirit, a Spirit of Love, and Concord, and Peace, and Glory; and
therefore where should he be but with those that make harmony upon Earth? He is
with them, and amongst them, and in them; 1 Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you, and works in you?

4. If by Christ's presence, we mean the presence of his Angels, I shall then
say, we have said enough; as a King is said to be where his Court is, where his
Train or Retinue are, so Christ the King of Kings is there especially present,
where the Heavenly Guard, the blessed Angels keep their sacred Station and
Rendezvous, wheresoever it is. Now that this is Christ's special presence, it
will appear in sundry Texts.

1. When Jacob saw that vision in Bethel, of the Ladder reaching from Earth to
Heaven, Genesis 28.16, 17
and of the Angels of God ascending and descending upon it, Surely (says
Jacob) the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not; and he was afraid, and
said, how dreadful is this place? this is none other but the House of God, and
this is the Gate of Heaven: He calls it God's House, where God and his holy
Angels, who are of his Household are especially present; and he calls it the
Gate of Heaven, Heaven's Guild Hall, Heaven's Court, namely, because of the
Angels; for the Gate, Guild Hall, or Court was wont to be the judgment-Hall,
and the place where Kings and Senators used to sit, attended by their Guard and
Ministers. The Caldee adds, This is no common or private place, but a place
wherein God takes pleasure, and over against this place is the Gate of Heaven.

2. When the Lord descended upon Mount Sinai to give the Law, some place the
specification of God's presence in the Angels, to which purpose are alleged
these Texts; Who have received the Law by the disposition of Angels, Acts 7.53.
Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2.
and have not kept it: and again, The Law was ordained by Angels in the Hand of
a Mediator. Again, the Apostle calls the Law the Word spoken by Angels. I have
already delivered my thoughts concerning these Angels; but some (I say)
conclude from hence, that the special presence of the Divine Majesty consists
in the encamping of his sacred Retinue, the blessed Angels; for that the Lord
of himself, who fills Heaven and Earth, could not descend, or be in one place
more than another: There Is yet another Text very pertinent to this. And he
said, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
the Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them, he shined forth
from Mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of his Saints, from his right
hand went a fiery Law for them: Psalm. 68.17.
the words translated ten thousand of his Saints, are in the Original ten
thousands of Sanctity, or holy ten thousands, or holy Myriads; which in my
apprehension, points to the Angels, rather than his Saints: and the Psalmist
puts it out of question: The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even
thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy Place.

3. After the Law given, this presence of God was fixed to the Temple; and what
that was, Isa. 6.1, 2.
Isaiah describe thus; I saw also the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high, and
lifted up, and his train filled the Temple; about it stood the Seraphims; They
were God's Train, and they filled the Temple. And hence David addresses to God
were said to be in the presence of Angels: Before the Gods will I sing praises
to thee, I will worship toward thy Holy Temple. Psalm. 128.1, 2.
The Septuagint translates it thus (...), before the Angels. I know in the time
of the Gospel, we do not so fix God's presence to our Temples, or places of
public assembling for the worship of his Name; but to our Church Assemblies in
such places, why may we not? Were the Rudiments of the Law worthy of an
attendance of Angels, and are the Churches of the Gospel destitute of so
glorious a Retinue? Did the blessed Spirits wait upon the Types, and do they
decline the Office at the ministration of the substance? Is the Nature of Man
made worse, since the Incarnation of the Son of God? Or have the Angels
purchased an exemption from their Ministry, since Christ became our Brother in
the flesh? We have little reason to think so; the Apostle treating of a comely
and decent demeanor to be observed in Church Assemblies, and in particular, of
women's being covered or veiled there, he enforces it from this presence of
Angels: 1 Cor. 11.10. Chrysostom hom. 16. in 1 Cor. hom. 15. in Heb.
For this cause ought the Woman to have a covering on her head, because of the
Angels; namely, which are there present. Upon this ground, Chrysostom reproves
the irreverent behavior of his Auditory; The Church, (says he) is not a Shop
of Manufactures or Merchandise, but the place of Angels, and of Archangels, the
Court of God, and the Image and Representment of Heaven it self. -- I know thou
see them not; but hear, and know that Angels are every where, and especially
in the House of God, where they attend upon their King, and where all is filled
with incorporeal powers. By this time, I hope, we know what is the meaning of
Christ's presence in Church Assemblies; to wit, the presence of his Spirit, and
the presence of his Angels.

Use.
And if it be so, would not a persuasion of this presence of Christ in our
Church Assemblies, be a special means or motive to bring all into order?
Sometimes I wonder at the irreverent carriage of some Hearers, Laughing,
Talking, Prating, Sleeping, in our congregations, what, is this a demeanor
beseeming the presence of Angels, and the Spirit of Christ? would thou carry
thy self thus in the presence of a Prince, or of some earthly Majesty? Chris.
ibid.
If thou go but into a Kings Palace (as Chrysostom speaks) thou composest
thy self to a comeliness in thy habit, look, gate, and all thy guise, and do
thou laugh? I may add, do thou any way carry thy self undecently in God's
Presence? some there are, that in the very midst of Ordinances the Devil
usually rocks them asleep; but Oh! do thou not fear that thy damnation sleeps
not? how justly might Christ come against thee in his wrath, and whip thee out
of the Temple into Hell? surely we should do well to behave our selves in such
a presence with the thoughts and apprehensions of Heaven about us; our business
here is an errand of Religion, and God himself is the object of our worship:
how then should our actions bear at least some few degrees of a proportionable
address to God, and Christ, and the Spirit of Christ? what? is Christ's
Presence in his Spirit, and his Angels here? Oh let us walk with God as Enoch
did, Genesis 5.22.
let us do all we do as in the Presence of Christ, and his Holy Angels.

And now was the first passover after Christ's Baptism; as it is writtten,
John 2.23.
and the Jews Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

This was the first year of Christ's Ministry; whereof the one half was carried
on by his Prodromus, or forerunner, John the Baptist: and the other half
(betwixt his Baptism, and this first Passover) was carried on by himself. And
now has Christ three years to his death; according to the method propounded; I
shall come on to the second year, and to his actings therein in reference to
our Souls Salvation. CHAP. II.
SECT. I. Of the second Year of Christ's Ministry, and of his Acts in general
for that Year.
NOW was it that the Office of the Baptist was expired; and Christ beginning
his Prophetical Office, he appears like the Sun, in succession of the
Morning Star; he takes at John, and preaches the Sum of the Gospel, Faith and
Repentance: Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15. Now, what this Gospel
was, the sum and series of all his following Sermons expressed and declared: it
is fully contained in the new Covenant, of which we have spoken, for what is
the Gospel but a Covenant of Grace, wherein all the imperfections of our works
are made up by the perfection and Grace of Jesus Christ? the Gospel is not a
Covenant of works (i.e.) it is not an agreement upon the stock of innocence,
requiring strict and exact obedience without any allowance of Repentance; no,
no, be Holy, says the Gospel, and where that fails, Repent, and believe. By
this time the work in his hand was grown high and pregnant, and Jesus saw it
Convenient to choose more Disciples; with this Family he goes up and down the
whole Galilee, Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, healing all manner of
Diseases, curing Demoniacks, cleansing Leapers, giving strength to Paraliticks,
and to lame People.

It is not my purpose to enlarge on all the Sermons, Miracles, Conferences, or
Colloquies of Christ with men; I am not for large Volumes, and I suppose with
John, that if all the Acts of Christ should be written with Commentaries on
them, that even the world it self could not contain the Books that should be
written. John. 2.25.


In this year therefore I shall contract and limit my self to the Consideration
of Christ in these two particulars. As first to his Preaching. 2. To his
Miracles; both these relate to the use and exercise of his Prophetical Office.

SECT. II. Of Christ's Sermons this Year.
1. HIs Preaching this year was frequent, and amongst others his Sermons; now
it was that he delivered the first Sermon, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand.

2. Now was it that he delivered that spiritual and mystical Sermon of
Regeneration, at which Nichodemus wonders, John 3.4.
how can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his
Mothers womb and be born? But Jesus takes off the wonder, in telling him, this
was not a work of flesh and blood, but of the Spirit of God, for the Spirit
blows where it lists; and is as the wind certain and notorious in the
effects, but secret in the Principle, and manner of production. Then Christ
proceeds in his Sermon, telling him yet of higher things, as of his descent
from Heaven, of his Passion and Ascension, and of the Mercy of Redemption,
which he came to work and effect for all that believe; of the Love of the
Father, the Mission of the Son, the Rewards of Faith, and Glories of Eternity:
and this was the Sum of his Sermon to Nichodemus, which was the fullest of
mystery and speculation that ever he made, except that which he made
immediately before his death.

3. Now was it that the throng of Auditors forcing Christ to leave the shore,
he makes Peter's ship his Pulpit; Luke 5.1, 2, 3, 4
never were there such Nets cast out of that Fisher-boat before; whiles he was
upon land, he healed the Sick bodies by his touch; and now he was upon Sea, he
cured the sick souls by his Doctrine; he that made both Sea and Land, causes
both to conspire to the opportunities of doing good to the souls and bodies of
men.

Luke 4.18.
4. Now it was that he Preached that blessed Sermon on that text, The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to Preach the Gospel to the
Poor: no question but he Preached both to poor and rich, Christ Preached to
all: but for the Power and Fruit of his Preaching, it was only received and
entertained by the poor in spirit. In the following particulars, his Office is
set out still in an higher tenor, To heal the broken hearted, to Preach
deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, or as it is
in Isa. 61.1. the opening of the Prison to them that are bound; a sad thing to
be in captivity, but sadder to be bound in chains, or locked up in a prison
there; but it is most sad of all to be imprisoned, having ones eyes put out; as
it was the case of Sampson and Zedekiah; Now the Evangelist willing to render
the Prophet to the highest comfortable sense that might be, he uses an
expression that meets with the highest mystery; that is, when a man is not only
shut up in a blinded Prison, when he himself also has his eyes put out; and to
such Christ should Preach; Preach what? not only deliverance to the Captives,
Luke. 4.48.
but also restoring of Light to Captive Prisoners, nay yet more, recovering of
sight to blinded Prisoners, as the Evangelist renders it.

5. Now it was that he delivered the admirable sermon, called The Sermon upon
the Mount. It is a breviary of all those Precepts which are truly called
Christian; it contains in it all the moral Precepts given by Moses, and opens a
stricter sense, and more severe exposition than the Scribes and Pharisees had
given; it holds forth the Doctrines of meekness, poverty of spirit, Christian
mourning, desire of Holy things, mercy, and purity, peace, and patience, and
suffering of injuries; he teaches us how to pray, how to fast, how to give
Alms, how to contemn the world, and how to seek the Kingdom of God, and its
appendent righteousness.

And thus Christ being entered upon his Prophetical Office; in these and the
rest of his sermons he gives a clear testimony that he was not only an
interpreter of the Law, but a Lawgiver; and that this Law of Christ might
retain some proportion at least with the Law of Moses, Christ in his last
sermon went up into a Mountain, and from thence gave the Oracle. I cannot stand
to paraphrase on this, or any other of his sermons, but seeing now we find
Christ in the exercise of his Prophetical Office, let us observe first his
Titles in this respect. 2. The reasons of his being a Prophet. 3. The
Excellency of Christ above all other Prophets, and then we have done.

SECT. III. Of Christ's Prophetical Office.
1. THe Titles of Christ in respect of his Prophetical Office were these: 1.
Sometimes he is called Doctor, or Master, Be ye not called Masters, Mat. 23.10.
for one is your Master, even Christ. The word is (...) which signifies a
Doctor, Moderator, teaching-Master, a guide of the way. 2. Sometimes he is
called a Lawgiver, James 4.12.
There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy; the Apostle speaks
of the internal Government of the Conscience, in which case the Lord is our
Judge, Isa. 33.22.
The Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us: we must hear
no voice in our Consciences but Gods, no Doctrine in the Church but Christ's; No
Offices, institutions, and worship must be allowed, but such as he has
appointed; and therefore when men brought in Foreign Doctrines, it is said
that they did not hold the head. 3. Col. 2, 19. Isa. 9.6. Prove. 8.14.
Sometimes he is called a Councellor, and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Councellor; Counsel is mine and sound Wisdom, says Christ, I am understanding,
and I have strength. Christ by his Office counsels men how to fly sin, and how
to please God, and how to escape Hell, Heb. 3.1.
and how to be saved. 4. Sometimes he is called the Apostle of our profession,
Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of the Heavenly calling, consider the
Apostle, and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus. God sent him as an
Ambassador to make known his will; he came not unsent, the very word imports a
Mission, a sending, Romans 10.15.
How shall they preach except they be sent? let all those who run before they
be sent, take notice of this, for this would not Christ do; he was sent, he was
the Apostle of our profession. 5. Sometimes he is called the Angel of the
Covenant, Mal. 3.1.
even the Angel of the Covenant whom ye delight in. Christ was the publisher of
the Gospel Covenant, he declared the Gracious purpose of God toward the Elect
held forth in the Covenant; and in this respect he is called a Prophet, Acts
3.22. and the Prophet, John 7.40. and that Prophet, John 6.14. John 6.14.
this is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the World; whose Office
it was to impart Gods will unto the Sons of Men, according unto the name,
Angel. 6. Sometimes he is called the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 9.15.
for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, says the Apostle;
now, a Mediator is such a one as goes betwixt two parties at variance,
imparting the mind of the one to the other, so as to breed a right
understanding, and thereby to work a compliance betwixt both: and thus Christ
is a Mediator betwixt God and us. By him it is that the mind and will of God
is imparted to man, no man has seen God at any time; John 1.18.
the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him: and by him it is that we impart our mind unto God, The smoke of the
incense which goes with the prayers of the Saints, ascends up before God out of
the Angels hand. This was typified in Moses, Rev. 8.4.
I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to show you the Word of the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 5, 5.
The Vulgar renders it thus, Ego sequestor and medius, I was a Mediator, a
Midler betwixt God and you: and so Christ Jesus he is a Mediator, a Midler, an
Interpreter, an Intermessenger betwixt God and his People.

2. The Reasons of Christ's being a Prophet, were these: 1. That he might reveal
and deliver to his people the will of his Father. 2. That he might open and
expound the same being once delivered. 3. That he might make his Saints to
understand, and to believe the same being once opened.

1. As a Prophet he delivers to the people his Fathers will, both in his own
Person, and by his Servants the Ministers. In his own Person when he was upon
earth as a Minister of the Circumcision; Romans 15.8. Heb. 2, 3.
and by his Servants the Ministers from the beginning of their mission till the
end of the World; Thus the Gospel is called, A great Salvation which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him. Christ in his own personal preaching is said but to have begun to
teach, Acts 1.1. and the consummate publication was the sending of the holy
Ghost to these Select Vessels, who were to carry abroad this Treasure unto all
the world; it was begun by the Lord, and it was confirmed by them that were the
Disciples of the Lord. In this respect we cannot look on the publishing of the
Gospel to the world, but as very glorious; was there not a resemblance of state
and glory in the preaching of Christ? You have heard how a forerunner was sent
to prepare his way, as an Herald to proclaim his approach, and then was
revealed the glory of the Lord; but because the publication was not consummate
till afterward, Ephesians. 4.8.
Christ carries it on in greater state afterward than he did before; When he
ascended up on high, he then led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, as
Princes in time of their solemn inauguration do some special Acts of
magnificence and Honor; they proclaim Pardons, open Prisons, Create Nobles,
fill Conduits with wine; so Christ to testify the glory of his Gospel, at the
day of his instalment, and solemn readmission into his Fathers glory, he
proclaims the Gospel, gives gifts unto men for the perfecting of the Saints,
Ver. 12.
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

2. As a Prophet he opens and expounds the Gospel. Thus being in the Synagogue
on the Sabbath Day, Luke 4.17, 18, 21.
he opened the book, and he found the place where it was written, the Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor, etc. and then he closed the book -- and said, Luke 24.27.
this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. And thus joining himself
with two of his Disciples, going toward Emmaus, he begun at Moses, and all the
Prophets, and he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself; the Prophesies of Christ were dark and hard to be
understood, and therefore Christ came down from Heaven to discover such truths;
John 3.13.
No man has ascended up to Heaven, (i.e.) to be acquainted with Gods secrets,
but he that came down from Heaven; the gracious purpose of God toward lost
mankind, was a secret locked up in the breast of the Father; and so it had been
even to this day, had not Christ who was in the bosom of the Father, and one
of his Privy Council, revealed it unto us; hence Christ is called the
Interpreter of God, Mat. 11.27.
no man knows the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him, by his interpretation.

Luke 24.45. Acts 10.14.
3. As a Prophet he gives us to understand, and to believe the Gospel. Then
opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures; and
thus was the Case of Lydia whose heart the Lord opened; he that first opens
Scriptures, at last opens hearts; He is that true light which enlighteneth
every man that comes into the world: John 1.9.
he enlightens every believer, not only with a common natural light, but with a
special supernatural light, of saving, spiritual, and effectual knowledge; now
there is no Prophet can do this save only Jesus Christ, he only is able to
cause our hearts to believe, and to understand the matter which he does teach
and reveal; other Prophets may plant, and water, Paul may plant, and Apollo may
water, but he, and only he can give the increase; other Prophets may teach and
Baptize, but unless Christ come in by the powerful presence of his Spirit, 1
Pet. 2.5. Psalm. 127.1.
they can never be able to save any one poor soul. We as lively stones are
built up a spiritual house, says Peter; but except the Lord do build this
house, they labor in vain that build it. O alas, who is able to breath the
Spirit of life into these dead stones, John 5.25.
but he of whom it is written. The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live? Who
can awaken a dead soul out of a dead sleep? And who can give light unto these
blind eyes of ours, but he of whom it is written, Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.

3. The Excellencies of Christ above all other Prophets are in these respects.
--

1. Other Prophets were but Types and shadows of this great Prophet; even Moses
himself was but a figure of him; Acts 7.37.
A Prophet shall the Lord God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me:
says Moses; these words, Like unto me] do plainly show that Moses was at the
best but an image and shadow of Christ; now as substances do far excel shadows,
so does Christ far excel all the Prophets; they were but shadows and
forerunners to him.

2. Other Prophets revealed but some part of Gods will, and only at sometimes.
God (says the Apostle) at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in
time-past unto the Fathers by the Prophets; Heb. 1.1.
(i.e.) he let out his light by little and little, till the Day Star and Sun of
Righteousness arose; Ver. 2.
but in these last days he has spoken by his Son, (i.e.) he had spoken more
fully and plainly; in this respect says the Apostle, the heirs of Life and
Salvation were but children before Christ's incarnation. Gal. 14.1, 2.
As now we see but through a glass darkly, toward what we shall do in the life
to come; so did they of old in comparison of us; their light in comparison of
ours, was but an obscure and glimmering light; Christ's discovery of himself
then was but a standing behind the wall, a looking forth of the window, Cant.
2.9.
a showing of himself through the lattice.

3. Other Prophets spoke only to the ears of men, but Christ spoke, and still
speaks to the heart; Revel. 3.7.
He has the Keys of David, that opens, and no man shuts, that shuts,
and no man opens; it is a similitude taken from them that keep the Keys of a
City, or Castle, without whom none can open or shut; no more can any man open
the heart or break in upon the Spirit, but Christ; he only is able to open the
eyes of the mind by the secret, kindly, and powerful working of his own Spirit.

4. Other Prophets preached wisdom unto men, but only Christ preaches men
wise; other Prophets warned men by telling them of their sins, and denouncing
the judgments of God, but Christ reclaimed them and turned them from sin; hence
it is said, that he taught as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes;
John 5.25.
it came daily and coldly from them, but it came from him as being full of
conviction and reproof, 1 Cor. 2.4.
full of the evident demonstration of the Spirit, and of power.

5. Other Prophets might not preach themselves; the Apostle inveighs against
self-commenders, We dare not (says he) make our selves of the number, 2 Cor.
10.12.
or compare our selves with some that commend themselves. Yea, Christ himself
relating to himself, as a mere man, says, that his witness is not true if he
bear witness of himself. John 5.31.
But in another place, relating to himself as Mediator, he speaks clean
contrary, John 8.14.
Though I do bear record of my self, yet my record is true. Here then is a wide
difference betwixt other Prophets in respect of their Office and Christ's; they
might not preach themselves, but he bears witness of himself, because he has
not a greater in the point of our Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation,
to bear witness of them himself. And hence are those self-predications of his
which we find in Scriptures, as, Look unto me, Isa. 45.22. Mat. 11.28. Luke
24.27.
and be ye saved all the ends of the earth. Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden. And conferring with the two Disciples, it is said, that
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself. Surely it commends to us the
Prophecy of Christ, that he might preach and commend himself without any blot
of Arrogance, or taking too much upon him.

6. Other Prophets had their Commission and Authority from him, Eccles. 12.11.
The words of the wise are as goads and as nails fastened by the Masters of the
Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd, (i.e.) the words of the wise are
divine and Heavenly instructions; the Masters of Assemblies are
Gospel Ministers, and Christ is that one Shepherd from whom these words are
given, and from whom these Masters have their Authority; 2 Cor. 5.20. Ezekiel.
20.46.
are they not called Ambassadors for Christ? and does not Ezekiel tell us,
that he must drop his words toward the South? Now what is the meaning of that
dropping? It is a phrase borrowed from rain; as the clouds, from whence the
rain descends, have not their water Originally and natively in themselves, but
from the Sea; so have not the Prophets a spirit of Prophecy of themselves, but
all is drawn up out of Christ, as out of a full Sea of all excellent Wisdom and
knowledge. In him are all the Treasures, a Sea, an Ocean of knowledge, and from
him all the Prophets derived whatsoever they had.

SECT. IV. Of Christ's Miracles.
2. THe Miracles of Christ this year were many; now what were these Miracles,
but a pursuance of the Doctrines delivered in Christ's Sermons? One calls them A
verification of Christ's Doctrine, a signal of Christ's Sermons; If we observe,
we shall find him to work most of his Miracles in actions of mercy; indeed once
he turned water into wine, and sometimes he walked upon the waters, but all the
rest were actions of relief according to the design of God, who would have him
manifest his power, in showing mercy and relief to men.

Amongst all his Miracles done this year, now was it that at Cana, where he
wrought the first Miracle, he does a second; a certain Noble man, or Courtier,
or little King (as some would have it) came to Jesus, and besought him to come
down to his house, John 4.47.
and to heal his Son, who was at the point of Death. We do not find Christ
often attended with Nobility, but here he is; Not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, 1 Cor. 1.26.
not many noble are called, yet God forbid but that some are, and may be; this
noble Ruler listens after Christ in his necessity; happy was it for him that
his Son was sick, for else he had not been so well acquainted with his Savior;
O we are loath to come to Christ till we see a need, a necessity for it, and
hence it is that Christ sends weakness, sicknesses, infirmities, oppositions,
and many afflictions, that he may be sought unto: Come then, are we afflicted?
whither should we go but to Cana to seek Christ? whither should we go but to
that Cana of Heaven, where our water will be turned into wine, where our
Physician lives that knows how to cure souls, and bodies and all; that we may
once say, It is good for me that I was afflicted. The first answer Christ gives
this Nobleman is a word of reproof, John 4.48.
Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe: Incredulity was the
common disease of the Jews, which no receipt could cure but wonders, A wicked
and Adulterous generation seeks after signs; the Doctrine of Christ, and all
the Divine words that he spoke, must be made up with Miracles, or they will not
believe; it was a soul fault, and a dangerous one, Ye will not believe. What is
it that condemns the world but unbelief? Here Is a Noble Capernaite that
probably had heard many a Sermon of Jesus Christ; and yet here is Taxed with
unbelief; if such as we that live under the clear Sunshine of the Gospel shall
not believe, O what a sin is this? Christ's next answer to this Nobleman is a
word of comfort, Ver. 50.
Go thy way, thy Son lives: Oh the meekness and mercy of Jesus Christ! when we
would have looked that he should have punished this Suitor for not believing,
he condescends to him that he may believe: as some tender mothers that give the
breast to their unquiet children instead of the rod; so usually deals Christ
with our perverseness, Go thy way, thy Son lives; with one word does Christ
heal two Patients, the Son and the Father; the Sons fever, and the Fathers
unbelief; we cannot but observe here the steps of Faith, he that believed
somewhat ere he came, and more when he went, he grew to more and more says in
the way, and when he came home he enlarged his faith to all the skirts of his
family. And the man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, Ver. 51.
and he went his way; and in the way one meets him and tells him, Thy Son
lives; which recovery he understands to be at the same time that Christ had
spoken those Salutary and healing words, Ver. 53.
and himself believed and his whole house.

Mat. 8.5, 6.
2. If I mistake not in the year, I shall not contend, because in this year only
I shall mention his miracles.

Ver. 7. Acts 10, 34, 35.


Now was it that a Centurion came unto Christ, beseeching him, and saying, my
servant lies at home sick of the palsy grievously Tormented. Many Suitors
come to Christ, one for a Son, another for a daughter, a third for himself, but
I see none come for his servant but this one Centurion; and if we observe
Christ's answers to his suit, we see how well pleased is Christ with his
request; And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal him. When the Ruler
entreated him for his Son, Come down ere he dye, Christ stirred not a foot, but
now this Centurion complains only of his servants sickness, and Christ offers
himself, I will come, and heal him; he that came in the shape of a servant,
would rather go down to the sick servant than to the Rulers Son: He is no
respecter of persons, but he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him: It may be this poor sick servant had more grace, or very
probable it is he had more need, and therefore Christ (to choose) will go down
to visit this poor sick servant. Nay says the Centurion, Ver. 8.
I am not worthy Lord, that thou should come under my roof, q. d. Alas Lord,
I am a Gentile, an Alien, a man of blood, but thou art holy, thou art
omnipotent; and therefore only say the word, and my servant shall be whole;
Mark this, O my soul, it is but a word of Christ, and my sins shall be
remitted, my soul healed, my body raised, and soul and body glorified forever.
The Centurion knew this by the command he had over his own servants, Ver. 9.
I say to this man go and he goes, and to another come and he comes, and to a
third do this and he does it: In way of Application; Oh that I were such a
servant to my heavenly Master. Alas, every of his commands says, Do this, and
I do it not; every of his inhibitions says, Do it not, and I do it: He says,
Go from the world, and I run to it; He says, Come to me, and I run from him. Woe
is me, this is not service, but enmity; Oh that I could come up to the faith
and obedience of this exemplar, that I could serve my Christ as these Soldiers
did their Master! Ver. 10.
Jesus marvels at the Centurions faith; we never find Christ wondering at Gold,
or Silver, or costly and curious works of humane Skill, yea when the Disciples
wondered at the Magnificence of the Temple, he rebuked them rather, but when he
sees the grace or acts of Faith, he so approves of them that he is ravished
with wonder; he that rejoiced in the view of his Creation, rejoices no less in
the reformation of his Creature, Cant. 4.7, 9.
Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair, there is no spot in thee:
my sister, my spouse, thou have wounded my heart, thou have wounded my heart
with one of thy eyes, Cant. 4.7, 9. To conclude, he that both wrought this
faith, and wondered at it, does now reward it; Go thy way, and as thou have
believed, so be it unto thee, and his servant was healed in the self same hour.

Luke 7.11.
3. Now it was, even the day after, that Jesus goes into the City of Naim. The
fruitful clouds are not ordained to fall all in one field, Naim must partake of
the bounty of Christ as well as Cana, or Capernaum. Thither come, he no sooner
enters in at the gate of the City, but he meets a funeral; a poor widow, with
her weeping friends, is following her only Son to the grave; Jesus observing
her sad condition, he pities her, comforts her, and at last relieves her: here
was no Solicitor but his own compassion; in his former Miracles he was sought
and sued to; his Mother at the Marriage Feast begged a supply of Wine, the
Ruler came to him for a Son, the Centurion came to him for a servant, but now
Christ offers a cure, to give us a lesson, that whiles we have to do with the
Father of mercies, our miseries and afflictions are the most Powerful Suitors.
Christ sees and observes the Widow's sadness, and presently all parts of Christ
conspire her good, his heart melts into Compassion of her, his tongue speaks
cheerfully and comfortably to her, Weep not; his feet carry him to the Bier,
his hand touches the Coffin, and he said, young man I say unto thee, arise;
see how the Lord of Life speaks with Command; ver. 14.
the same voice speaks to him, that shall one day speak to us, and raise us out
of the dust of the earth; neither sea, nor death, nor hell can detain their
dead, when he charges them to be delivered; we see not Christ stretching
himself on this dead Corpse, as Eliah, and Elisha upon the Sons of the
Shunamite, and the Widow of Sarephta; nor see we him kneeling down and praying,
as Peter did for Dorcas; but we hear him so speaking to the dead, as if the
dead were alive, and so speaking to the dead, that by the word he speaks, he
makes him alive, Young man, I say unto thee, arise, ver. 15.
and he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. So at the sound of the last
Trumpet, by the Power of the same voice, we shall arise out of the dust, and
stand up Gloriously; This mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruptible
shall put on incorruption. And least our weak faith should stagger at the
assent of so great a difficulty, by this he has done; Christ gives us tastes
of what he will do; the same Power that can raise one man, can raise a
thousand, a million, a world; Christ here raised a Widows Son, and after
Jairus's Daughter, and then Lazarus, and lastly at his resurrection he raised a
many at once; he raised one from her Bed, another from his Bier, another from
his grave, and many at once from their rotteness, that it might appear no
degree of death can hinder the efficacy of his Almighty Power.

4. Now it was that in the Synagogue he finds a man that had a Spirit of an
unclean Devil. Luke 4.33. ver. 34.
This, I take it, is the first man that we read of as possessed with a Devil.
And he cried let us alone, what have we to do with thee? etc. In these words
the devil dictates, the man speaks; and whereas the words are plural, Let us
alone, it is probable he speaks of himself, and the rest of the men in the
Synagogue with him. So high and dreadful things are spoken concerning the
coming of Christ, ( Mal. 3.2. Who may abide the day of his coming? and who
shall stand when he appears? Mal. 3.2.
) that the Devil by this takes opportunity to affright the men of the Synagogue
with the presence of Christ; he would dissuade them from the receiving of
Christ, by the terrors of Christ, as if Christ had come only to destroy them:
Thou Jesus of Nazareth, art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art,
the holy one of God. Ver. 34.


And Jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of him. Ver. 35.
The word hold thy peace, is in the original (...), be muzled; it was not a
bare command of silence, but there was such Power in it, that it cast a muzzle
upon the mouth of Satan, that he could speak no more; and when the unclean
Spirit had torn him, not with any gashes in his flesh, or dismembring of his
Body, for he hurt him not, Mark 1.26.
but with some Convulsion fits (as it is supposed) then he threw them in the
midst, and made an horrid cry, Ver. 35.
and so came out.

From this Miracle, they all take special notice of the Doctrine attested by so
great a Miracle, What a word is this? or as the other Evangelist, What a thing
is this? Ver. 36. Mark 1.27,
what new doctrine is this? surely this was the great design of all the
Miracles of Christ, to prove his mission from God, to demonstrate his Power
unto men, to confirm his Gospel, to endear his Precepts, to work in us faith to
help us Heavenward: These signs are written that we might believe, -- and that
believing we might have Life through his Name. John 20.31.


I have given you several instances of the Miracles of Christ in this second
year of his Ministry; Use.
only a few words on this Doctrine of Miracles for our information, as 1. What
they are? 2. Why they are? 3. Whether they are chained and continued in this
great transaction of our souls salvation? and I have done.


For the first, what they are? Miracles are unusual events wrought above the
course or possibility of Nature; such were the Miracles of Christ, and such
were the Miracles of the Prophets, and of the Apostles of Christ; for what they
did was above Nature; and all the difference betwixt their Miracles and the
Miracles of Christ was only in this, viz. they wrought them not in their own
Name and Power as Jesus Christ did; Thus when Elisha with twenty loaves and
some full ears of corn fed an hundred men, Give unto the people (says he) that
they may eat; 2 Kings 14.42, 43.
and his servitor said, what should I set this before an hundred men? He said
again, give the people that they may eat, for thus says Lord, they shall eat
and shall leave thereof.

And when Peter cured Aeneas, which had kept his Bed eight years, and was sick
of a Palsy, Act. 9.34.
Peter said unto him, Aeneas, Jesus Christ makes thee whole. And when he cured
that man that was lame from his Mothers womb, whom they laid daily at the gate
of the Temple, Acts. 3.6.
Silver and gold have I none, (said Peter) but such as I have give I thee; in
the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazzareth, rise up, and walk. But our Savior comes
in an higher strain to the dead damosel, Mark 5.41.
I say unto thee, arise: and in an higher strain to the stormy Winds and Seas,
Mark 4.39. Luke 4.35.
Peace, and be still: and in an higher strain to the raging Devil in the
possessed, Be muzzled, and come out of the man. Here Is the difference betwixt
the Lord and his servants; but in this they agree, their miracles were not
miranda, but miracula; not only wonders, but miracles indeed; they were unusual
events wrought above nature, or the course of nature.

For the second, why they are? Many Reasons are given, of which I hinted
before, but in reference to Scriptures, (which is the great controversy) this
is the main and the only true Reason; Miracles are wrought for the grounding or
confirming of some divine truth or doctrine at its first settling. To this
purpose Miracles were as the Trumpets or Heralds, by which the Gospel was first
commended unto us; as the Law of Moses was first authorized by manifold
Miracles wrought in Sinai, and in the Desert, which afterward ceased when they
came to, and were settled in the promised Land; so the Gospel of Christ was
first authorized by manifold Miracles, but the sound thereof having now gone
through all the world, these Miracles cease: if new additions of Miracles for
the confirmation of Scriptures should be expected in every Age, the former
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles would be slighted of all; indeed, Christ
tells us of great signs and wonders that shall be in the last days; Matthew
24.24.
but withal, he tells us of false Christ's, and false Prophets, that must work
them; it may be disputed, whether those are true miracles, or mere deceptions
and magical pretenses, but because they are such as the People cannot discern
them from miracles really such, therefore it is all one as to them; here then
is Christ's Rule, Believe them not, -- behold I have told you before; he that
foretold us of the man, Ver. 23, 25.
foretold us also of the imposture, and commanded us not to trust him; in this
respect it had been more likely for Antichrist to have prevailed upon
Christians by doing no miracles, than by doing any; for if he had done none, he
might have escaped without discovery; but by doing miracles, or wonders, he
both verified the Wisdom and prescience of Christ, and he declared to the Elect
that he was the very enemy of Christ. As all the Prophets that speak of Christ,
bade us believe him for his Miracles; so all that foretold of Antichrist, bade
us disbelieve him for his Miracles; which occasioned Augustine to say, Contra
mirabularios istos cautum me fecit Deus meus, Aug. in Johan. tract. 3.
Against such Miracle-mongers God has armed me to take heed. Go not forth unto
such, says Christ, Matthew. 24.26. and therefore Brethren stand fast, says
Paul, 2 These. 2.15. The great Beast deceives them that dwell on the earth, by
means of miracles; these are the words of John, Rev. 13.14. but if any man have
an ear let him hear (i.e.) let him beware, Rev. 13.9. True miracles that
proceed from God, are wrought for the grounding of Doctrine at the first
settling; but being once grounded, and settled, and a platform described for the
right continuing of it, then we are left to the Scripture, and are not to
expect any new miracles for the confirming of it.

For the third, whether they are chained and continued in this great
transaction of our souls salvation? I answer, yea; in this respect miracles
cease not; it is without controversy that Jesus Christ in carrying on our souls
Salvation is adding miracle to miracle; there is a chain of miracles in the
matter of our salvation from first to last: As. --

1. It was a miracle that God in his Eternity, before we had a being, should
have once thought of us; especially that the Blessed Trinity should sit in
council, and contrive that most admirable and astonishing plot of the Salvation
of our souls: Oh what a miracle was this!

2. It was a Miracle that God for our sakes should create the world, and after
our fall in Adam, that God should preserve the world, especially considering
that our sin had unpin'd the whole frame of the Creation; and that God even
then sitting on his Throne of Judgment, ready to pass the doom of death for our
first Transgression, should unexpectedly give a promise of a Savior, when
justly he might have given us to the devil, and to Hell, according to his own
Law, Genesis 2.17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death.

3. It was a Miracle that Gods Son should take upon him our nature, and that in
our nature he should Transact our peace; that he should Preach Salvation to us
all if we would believe; and to the end that we might believe, that he would
work so many signs and Miracles in the presence of his Disciples, and of a
world of men: was not Christ's Birth a Miracle? and Christ's Life a Miracle? and
Christ's Death a Miracle? and Christ's Resurrection a Miracle? and Christ's
Ascension a Miracle? was not Christ's Ministry a miracle? and was it not a
miracle, that Christ's Word should not be credited without a world of miracles
to back it, and confirm it to the Sons of men? 1 Timothy 3.16.
Without controversy great is the miracle, as well as mystery of godliness,
God manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into glory.

4. It was a Miracle that God should look upon us in our blood; what a sight
was it for God, when thy navel was not cut, when thou wast not salted at all,
Ezekiel. 16.4.5, 6.
nor swadled at all when thou wast cast out in the open field to the loathing
of thy person? yet that then, even then the Lord should pass by thee, and see
thee polluted in thy own blood, and should say unto thee when thou wast in thy
blood, live; yea, say unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live. O miracle of
mercies! If creation cannot be without a miracle, surely the new creature is a
miracle indeed. So contrary is our perverse natures to all possibilities of
Salvation, that if Salvation had not marched to us all the way in a miracle, we
should have perished in the ruins of a sad eternity. Election is a miracle,
and Creation is a miracle, and Redemption is a miracle, and Vocation is a
miracle; and indeed every man living in the state of grace, is a perpetual
miracle; in such a one his reason is turned into faith, his soul into spirit,
his body iinto a Temple, his earth into heaven, his water into wine, his
Aversations from Christ into intimate Union with Christ; and Adhesions to
Christ. O what a Chain of Miracles is this? Why Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me clean; say thus, you that are yet in your blood, why Lord, if thou will
thou can make me clean. O Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief.

After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem: John
5.39
Some would have this feast to be Pentecost; and to speak truly, the most of
our Commentaries run that way: others take this for the feast of the Passover,
and the rather, because the Evangelist John reckons the time of Christ's public
Ministry by the several Passovers; now if this feast were not a Passover, we
cannot find in the Gospel so many Passovers as to make up Christ's Ministry
three years and an half. On this ground I join with the latter Opinion; and so
here I end the second year of Christ's Ministry, and come to the third, and to
his Actings therein in reference to our souls Salvation. CHAP. III.
SECT. I. Of the third year of Christ's Ministry, and generally of his Actings
in that year.
HItherto all was quiet; neither the Jews, nor the Samaritans, nor Galileans
did as yet malign the Doctrine or Person of Jesus Christ; but he preached with
much peace on all hands till the beginning of this year. I shall not yet speak
his sufferings; neither shall I speak much of his doings: many things were done
and spoken this year, which I must pass, least I be too prolix; only such
things as refer more principally to the main business of our souls Salvation, I
shall touch in these particulars. As, 1. In the Ordination of the Apostles. 2.
In his Reception of Sinners. 3. In the easiness of his yoke, and the lightness
of his burden which he imposes on men.

SECT. II. Of Christ's Ordination of his Apostles.
1. IN the Ordination of his Apostles, are many considerable things, the
Evangelist Luke lays it down thus. Luke 6.12, 13.
And it came to pass in those days that he went out into a mountain to pray,
and continued all night in prayer to God; and when it was day he called unto
him his Disciples, and of them he Chose Twelve, whom also he named Apostles.
Till now Christ taught alone, but because after his Ascension he must needs
have a Ministry till the end of the world, in the first place he choseth out
some whom he would have on purpose to wait upon him all the time of his
Ministry, till he was taken up into Heaven In this Election, or Ordination,
here is first the person by whom they are Chosen, Jesus Christ. 2. The place
were they are chosen, viz. in a mountain. 3. The time when they were Chosen,
after his watching and praying all night, and when it was day. 4. The company
out of whom they were Chosen, they where his Disciples, and out of them he
makes this Election. 5. The number of them that were Chosen, they were Twelve,
nor more, nor less. 6. The end to which they were chosen, it was to an
Apostleship, he Chose Twelve, whom he also named Apostles.

1. The person by whom they are Chosen is Jesus Christ. They Chose not
themselves, but were chosen of Christ; this call was immediate, and therefore
most excellent; but now we look not after such calls, and therefore I shall not
insist on that; only by the way, Ministers of the Gospel must be Ministers of
Christ, either immediately, or mediately called.

2. The place where they were chosen, it was on a mountain; mountainous places
have their situation nearest to Heaven; which shows that they were called to
high and heavenly things: mountains are open and in view, which shows their
Ministry must be public; they cannot lie hid in a mountain, a City that is set
upon a hill is exposed to the view of all: Again, mountains are subject to
Winds and Tempests, which show their Callings must meet with many oppositions;
and this occasioned Christ to hold up their hearts with Cordials, Mat. 5.11, 12.
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake -- for so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you. The Ministers of Christ are sure of opposition,
the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord; if they
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much mo^^ shall they call
them of his household?

3. The time when they were chosen, when it was, and after he had continued all
night in prayer to God; he goes not to Election, but first he watches, and
prays all the night before; this shows the singular care that Christ had in
this great employment: what? to set men apart to witness his Name, and to
publish to the world the Gospel of Christ? this he would not do without much
prayer. Matthew. 14.23.
Sometimes we find Christ praying alone, as elsewhere, Matthew. 6.6.
He went up into a mountain apart to pray; and here on this mountain without
any of his Disciples, or Domestics about him, he prays alone; thus, When thou
prayest enter into thy closet (says Christ) and when thou have shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret
shall reward thee openly. Sometimes we find Christ praying at night: In the
daytime he was teaching in the Temple, Luke 21.37
and at night he went out and abode in the Mount, that is called the mount of
Olives: See Christ in the exercise of his double Office, he preaches all day,
and prays all night; this Text tells us, He continued all night in prayer.
Night prayers have their special, spiritual advantages. 1. It is a time fitter
for compunction, and heart-contrition. Psalm. 6.6.
All the night make I my bed to swim, I water my Couch with my Tears. As some
things are by heat parched in the day, but cooled in the night; so many sins
contracted in the day, are seasonably repented at night; night tears are as
sweet dews that cool the heat and pride of our spirits. 2. It is a time of
silence and free from distraction; then all Tumults cease, and in the secret of
our souls we may silently go and speak with our heavenly Father. In this
respect we have a blessed example of Christ praying at night, and especially
now; O he was about the great work of sending his Ministers through all the
world, and therefore now he spends all the night long in prayer to his Father;
A great and extraordinary work is not to be set upon, without extraordinary
prayer.

4. The company out of whom they are chosen, He called unto him his disciples,
and out of them he chose twelve: A Disciple of Christ is one thing, and an
Apostle of Christ is another thing; those were Christ's Disciples that embraced
Christ's Doctrine of Faith and Repentance; it was not material to the
constituting of a Disciple of Christ, whether they followed Christ as many did,
or they returned to their own homes, as some others did. The man out of whom
the Legions of devils was cast, Luke 8.38, 39.
besought Christ that he might be with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying,
return to thine own house, and show how great things God has done to thee. I
make no question but Christ at the Election of his Apostles had many Disciples
both waiting on him, and absent from him; and out of them that waited on him
his Apostles were chosen, Christ's Ministers should be first Disciples. O how
unfit are any to take upon them the Ministry of Christ that were never yet the
Disciples of Christ? first the grace of God within us, and then must that grace
of God be discovered by us.

5. The number of them that were chosen; they were Twelve: very propable it is
that there was some peculiar reason in this account, the number (say some) was
figured out to us in many particulars, as in the Twelve Patriarchs, Genesis 35.22.
Exodus 15.21.
in the Twelve Wells of Elim, in the Twelve precious stones on the breast of
the Priest, in the Twelve Tribes of Israel, in the Twelve hours of the day;
Christ tells them of sitting on Twelve Thrones, and judging the Twelve Tribes
of Israel; Mat. 19.28.
but I delight not curiously to descant on these things. This I am sure, that
the doings of Christ were done in weight, measure, and number.

6. The end to which they were chosen, it was to an Apostleship (i.e.) that
they might be Christ's Legates to the Sons of men, that they might be sent up
and down the world to persuade men to Salvation. The dispensers of Gods Word
must look to their mission, they must not intrude upon so sacred a business
before they are sent. Now this mission is either extraordinary by immediate
instinct, and revelation from God, which is ever accompanied with immediate and
infused gifts, and this was the case of the Apostles; or ordinary, by
imposition of hands and Ecclesiastical designation: and in this likewise is
required fidelity, and ability. 1. Fidelity, it is required of Stewards, that a
man be found faithful, that he defraud not Christ of his purchase, which is the
souls of men, nor men of their price and privilege, which is the blood of
Christ; that he watch as a Seer, that he speaks as an Oracle, that he feed as a
Shepherd, that he labor as an Husbandman, that he be instant in season and out
of season, to exhort, rebuke, instruct, to do the work of an Evangelist, to
make full proof of his Ministry, because he has an account to make. 2. Ability
both for right information of the consciences of men, and for the seasonable
application of truth to particular Circumstances, which is that which makes a
wise builder. Ah! Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2 16.
How should we but detest the presumption of those men, who run before they be
sent, who leap from their manual trades into this sacred and dreadful office,
unto which heretofore the most learned and pious men have trembled to approach?

This may inform us of our duty: and this may inform you of your happiness. Use.
1. Here Is our duty; I mean ours of the Ministry, Christ ordained his Apostles
to preach the Gospel; and Paul's motto may be ours, Woe unto me, if I preach not
the Gospel: 1 Cor. 9.16.
what though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for a necessity
is laid upon me. This day Christ sent me on this errand, Mat. 10.7.
Go preach, saying, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Surely the
Lord has put this message into my mouth, Repent swearers, repent drunkards,
repent sinners, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Gospel-discoveries are
made every day, Christ is arising and shining in our Horizon more and more
clearly, that great design of Gods love to our souls is manifested in every
Sermon, on every Sabbath: is not this Gospel-preaching? what is the Gospel, but
the Treasure of Gods love in Christ opened to us? Oh it is a pleasant work in
this respect to be a Minister of the Gospel to be always searching into the
Treasures of love, and to make them known to poor souls for the gaining of them
unto God. 2. Here is your Happiness, Christ has not erected any standing
Sanctuary, or City of refuge for men to fly to for their Salvation, but he has
appointed Ambassadors to carry this Treasure unto men's houses, where he invites
them, and entreats them, and requires them, and commands them, and compels them
to come in. Oh the unsearchable riches of Christ! 1. In respect of the
Messengers, 2. In respect of their Message.

1. In respect of the Messengers; they were first Apostles; now Ministers, poor
Earthen Vessels. Had Christ himself come in his glorified body, attended with
his Angels, it might in some measure have represented his Majesty: but alas!
how would this have dazzled your weakness? or if Christ had made use of his
Angels, as he did at his birth, to preach his Gospel; had they continually come
in state and proclaimed Salvation to the Sons of men, this would have showed
more glory; but alas, how unsuitable had this been to your weak conditions?
here then is the riches of his grace, that earthen vessels should carry this
treasure, that salvation should come out of the mouths of sinful creatures,
that hearts should be broken, souls should believe, life should be infused by
the ministerial breath of a weak worthless man; 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may
be of God, and not of us; Gods power is more Honored this way, than if an
Angel had come in person; it may be in that Case a sinners Conversion would
have been attributed to the power and Efficacy of the Angel; but to prevent
this, and to preserve the glory of his power and grace, Christ takes the
Treasure, and he puts it into Earthen Vessels; it is in the Original vessels of
shell, as precious Pearls are found in Shells, so the Pearl is the Gospel, and
the Shell or Mother of Pearl are the Apostles and Pastors; it is true, they are
Vessels of small price, and subject to many knocks and falls, yet in them is
the most excellent Treasures of the Wisdom of God, and of the Gospel of Christ.
And it is in them on purpose, that the excellency may reflect on God, and not
on them.

2. In respect of the Message; O the unsearchable riches of Christ! What is the
message of these men? what is the Treasure they bring, but the Blood of Christ,
the Promises of the Gospel, the Word of Grace? I might sum up all in one word,
They bring unto men an invitation from heaven, to heaven; Observe it
Christians; the Gospel is a message, the Lord sends his Son up and down,
carries him from place to place; he is set forth before men's eyes, he comes,
and stands, and calls, and Knocks at their doors, and beseeches them to be
reconciled: O the free grace of God! O that mercy, pardon, preferment, eternal
life and Salvation should go a begging, and suing for acceptance! O the love of
sin, and madness of folly in wicked men, to Trample on such Pearls, and to
neglect so great Salvation when it is tendered unto them! O what a heavy charge
will it be for men at the last day, to have the mercy of God, the humility of
Christ, the entreaties of the Spirit, the proclamations of pardon, the
approaches of Salvation, the days, the years, the ages of peace, the Ministry
of the Word, the Book of God, the great Mystery of Godliness, to rise up in
judgment, and to testify against their souls? O the condescentions of Christ!
who are ye, that the Lord should send after you? what need has God of you?
suppose you should go on in the ways of death, and perish everlastingly, what
shall God lose by it? Christ might say, If you will go on, go on and perish; if
you love sin so well, take your pleasure in it, and be damned evermore. Ah no,
says the mercy of God, and the mercy of Christ, before that be, message after
message, Isa. 28.10.
Precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line;
here a little, and there a little. This was the design of Christ's choosing his
Apostles, Go ye into all the world, Mark 16.15.
and preach the Gospel unto every Creature, that poor sinners may turn from
sin, and be saved.

SECT. III. Of Christ's Reception of sinners.
2. FOr Christ's Reception of sinners; I cannot limit this only to one year of
Christ's Ministry, but I shall only mention it this year. Now this will appear,
1. In the Doctrine of Christ. 2. In the Practice of Christ.

1. In his Doctrine, Christ lays it down expressly, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are Heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
It is no more but come, and welcome. The Gospel shuts none out of Heaven, but
those that by unbelief lock the door against their own souls. Again, All that
the Father gives me shall come unto me, John 6.37.
and him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out; here is laid down the
full intent and purpose of God and Christ to pardon and receive sinners; the
Father is willing, and the Son is willing. 1. The Father is willing, This is
the Fathers will which has sent me, John 6.39.
that of all which he has given me, I should lose none; the Father is engaged,
in that first he sent Christ on that errand, to receive sinners. Secondly, in
that he gave unto Christ all that he would have to be saved by Christ, with a
charge to lose none. Sinners were given to Christ by his Father as so many
Jewels to look to, and to save. 2. The Son is willing, for he that comes unto
me (says Christ) I will in no wise cast out. Christ is so willing to receive
sinners, as that he sets all his doors open, he keeps open house, and he casts
out none that will but come in; and why so? John 6.38.
For I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me. 1. I came down from Heaven, it was a great journey from heaven to
earth, and this great journey I undertook for no other purpose but to save
sinners. Great actions (as one says well) must needs have great ends; now this
was the greatest thing that ever was done, Luke 19.10.
that the Son of God should come down from Heaven; and what was the end, but
the Reception and Salvation of sinners? For the Son of man is come to seek, and
to save that which was lost: had not Christ come down, sinners could not have
gone up into Heaven, and therefore that they might ascend, he descends. 2. I
come down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, Heb. 3.1, 2.
but the will of him that sent me; his Father had sent him on purpose to
receive, and to save sinners; and to this purpose, he is called the Apostle of
our profession, -- who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses
was faithful in all his house: His Father could not send him on any errand, but
he was sure to do it; his Fathers mission was a strong demonstration, that
Christ was willing to receive those sinners that would but come to him.

Again, Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any man thirst, John 7.37.
let him come unto me and drink: the very pith, heart, and marrow of the Gospel
is contained in these words: the occasion of them was thus: on that last day of
the Feast of Tabernacles, the Jews were wont with great solemnity to draw water
out of the fountain of Siloam, at the foot of Mount Sion, and to bring it to
the Altar, singing out of Isaiah, Isa. 12.3.
With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of Salvation; now Christ takes
them at this Custom, and recalls them from earthly to heavenly waters, alluding
to that of Isaiah, Isa. 55.1, 3.
Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. -- Incline your ears, and
come unto me, and your souls shall live. The Father says come, the Son says
come, the Spirit says come, yea, Rev. 22.17.
the Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears say come, and let
him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him drink of the water of
life freely. All the time of Christ's Ministry we see him tyring himself in
going about from place to place, upon no other errand than this, to cry at the
markets, Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters! if any sinners
love life, if any will go to heaven, let them come to me, and I will show them
the way to my Fathers bosom, and endear them to my Fathers heart.

Again, hither tend all those Arguments of God and Christ, to draw souls to
themselves. Thus God draws, 1. From his equity, Hear now O house of Israel,
Ezekiel. 18.25.
is not my way equal? or are not your ways unequal? q. d. I appeal to your
very consciences, is this equal, that sinners should go on in sin, and Trespass
against him that is so willing to receive and save poor sinners? 2. From our
ruin, in case we go on in sin, Ezekiel. 18.31.
Cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby ye have Transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new Spirit, for why will ye dye, O house of Israel?
3. From his own dislike and displeasure at our ruin, I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dies, Ver. 32.
says the Lord God, wherefore turn your souls, and live ye. 4. From his mercy
and readiness to pardon sinners, Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. Hos. 14.4. John 3.16.
5. From the freeness of his love, I will love them freely, and God so loved
the world, so fully, so fatherly, so freely, that he gave his only begotten
Son, etc. and I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water
of life freely. 6. From the sweetness of his Name, Rev. 21.6. Exodus 34.6, 7.
Isa. 48.18, 19.
The Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
Transgression and sin. 7. From the benefits that would follow, O that thou
had hearkened to my commandments, then had thy peace been as a River, and thy
righteousness as the waves of the Sea; thy seed also had been as the Sand, and
the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof. 8. From his Oath; As I
live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should turn from his wickedness and live: O happy creatures (says Tertullian)
for whom God swears! O unbelieving wretches, if we will not trust God swearing!
Ezekiel. 33.61. Ezekiel. 33.11. Mich. 6.3. Isa. 5.4. Isa. 5.3.
9. From his expostulations, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why
will ye dye, O house of Israel? -- O my people, what have I done to thee? and
wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me, -- what could I have done
more for my vineyard than I have done? wherefore, when I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? Mich. 6.2.
10. From his appeals, Judge now, O ye inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem --
and hear O ye mountains the Lords controversy: and ye strong foundations of
the earth, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
for the Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will plead with
Israel. 11. From his groans, Oh that there were such an heart in them that they
would fear me, and keep my commandments always, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that it might be well with them, and their children for ever. And oh that they
were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter
end. 12. Hos. 11.8.
From his loathness to give men up, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how
shall I deliver thee O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set
thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. O the goodness of God!

And as God the Father, so God the Son draws Arguments to win souls to himself,
1. From his coming; it was the very purpose and design of his coming down from
Heaven to receive sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a faithful saying (says Paul) and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. 2. From his fair demeanor
and behavior toward sinners; this was so open and notorious, that it was
turned to his disgrace and opprobry, Mat. 11.19.
Behold a friend of Publicans and sinners: And the Scribes and Pharisees
murmured at him, Luke 5.30.
and his Disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with Publicans and Sinners?
3. From his owning of sinners, and answering for them in this respect, Luke
5.31, 32.
And Jesus answering said unto them, they that are whole need not a Physician,
but they that are sick; I came not to call the righteous but Sinners to
repentance. 4. From his rejoicing at sinners conversion: indeed we never read
of Christ's Laughter, and we seldom read of Christ's joy; but when it is at any
time recorded, it is at the Conversion of a poor soul; he had little else to
comfort himself in, being a man of sorrows: but in this he rejoiced
exceedingly, Luke 10.21.
In that hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit; it was in that hour when he saw an
handsel of the fruit of his Disciples Ministry, as an earnest of the many
thousands that should afterward come in; John 11.15.
And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there (said Christ when Lazarus
was dead:) But why was he glad? It follows, to the intent ye might believe. He
rejoiced if any of his got faith, a little more faith, more and more faith.
Luke 19.41, 42.
5. From grief in case of sinners not repenting; witness his tears over
Jerusalem, and those speeches of his; And when he was come near, he beheld the
City, and wept over it, saying, if thou had known, even thou at least in this
thy day the things which belong unto thy peace; but now they are hid from thine
eyes? Look as it is with a man carrying to be buried, his wife weeps, his
children weep, his friends weep, so our Savior follows Jerusalem to the grave,
and when he can do no more for it, he rings out this doleful passing bell, Mat.
23.37.
O that thou had known, etc. 6. From his wishes, groanings; O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as an hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings; and ye would not? In this Argument,
before we pass it, observe we the several passages; here is first, the groan;
Oh! this Aspiration argues a compassionate pang of grief; it ran to the very
heart of Christ, that Jerusalem had neglected their souls salvation, Oh
Jerusalem! Secondly, here is an ingemination, or a double calling on Jerusalem,
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! the name doubled expresses great affection in the
speaker, as when David doubled the name Absalom, it is said, the King was much
moved, 2 Samuel 18.33.
and so he cried, O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom; thirdly, here is the
monstrous sin wherewith the Lord charges Jerusalem, Thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; Jerusalem was the very
slaughterhouse of the Prophets, in so much that very few of the Prophets had
been murdered elsewhere, and so comparatively Christ speaks, it cannot be that
a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem. Fourthly, Luke 13.33.
here is Christ's willingness to save Jerusalem, which he discovers. 1. In his
frequent applications to it, how often? q. d. not once, nor twice, nor thrice,
but many and many a time have I come to Jerusalem, and spoke to Jerusalem, and
wooed Jerusalem, how often? 2. In the acting, exercising, and putting forth of
his will, how often would I have gathered thy children together? The will of
Christ was serious, though not absolute; I know his divine will absolutely
considered could not have been resisted; but this was There is voluntas
absoluta efficax, deceinens, and infalibiliter producens effectum volitum: and
voluntas conditionata, revelata approbationis, simplicis complacentia. August.
tract. 15. in John
not his absolute will, but only a will of divine complacency; and so he would
not have the death of any, but that all should live; or he speaks here of his
humane ministerial will (say some) and not of his divine: many a Sermon had he
preached, and many an Exhortation had he dropped, and every Sermon, every
Exhortation proclaimed his willingness, I would, yea, that I would have
gathered thy children together. 3. In resemblance of his willingness, Christ
would have gathered Jerusalems children as the hen gathers her chickens under
her wings; in the metaphor Christ's care is admirably displayed. 1. As the hen
with her wings covers the unfeathered chickens. 2. As the hen provides for
their food, not eating her self till they are filled. 3. As the hen defends her
chickens from the ravenous birds, so that to blood she will fight in their
defense; so has Christ's care been for Jerusalem. No bird (says Austin)
expresses such tender love to her young ones as the hen does; no fowls so
discover themselves to be mothers, as hens do; other birds we know to be
mothers, when we see them in their nest, but no other way; only the hen
discovers her self to be a mother, when her chickens do not follow her; for
then her feathers stand up, her wings hang down, she clocketh mournfully, and
goes feebly; now in respect of this singular love, Christ compares himself to
an hen; As an hen gathers her chickens, so would I have gathered Jerusalem. 4.
In that he adds so dolefully, but ye would not; I would, but ye would not; q.
d. in me no care so great as to save your souls, in you no care so little as
your souls Salvation; I strove toward you in acts of love, and you strove
toward me in acts of ingratitude; I would have done you good, but you would
not receive it; I would, yea how often would I? but ye would not.

2. Christ's reception of sinners appears yet more in his practice. How welcome
were all sorts of sinners unto him? He casts out none that acknowledged him for
the Messiah, he turned none away that gave up their souls to be saved by him in
his own way. This he manifests: 1. Parabolically. 2. Really.

1. Parabolically, especially in those three Parables, of the lost Groat, and
of the lost Sheep, and of the lost Son; I shall instance in this last, Luke
15.20.
which may well serve for all the rest. -- When the Prodigal was yet afar off,
his Father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him. In these words, observe, 1. His Father sees him before he sees
his Father; no sooner a sinner thinks of Heaven, but the Lord spies him and
takes notice of him. 2. The Lord sees him whiles he was yet a great way off; he
was but in the beginning of his way: his Father might have let him alone till
he had come quite home to his house, and it had been a singular mercy to have
bid him welcome then; but he takes notice of him yet a great way off: sinners
may be far off from God in their own apprehensions, and yet the Lord even then
draws near, whiles thus they apprehend. 3. His Father had pity or compassion on
him; the Lords bowels even yearn, and work, and stir within him at the sight of
his returning prodigals; when Ephraim had bemoaned himself, Thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised, Jer. 31.18, 19 ver. 20.
as a bullock unaccostomed to the yoke; why then cries God; Is Ephraim my dear
son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely
have mercy upon him says the Lord. -- 4. His Father run: there is much in
this: As, 1. It had been mercy though his Father had stood still, till his Son
had come. 2. What a mercy is this, that his Father will go, and give his Son
the meeting? 3. But above all, oh what abundant mercy call we this, that the
Father will not go, but run? If he would needs meet his Son, might he not have
walked toward him in a soft slow pace? O no, if a sinner will but come, or
creep toward Christ, mercy will not go a foot-pace, but run to meet him;
bowels full of mercy out-pace bowels pinched with hunger; Gods mercy is over
all his works, and so it is over all our needs, and over all our sins. 5. He
ran, and fell on his neck; (i.e.) he hugged and embraced him; O wonder! who
would not have been loath to have touched him? was he not in his loathsome
stinking rags? smelt he not of the hogs and swine he lately kept? would not
some dainty stomachs have been ready to have cast all up upon such
embracements? Ezekiel. 16.6.
we see mercy is not nice, When I passed by (says God) I saw thee polluted in
thy own blood, and I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live; yea, I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live; that very time of her blood,
was the time of love; then the Lord spread his Spirit over her, and covered her
nakedness, and swore unto her, Ver. 8.
and entered into a Covenant with her, and she became his. 6. He ran, and fell
on his neck, and kissed him; who would have brooked a person in so filthy a
pickle? what? kiss those lips that have been so lately lapping in the hogs
trough? those lips that had so often kissed those base, and beggarly, and
abominable Harlots? one would think he should rather have kicked, than kissed
him: there is a passage somewhat like this, and Esau ran to meet Jacob, Genesis
33.4.
and he embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him; before he had
thought to have killed him, but now he kissed him; its not to tell how dear the
Father was to his Prodigal Son, when he ran, and fell on his neck, and
embraced, and kissed him. The scope of the Parable is this, that Christ is
willing and glad to receive sinners: Ezekiel. 33.11.
Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for why will ye dye O house of Israel?

2. Christ manifests this willingness in his practice really; amongst many
instances I shall insist only on one, a notable instance of this year: One of
the Pharisees named Simon invited Christ to eat with him: Luke 36.37.
into whose house when he had entered, a certain woman that was a sinner abiding
there in the City, heard of it; a widow she was, and prompted by her wealth and
youth to an intemperate life: she came to Jesus in the Pharisees house, and no
sooner come, but she lays her burden at Jesus's feet, and presents him with a
broken heart, Ver. 38.
and weeping eye, and an Alabaster Box of Ointment. She stood at his feet
behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with her tears, and to wipe them
with the hairs of her head; and she kissed his feet, and Anointed them with
Ointment. 1. She stands at his feet, a sign of her humility: O what a change!
She that was before married to a Noble personage, a Native of the Town and
Castle of Magdal, from whence she had her name of Magdalen; and she that now
was a widow, and therefore took her liberty of pride and lust, who so proud and
vile as Mary Magdalen? at this time she comes in remorse and regret for her
sins, and throwing away her former pride, she stoops, and waits, and humbly
stands at Jesus feet. 2. She stood at his feet behind him; a blushing sign of
faith; it comprehends in it a Tacit confession of her Sins, she knew her self
unworthy of Christ's presence; she durst not look him in the face, but
believingly she waits behind him: her shame speaks her repentance; and her
waiting on him, and not flying from him, bespeaks her faith. 3. She stood at
his feet behind him weeping, her grief burst out in tears: she heeds not the
feast, or feaster, though usually they are accompanied with joy, and mirth, and
music; and such feasts attended with such vanities she many a time had
probably observed, yet now she comes in trembling to this feast, and falling
down before Christ, she weeps, and weeps bitterly for her sins. 4. She began to
wash his feet with tears; her tears were not feigned, but fruitful; she wept a
shower of tears; one considering her tears, cries it out, Terra rigat coelum,
the very earth bedews heaven; her eyes that before were abused to lust, are now
fountains of tears; she poures out a flood, great enough to wash the feet of
her blessed Jesus; this was the manner of the Jews, to eat their meat lying
down, John 13.23.
and Leaning on their Elbows; or if many eat together, leaning in the bosoms of
one another; thus at the Passover it is said that there was leaning on Jesus
bosom one of his disciples whom Jesus loved; And in this posture Jesus sitting
or lying at meat, Mary had the convenience to weep on his feet, which he had
cast behind his fellow; and O how she weeps a main! the Tears so Trickle, that
she begins to wash Christ's feet; she not only waters them, Jer. 6.1.
but washes them; that which Jeremy wished, Oh that my head were waters, and
mine eyes a Fountain of Tears! Mary fulfills; for her head is waters, and her
eyes are fountains; Rivers of Tears run down her eyes; O she had pierced Christ
with her sins, and now she weeps over him whom she had pierced; crying out as
we may imagine, O my sins! and O my Christ! O foul sins! and O sweet Jesus! 5.
She wipes his feet with the Hairs of her Head; her hair added to her beauty,
sometimes in curling rings, or in seemly sheds, she made it a snare for men;
but now she consecrates it to her Lord, and makes it a Towel to wipe Christ's
feet withal: O here is a worthy fruit of serious repentance, the Apostle calls
it an holy revenge. 6. She kissed his feet; 2 Cor. 7.11.
in token of her new chioce, and new love, and new affection; her kisses had
formerly been to wantons, but now she bestows them on the feet of Christ. 7.
She anointed them with ointment; which expression was so great an ecstasy of
love, and sorrow, and adoration, that to anoint the feet of the greatest
Monarch was long unknown, and in all the pomps of Roman prodigality, it was
never used till Otho taught it Nero. When Simon observed this sinner so busy
in the expresses of her Religion, he thought within himself that Christ was no
Prophet, that he did not know her to be a sinner; for although the Jews
Religion did permit harlots to live, and to enjoy the privileges of the
Nation, save that their oblations were refused; yet the Pharisees who pretended
to a greater degree of sanctity than others, would not admit them to civil
usages, or to the benefits of ordinary society: and hence Simon made an
objection within himself, which Jesus knowing (for he understood his thoughts
as well as words) first he makes her Appology, and then his own; the scope
givign us to understand, that Christ was not of the same superciliousness with
the Pharisees, but that repenting sinners should be welcome unto him; Ver. 47.
Ver. 48. Ver. 50. Use.
and this welcome he publishes first to Simon, Her sins which are many are
forgiven; and then to the woman, Thy sins are forgiven thee, thy faith has
saved thee, go in peace.

I have been long in the proof: but a word of use, and I have done. What? is
Christ most willing to receive sinners? O then be exhorted! who would not come
to Jesus Christ? methinks now all sinners of all sorts should say, though I
have been a drunkard, a swearer, an unclean person, yet now I hear Christ is
willing to receive sinners, and therefore I will go to Jesus Christ. This is my
exhortation, O come unto Christ, come unto Christ! behold here in the name of
the Lord I stand, and make invitation to poor sinners; O will ye not come? how
will ye answer it at the great day, when it shall be said, the Lord Jesus made
a tender and offer of mercy to you, and you would not accept of it? Oh come to
Christ, and believe on Christ; as Christ is willing to receive you, so be you
willing to give up your souls to him; the motives to this I may lay down in
these particulars. --

1. The Doctrine of Christ, Come unto me, -- and him that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out. All the arguments of God and Christ, of which you
have heard, the practice of Christ whiles he was upon earth, and the heart of
Christ now in Heaven; lay these together, and apply them to your own souls. Oh
what work will they make!

2. The calls of God, and Christ; as they are frequent in Scriptures; consider
that Text, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters! Isa. 55.1. [Ho]
he begins proclamation-wise; we usually say, vocations, interjections speak
very affectionate motion toward the distressed; certainly Christ's love is a
very affectionate love, he lays his mouth to the ears of those that are
spiritually deaf, and cries aloud, Ho [every one] Christ invites all: As many
as ye shall find, bid them to the Marriage, Matthew 22.9. As the Heavens are
general in their influence, not one grass on the ground but it is bedewed; so
are Christ's invitations to his feast, not one man in the world but he is
invited? Ho, every one that thirsteth] so the Apostle, Let him that is athirst
come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of Life freely, Revel. 22.17.
A thirst and a will is one and the same, it is your will that makes up the
match; if you will but sit down at God's Table, if you will but have the
honeycomb with the honey, if you will but drink his Wine with his milk, if you
will drink, yea drink abundantly of the flaggons of the new wine of his
Kingdom; why then come, Come ye to the waters; come unto me and drink. Christ's
arms are spread abroad to receive sinners; he calls and knocks; and calls and
waits; and calls and beseeches; every word here has so much sweetness and
dearness in it, as it plainly speaks him free and willing to receive you, if
you will but come.

3. The wooings of Christ to gain your hearts; consider him bowing the Heavens,
and coming down, and laying aside his Robes of Majesty, and putting on your
filthy garments; consider him going about from place to place, on no other
errand, but to gain your hearts, and win your Souls; and whoever spoke such
effectual words as Christ spoke when he was upon the earth? who ever gave such
precious jewels to a Bride, as Christ gave to his Spouse? whoever put on such
apparel, as Christ did when he wooed his Church? the Prophet wonders at it;
Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? -- Wherefore
art thou red in thine apparel, Isa. 63.1, 2.
and thy garments like him that treads in the Wine Fat? Isa. 63.1, 2. Whoever
gave such a love-token, as Christ gave when he laid down his Life? Oh consider
him living, or dying, and say, Never like Love to this. Ah poor sinner, see
your Jesus hanging on the Cross, dropping out his last blood, breathing out his
last breath, stretching out his dying arms to incircle sinners; and come, Oh
come and throw your selves into his bleeding arms! away with all prejudicate
opinions! who shall say, Christ is not willing to save him, and not blaspheme
eternal love? speak truth; corrupt hearts speak truth; say not Christ is
unwilling, but you are unwilling; I would, but ye would not.

4. The weepings of Christ if he cannot prevail. Thus we find him in the
Gospel expressing himself, Luke. 19.41.
not only in words, but in tears. And when he was come near Jerusalem, he
beheld the City and wept over it, Luke 19.41. Christ coming to the City and
seeing it, and foreseeing the desolation that should come upon it, his bowels
yearned within him toward the People, and he mourned secretly within himself.
q. d. O Jerusalem, thou have had many Priests to advise thee, and many Prophets
to instruct thee in the ways of life, but now those days are gone and past;
nay, the great Prophet of the World is come to woo thee, but yet thy heart is
hardened, and thou will not receive the things belonging to thy peace, and
therefore I will turn my preaching into mourning and sighing. O that thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things belonging to thy peace
-- and then his heart even breaks, and he weeps again, but now are they hid
from thine eyes! sinners, suppose Christ should come and weep over you, as he
did over Jerusalem, saying, O ye sinful souls, had but you known, even you in
this your day, the things belonging to your peace! and suppose that you should
see one tear trickling down after another; what? Christ to weep for you, over
you? Methinks if you had hearts of stone, it should melt your hearts; surely it
is no light matter that makes Christ weep; Children weep often, but Wisemen
seldom, yet here the wisest of men weeps for them that would not weep for
themselves; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem.

SECT. IV. Of Christ's easy Yoke, and light Burden.
3. FOr the easiness of Christ's Yoke, and the lightness of Christ's burden,
Christ delivers it in these words, Take my Yoke upon you and learn of me, --
for my Yoke is easy, Mat. 11.29, 30.
and my Burden is light. See the actings of Christ this year in reference to
our souls health. 1. He commissionates his Apostles to call sinners in. 2. He
stands ready to receive them if they will but come in. 3. He sweetens the way
of Christianity to them when they are come in. Many fears and jealousies are in
the hearts of men, of the difficulty, austerity, and severity of Christ's
institutions; and therefore to remove that objection, he tells them plainly,
there is no such thing, but rather clean contrary, For my Yoke is easy, and my
Burden is light.

My Yoke (i.e.) my Commandments, so the Apostle John gives the interpretation,
His Commandments are not grievous. 1 John 7.3.
My Yoke is easy; (i.e.) my Commandments are without any inconvenience; the
trouble of a Yoke is not the weight, but the uneasiness of it, and Christ
speaks sutably, My Yoke is easy, and my Burden (i.e.) my institutions; the
word primarily signifies the freight or balast of a Ship, which cuts through
the Waves, as if it had no burden; and without which burden there were no
safety in the Ship: (...), a ferendo, a burden which either is laid upon the
shoulder, or rather which is put into a Ship, that it may go steadily and
safely. My Burden is light, the Yoke of the Law was heard, and the Burden of
the Pharisees was heavy, but Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light,
every way sweet, and pleasant.

Christian Religion, and the practice of it, are full of sweetness, easiness,
and pleasantness; My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light. The Prophets
prophesying of this, say thus, Every Valley shall be exalted, and every
Mountain and Hill shall be laid low; Isa. 40.4.
the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain; the meaning
is, that the ways of Christianity should be levelled and made even; and that
all lets and impediments should be removed out of the way; that so we might
have a more easy and convenient passage unto Heaven; to the same purpose is
that other prophecy, Isa. 35.8.
And an highway (or causway) shall be there; and a way, a causway, and a way;
(that is, a way cast up) Isa. 62.10. and it shall be called the way of
holiness, (or a way for the Saints of God, and not for the wicked, Matthew. 7.14.
The unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those: (or he shall be
with them, or be a guide unto them by his Word and Spirit, Isa. 30.21.) The
Wayfaring men though fools shall not err therein; Christ's way is so easy that
the simplest so conducted by his Word and Spirit shall not miss of it, The meek
will he guide in Judgment, Psalm. 25.9.
and the meek will he teach his way.

The Apostles are yet more clear; For this is the love of God, 1 John. 5.3.
Romans 8.2. Romans 7.6.
that we keep his Commandments, and his commandments are not grievous. And the
Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin
and Death. And now are we delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held, that we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of
the letter. Christ Jesus came to break off from our necks those two great
yoaks, the one of Sin, by which we are kept in fetters and prisons; the other
of Moses Law, by which we are kept in pupillage and minority; and now Christ
having taken off these two, he has put on a third; he quits us of our burden,
but not of our duty; he has changed the yoke of sin, and the yoke of the Law
strictly taken, into the sweetness of his Fatherly Regiment, whose very
precepts carry part of their reward in hand, and assurance of Glory afterward.

The reasons of the sweetness, easiness, and pleasantness of Christian
Religion, and the practice of it, I shall reduce into these heads.

1. Christian Religion is most rational. If we should look into the best laws
that the wisest men in the World ever agreed upon, we shall find that Christ
adopted the quintessence of them all into this one Law; the highest pitch of
reason is but as a spark, a taper, a lesser light, which is involved and
swallowed up in the Body of this great light, that is made up by the Son of
Righteousness. Some observe that Christ's discipline is the Breviary of all the
wisdom of the Best men, and a fair copy and transcript of his Fathers wisdom;
there is nothing in the laws of Christian Religion, but what is the perfective
of our Spirits, rare expedient of obeying God, and of doing duty and benefit to
all capacities and orders of men. Indeed the Greeks, whom the World admired for
their humane wisdom, accounted the Preaching of the Gospel foolishness, and
thereupon God blasted their wisdom, as it is written, I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the Prudent, 1 Cor.
1.19. 1 Cor. 1 19.
the Gospel may be as foolishness unto some, but unto them which are called --
Christ the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.
and the wisdom of God.

2. Christian Religion has less trouble and slavery in it than sin, or any
thing that is contrary to it; as for instance; he that propounds to himself to
live a low, a pious, an humble and retired life, his main employment is nothing
but sitting Religiously quiet, and undisturbed with variety of impertinent
affairs; but he that loves the world entertains athousand businesses, and every
business has a world of employments: how easy a thing is it to restore a
pledge? but if a man means to defeat, or to cozen him that trusts him, what a
world of arts must he use to make pretenses? as first to delay, then to excuse,
then to object, then to intricate the business, then to quarrel; and all the
way to palliate the crime, and to represent himself an honest man: the ways of
sin are crooked, desert, rocky, and uneven ways: the Apocriphal Book of
Solomon brings in such men, as if in hell they were speaking this language, We
wearied our selves in the way of wickedness, Wisd. 5.7.
yea we have gone through deserts, where there lay no way; but as for the way
of the Lord we have not known it. Wicked men are in thraldom, but where the
Spirit of the Lord is, 2 Cor. 3.17.
there is freedom. O the pains, troubles, expenses that men are at to serve
their sensuality! see how the ambitious man rises early, and goes to bed late;
see how he flatters, dissembles, solicites to obtain nothing but a little wind,
a puff, a breath of vain men's mouths! see how the covetous man toyls, as if he
were tied in a gally by the leg with a chain to serve by rowing for ever; so I
have heard, that Turks use some Christians; but this is a thousand times worse
servitude, for such a one is in servitude to a more base Creature than a Turk,
and he lies bound not only by the feet, but also by the hands ears, eyes,
heart, and all; only the Christian is at liberty; only Christian Religion and
the practice of it sets men at liberty; If ye continue in my word, John. 8.31,
32
(says Christ) then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make you free.

3. Christian Religion is all composed of peace; her ways are the ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove 17.3. Christ framed all his
Laws in compliance of this design of peace; peace within, and peace at home,
and peace abroad; 1. It holds forth a certain Heavenly peace, and tranquillity
within; Psalm. 119.165. Isa. 57.20, 21.
Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. But
on the contrary; The wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt; there is no peace says my God to the
wicked: Psalm. 55.9.
their passions were never yet mortified; and such passions usually range in
wicked men as are most contrary, and demand contrary thimgs; the desire of
honor cries spend here, but the passion of avarice cries, hold thy hands; lost
cries, venture here; but pride says, no such thing, it may turn to thy
dishonor; anger cries, revenge thy self here, but ambition says, it is better
to dissemble. And here is fulfilled that of the Psalmist, I have seen violence
and strife in the City; the vulgar renders it, I have seen iniquity and
contradiction in the self-same City: First, Iniquity, for all the demands of
these passions are unjust; And, 2. Contradiction, for one passion cries out
against another. But now great peace have they that love thy Law; for by the
aid of Christ and his Grace, their passions are in some sort subdued: and they
pass on their life most sweetly and calmly, without any perturbations much
troubling their Spirits; they have that Peace which passes all understanding,
which the World can neither give nor taste of, as Christ affirms. John. 14.27.


2. It holds forth peace at home; the Laws of Jesus teach us how to bear with
the infirmitives of our Relatives, and indeed whosoever obeys the Laws of Jesus
Christ, he seeks with sweetness to remedy all differences, he throws water upon
a spark, he lives sweetly with his Wife, affectionately with his Children,
descreetly with his Servants; and they all look upon him as their Guardian,
Friend, and Patron; but look upon an angry man, not subject to these Christian
Laws, and when he enters upon his threshold, it it gives an alarm to his house,
every little accident is the matter of a quarrel, and every quarrel discomposes
the peace of the house, and sets it on fire, and no man can tell how far it may
burn. O the sweetness, easiness, pleasantness of Christian Religion! where that
is embraced and followed, the man is peaceable, and charitable, and just, and
loving, and forbearing, and forgiving; and how should there be but content in
this blessed Family?

3. It holds out peace abroad, it commands all Offices of kindness, gentleness,
love, meekness, humility, lowliness of mind toward others; and such sweet
dispositions are usually received with fondness, and all the endearments of the
neighborhood; it prescribes an austere, and yet a sweet deportment; it
commands all those labors of love, as to relieve the stranger, to visit the
sick, to wash the feet of the poor; it sends us upon charitable embassies, to
unclean prisons, nasty dungeons, and in the cause of Christ to lay down our
lives one for another; it teaches us how to return good for evil, kindness for
injuries, a soft answer for the rough words of an Enemy; Oh when I think of
this, I cannot but think of him who said, That either that this was not the
Christian Religion, or we were not Christians. For my part I am easily
persuaded, that if we would but live according to the discipline of Christian
Religion, one of those great plagues that vexes the world (I mean the plague
of war) would be no more; certainly this was one of the designs of
Christianity, that there should be no wars, no jars, no discontents amongst
men; and if all men that are called Christians, were indeed charitable,
peaceable, just, loving, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another,
what sweet peace should we have? how would this world be an Image of Heaven,
and of the society of Saints and Angels above in Glory?

4. Christian Religion affords to us all assistances both outward and inward.
In some respects, I know the duties of Christianity are hard and heavy; but
whatsoever Christ has imposed as heavy and hard, he has made it light in
aids: I shall show the helps in these particulars. As --

1. The holy Scriptures be our helps; this was the very scope and aim for which
the sacred Volume was sent from Heaven, viz. that we might decline from evil,
and do good, that we might die to old Adam, and live to Christ; that we might
crucify sin, and follow Virtue; what are the Scriptures but the Registers of
God's Will, the letters of God's Love to invite us to Grace, and to dehort us
from vice? O the persuasion, directions and commands of God that we might
become holy; and O the disswasions diversions, threatenings, and terrifying of
God that we might fly profaneness!

2. The Ministers of Christ be our helps: thou have the Scriptures, but it may
be thou can not read, or thou can not understand the sense and meaning
thereof; Christ therefore for thy help has set up a ministry for the edifying
of the Body of Christ. Ephesians. 4.12.
These are the watchmen over the house of Israel to cry like trumpets, and to
blazon the sins of the house of Israel; these are the suitors of God and Christ
to speak out his good will in thine ears; 2 Cor. 5.20.
they call, they cry, they wait, they woo, they Pray you in Christ's stead, that
you will be reconciled unto God.

3. The lives of Saints be our helps; we have not only Teachers in word, but
the Saints in all Ages, as so many Stars, have given us light how to walk in
the darkness of this life. The examples of the godly are very drawing, and much
for our imitation, and therefore the Psalmist bids us, Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright, Psalm. 37.37.
for the end of that man is peace. O it is a blessed help to a Christan life to
read over, much more to mark, and observe the holy and godly lives of the
Saints of God; how does their Zeal condemn our coldness, their diligence our
negligence, their watching and prayer, our sluggishness and indevotion? And how
are they as spurs to quicken us forwards in our spiritual voyage toward Heaven?

4. Christ's Ordinances be our helpers; as the Word, and Sacraments, and Prayer,
and Meditation, and Conference, etc. What are they but Fountains of grace,
conduits and conveyances of the blood of Christ? To what end were they
instituted, but for the watering of our souls to the increase of grace, and to
the supplanting of sin and vice, and all manner of evil?

5. The encouragements of reward be our helps. Now in the practice of Christian
Religion there is a double reward. 1. The reward of duty, Psalm. 19.11.
In the keeping of thy Commandments there is great reward; he says not, for
keeping them, but in keeping them there is great reward, there is a grace, a
beauty, an excellency in every gracious acting. 2. The reward according to the
duty; to this exercise of Religion Christ has annexed many sweet and gracious
Promises both for this life, and that to come; and these Promises may be used
as helps; He had respect unto the recompense of reward. Heb. 11.26.
To this purpose are the glorious things of Heaven set open before us, that we
may have an eye to them, and be encouraged by them. So run that ye may obtain.
1 Cor. 9.24.


6. The openings and discoveries of the pains of Hell are as helps to restrain
us from sin, and to keep us in the way to Christ. This, some call legal, but
Christ in the Gospel tells us of this; in the Gospel we find a description of
hell-pains, set out by weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth; by a worm
never dying, Matthew. 8.12. Mark 9.44.
and a fire never going out; Oh when I think of those unquenchable flames,
those remediless torments, without hope of recovery, remission, or mitigation;
when I think of that privation and loss of the sight of Gods face, prepared
only for those that serve him in holiness, how should I but look about me, and
prepare for my reckoning? Nay how easy should I think any pains in comparison?
Some persons in affrightment have been seen to carry burdens, and to leap
ditches, and climb walls, which their natural power could never have done; and
if we understood the sadness of a cursed eternity, from which we are commanded
to fly, and yet knew how near we are to it, and how likely to fall into it, if
we continue in sin, it would be able to create fears greater than a sudden
fire, or a midnight alarm.

7. A principle of love (wheresoever it is planted) is our help; be the Yoke
never so uneasy, yet love will make it light; Can. 3.10.
Solomon compares the estate of the Church to a chariot, and it is described to
have Pillars of Silver, and a Bottom of Gold, and a Covering of Purple, the
midst thereof being paved with Love; a strange expression, that the midst of a
Chariot should be paved with love; but it is plain, the Chariots wherein Christ
carries his people up and down in the World, and brings them to himself, is
such a Chariot as the midst thereof is paved with love; in this case if there
were neither Heaven, nor Hell, yet a soul would be in the duties of
Christianity. I remember how Ivo, Bishop of Chartres, meeting a grave Matron on
the way with fire in one hand, and water in the other, he asked her what those
symboles meant? and what she meant to do with her fire and water? she answered,
My purpose is with the fire to burn Paradise, and with the water to quench the
flames of Hell, that men may serve God (said she) without the incentives of
hope and fear, and purely for the love of God, and Jesus Christ. Surely it was
an high expression; for my part I dare not separate those things which God has
joined together; only this I say, that where true love is, there is an
excellent help in our way Heaven-wards.

8. The Angels be our helps; They are ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14.
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14.
and the kind of their ministration is excellently set forth by the Psalmist,
They shall keep thee in all thy ways, they shall bear thee up in their hands,
least thou dash thy foot against a stone, Psalm. 91.11, 12. in this place the
Angels are compared to Nurses that have a charge over weak Children to keep
them and guard them; so the Angels do all the offices of a Nurse, or Mother;
they keep us, guard us, instruct us, admonish us, correct us, comfort us,
preserve us from evil, and provoke us to good.

9. The Motions, Inspirations, blessed Influences of the Spirit of Christ be
our helps; many a time the Spirit cries, Isa. 30.21.
and calls on our hearts, saying, This is the way walk therein: as the evil
Spirit, or Devil in wicked men is continually moving, and inclining them to all
evil thoughts, affections, and desires; so the good Spirit of God in good men
does incline, and move them to good thoughts, good affections, good actions;
and hence they are said to be led by the Spirit; Romans 8.14.
there are indeed several acts of the Spirit, as sometimes, there is a
breathing or stirring; sometimes a quickening, or enlivening; sometimes a
powerful effectual inclining, or bending of our hearts unto good things; now in
some of these works the Spirit is most-what, for in the progress of
sanctification, we need a continual help, and influence, from Gods holy Spirit;
and when we obey these conducts, Gal. 5.24.
we are said to walk in the Spirit; and as all these are helps in the ways of
Christianity, so by these helps and assistance of Christ's Holy Spirit,
Christianity is made very easy unto us.

10. The Grace of God is our help; many feeling the strength of corruption cry
out with Paul, Romans 7.24. Ver. 23. 2 Cor. 12.9.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? O I
find a law in my members warring against the law of my mind; but they consider
not the comfortable saying of Christ to Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee;
by the assistance of grace Paul could do any thing; I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me; Phil. 4.13. Romans 8.37. Psalm. 119.32.
yea, In all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved
us: the Psalmist has a notable expression to this purpose, I will run the way
of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart; this enlargement of
heart was by the grace of God; grace is compared to oil: as a dry purse is
softened and enlarged by anointing it with Oil, so the heart drawn together by
sin, is opened and enlarged by the pouring of grace into it; and if grace be
present, then says David, I will run the way of thy Commandments; not walk,
but run; it is an allusion to a Cart-Wheel, which cries and complains under
a small burden being dry, but when a little Oil is put into it, it runs
merrily, and without noise; and if David could say thus in his time, how much
more should we that live in these Gospel Times, when grace in greater measure
is effused, and poured out? by the grace of Christ (should we say) we will
walk, and run, and fly in the way of his Commandments.

Use.
Well then, is Christian Religion and the practice of it, full of sweetness,
easiness, and pleasantness? in the first place for conviction, this may take
away the cavils of some men; what is said in way of objection I shall reduce to
these particulars. --

1. They object that Christ himself confesses it to be a Yoke, and a burden;
but no that we answer with Christ, his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light.
Certainly there are burdens which grieve not the bearers at all, as the
burden of feathers upon a Birds back; it is nothing grievous to her, but
rather bears her up; and a burden of Gold and Jewels upon a man's back
(supposing it the reward of his portage, and the hire of his labor) it is
nothing grievous to him, but rather cheers him up. Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
if we will but come and close with Christ, the Spirit is given to enable us,
and Heaven is promised to encourage us; the one gives power, and the other
stirs up our affections, and how then should we complain of pressure? O it is a
sweet burden! sweetened by his Grace, and sweetened by his Spirit, and sweetened
by a principle of love, O how I love thy Law? Psalm. 119.97, 174. Psalm. 19.11.
and sweetened by a principle of delight, Thy Law is my delight; and sweetened
with a promise of reward, In the keeping of thy Commandments there is great
reward.

2. They object; we feel no such thing; you tell us of sweetness, easiness,
pleasantness; Mal. 1.13. Amos 8.5.
but if we must speak out our own experiences, O what a weariness is it? --
when will the New Mood be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the Sabbath, that we
may set forth wheat? We feel a sweetness in these present enjoyments of the
World, but as for Holiness, Grace, Religion, the Discipline of Christ, we
wonder where the sweetness is, we can find no such secret golden Mines in these
spiritual diggings.

I answer, 1. This indeed is the speech of carnal and profane men, they feel
no sweetness, easiness, pleasantness in Gods ways; The natural man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15.
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: but he that is spiritual judges or discerns all
things. Poor souls! till God speak to your hearts you cannot understand this
hidden Manna: It is observed that God never sent the pleasant Manna unto Israel
so long as their Flower and Bread of Egypt lasted; so never will you taste how
good the Lord is, so long as you dote on sin and vanity.

2. Though you feel not these things for the present, yet in time you may do;
yea certainly if you belong to God, in time you will do; O but when? you will
say, when? I answer, the first taste of this sweetness is usually at the first
taking of Christ's yoke upon us; as Merchants desire us to sell their waters,
are content in the first place to let you see, and handle, and taste, thereby to
induce you to buy: so Jesus Christ willing (as it were) to part with Heaven, he
is content in the first place to impart a certain taste before hand, and to
sweeten the ways of goliness unto us; B^hold, Hos. 2.14.
I will allure her (says God) and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak
comfortably unto her. What is it that God means by alluring of his people? I
answer, it contains these things. As, --

1. A discovery of the beauty of holiness; when God first effectually calls the
soul home to himself, he sets open the beauty of his service; naturally the
heart is possessed with much prejudice against the ways of Religion, Oh what a
strict rule is this to carnal men, to pull out their right eyes, to cut off
their right hands, to hate Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Lands, and Life
for the Name of Christ, to cross their own desires, to deny their own selves,
to mortify their earthly members, to follow the Lamb through evil report and
good report, through afflictions, and persecutions, and manifold temptations
whithersoever he goes, to war with principalities, and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in high places? and hence it is that the Lord is forced to set
forth the ways of Christ as beautiful, even under crosses and afflictions;
thus when the watchman smote the Church, and wounded her, and took away her
vail, yet she still acknowledged Christ (for whose sake she suffered) to be
white and ruddy, Cant. 5.7, 10.
the fairest of ten thousands. Christ sets forth himself and his ways in all
the grace, and goodness, and beauty, and sweetness, and loveliness that
possibly may be; q. d. by these I will allure them that belong unto me.

2. An out-bidding of all the temptations of other Lovers; before Christ come,
souls go a whoring from Christ, their hearts are allured by other lovers; the
world, the flesh, and the Devil come in, and they proffer Souls such and such
contentments; but when Christ comes; he deals with souls in a more Powerful
way, and he out-bids all their former lovers, q. d. Did their lovers proffer
them comfort? I will bid more comfort; Did their lovers proffer gain? I will
bid more gain; Did their lovers proffer honor and respect? I will out-bid them
in that also. And indeed, then has the Gospel a true, and full, and gracious
work upon the heart, when it yields to the proffers of the Gospel, as finding
that all that the World can bid is now out-bidden; you know, when one comes to
offer so much for a commodity, and another out-bids him, he carries it away; so
when the World, and lust, and sin proffer to the soul such and such contents,
then comes Christ and out-bids all, and so the bargain is made up, and Christ
carries the heart away; sinners, it may be as yet you feel none of these
things, but in time you may do, and in the mean time you see here is a word for
it, Behold I will allure her, etc.

3. They object, the Saints themselves feel no such things, for ought appears
to the World; whose spirits are more heavy and sad? as it is said of Christ
himself, that he never laughed, and as David said of himself, Why art thou cast
down O my soul, Psalm. 42.5.
and why art thou disquieted within me? So it may be said of some Christians,
if they are strict, that they are seldom merry, or pleasant. --

But I answer -- 1. Christians that keep indeed close to the rule, are for the
most part serious, and the word may suppose them, as sad.

2. It may be they are not in their element, in the acts of Religion, and
therefore they cannot express their spiritual cheerfulness; a fish cannot
delight it self on the Earth, but when it is in the water; a Bird does not sing
on the ground, but when it is got up into the air; Gods people cannot rejoice
in sin, as drunkards and revellers do; but when their hearts are in Religious
exercises, and in communion with God, they are merry and pleasant.

3. It may be they are in such company as may make them sad: the men of the
World object against Saints, that they are heavy, and sour, and melancholy men;
but in the mean time they consider not that their swearing, revelling, and
dishonouring of God has made them so pensive. Why sinners! your carriage
grieves the very Spirit of God, Genesis 6.6.
You grieve God at the heart, as it is expressed, Genesis 6.6. and therefore no
wonder if the godly cannot rejoice in your sinful society; you are the cause of
their sadness; but admit them once into the company and fellowship of the
Saints, and they know how to be joyful.

4. If it be so, that usually they are pensive and sad, it is not because of
Religion, but because they are not more Religious; because they find so much
want of godliness in their own hearts; Romans 7.24.
this was the cause of Paul's heaviness, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? And yet know, that all these sadnesses are
true preparatives to joy; and therefore in the very next words, the Apostle
breaks out into that sweet Doxology, I thank God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Never was true sorrow for sin, but it ended in rejoycings, and praises,
and thanksgiving to God,

Why then be convinced; Ah deceived souls! say not that God is an hard Master,
reaping where he sowed not, and gathering where he strawed not; say not that
his ways are tedious, and irksome, and uncomfortable ways; but rather taste,
and see, and try how good the Lord is; experience the truth of these words, My
Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light: What is lighter than that Burden,
which instead of burthening Chears up the party on which it is laid? Just like
those burdens of Cinnamon, that refresh those that carry them through the deep
sands of Arabia. An holy Divine once endeavoring to convince men of the
sweetness and pleasantness of Gods ways by his own experiences; I call H^aven
and Earth to Record (says he) that these things are truths of God; they are
not notions, or conceits, but certain realities: Another flies somewhat higher;
If men would in earnest (says he) abandon the Devils service, and give up
their names to Christ in truth; and try, I dare assure them in the Word of Life
and Truth, they would not exchange the saddest hour of all their life
afterward, with the prime and flower of all their former sensual pleasures,
Prove. 3.17.
might they have ten thousand worlds to boot; her ways are ways of pleasure,
says Solomon.

Use 2. Psalm. 1.1, 2. Psalm. 119.1. Psalm. 40.8.
2. You that are so convinced, I beseech you carry on the work of God sweetly,
comfortably, and with delight: the Psalmist says, Blessed is the man that
delights in the Law of the Lord. And Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who
walk cheerfully in the Law of the Lord. And blessed is the man that delights
greatly in his Law. And it is written upon the heart of Christ, I delight to do
thy will O my God, yea they Law is within my heart; as God loves a cheerful
giver, so a cheerful server; Come take my Yoke upon you, says Christ, for my
Yoke is easy; it is not an Iron Yoke of Bondage, but a Chain of heavenly
Pearls to adorn your souls.

Answ.


1. Be sure to keep the heart right and upright within; let all we do be in
sincerity, and let all we are in respect of the inner man be at peace within;
sense and reason can tell us, that according to the tempter within, so there is
the relishing of things without; he that acts in sincerity, and has peace
within, can easily go through the duties that are required without, with joy
and comfort.

2. Exercise says in the work and office of the Holy Ghost; I mean that work
and office to which the Holy Ghost is designed, by the Father, and the Son,
both to help his people, and to be the Comforter of his people. 1. The holy
Ghost is designed to help his people; Likewise the Spirit helps our
infirmities; the word in the Original (...). John 14.26. and 15.26.
does properly imply such an help, Romans 8.26.
as when another man of strength and ability steppeth in, to sustain the
burden that lies upon weak shoulders; why, this makes Christ's Burden light,
we do not bear all the weight, for the holy Ghost puts under his shoulder. 2.
The Holy Ghost is designed to comfort his People. Christ calls him the Spirit,
the Comforter; because he brings in a kind of spiritual joy, and spiritual
comfort. Mark, it is not a natural, but a spiritual joy; Oh what a vast
difference is there betwixt the comforts of a carnal heart, and the comforts of
the godly? The one comes from a little meat, or drink, or creature vanity; but
the other comes from the exercise of Faith, about the office of the Holy Ghost,
who is designed to this work? surely here is the way to carry on duty sweetly,
and comfortably, and with delight (i.e.) to be in the exercise of faith on the
work and office of the Holy Ghost, as he is our Helper and Comforter, 1 Pet.
2.9. 1 Pet. 2.9.


3. Understand what is in Christian Religion, and in the practice of it to
cause delight. As. --

1. In every duty and gracious acting of it, there is more of the Glory of God,
than in the whole frame of Heaven and Earth besides; Herein is my Father
glorified, that you bear much Fruit, John. 15.8. Oh, if we but thus looked at
the profession and practice of Christian Religion, we could not but take
pleasure in it.

2. In every duty and gracious acting of it, there is the seed of glory, and
eternal life; sometimes there breaks out in the very exercise of duty a joy in
the Holy Ghost, a foretast of Glory; but howsoever there is the seed of Glory;
and though the seed of Glory be not seen, but lie as it were under ground dead,
and unseen, yet in time it will spring up unto eternal life: why, thus look at
the practice of Religion, and it will be sweeter to us than Honey and the
Honeycomb, it will be more precious than Gold, yea than much fine Gold.

But how should we know the difference betwixt the natural pleasantness, and
this

1. If it be a spiritual pleasantness, it will be serious; I have said of
laughter it is mad, Answ. Eccles. 2.2.
and of mirth what does it? There is much lightness and vanity in such
breakings out of natural pleasantness, but in spiritual pleasantness all is
grave, and sober, and exceeding serious.

2. If it be a spiritual pleasantness, it can stand with repentance, and
humiliation, and the fear of God, rejoice with trembling, says the Psalmist;
Psalm. 2.11. Psalm. 112.1.
spiritual rejoicing may consist with trembling: And blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments; the fear of God
may consist with these spiritual delights in the Commandments of God.

3. If it be spir^^ual pleasantness, it is our strength; The joy of the Lord is
our strength, says Nehemiah; Nehem. 8.10.
nothing animates souls more in duties than joy does; it carries on the soul
more fully: it is as oil that causes the wheels of Christian practice to go on
more freely: we may be naturally pleasant, and then coming to spiritual duties
our hearts are dead; but if out pleasantness be spiritual, our hearts will be
strengthened in the ways of God.

4. If it be a spiritual pleasantness, it will bear up the heart in want of all
outward pleasantness; Although the Fig Tree shall not Blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the Vines, Heb. 3.17, 18.
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the
Flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls,
yes I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. When all
is dark abroad in the World, the soul in this frame will rejoice in God alone;
on the contrary, the soul that has only a natural pleasantness of Spirit, when
affliction comes, it is all amort, and down; I appeal to you that have the most
delightful spirits, when you have friends, and means, and all you like, you are
jocund and merry; but when affliction comes, how quickly are your spirits down?
surely your pleasantness is not spiritual, for if so, it would bear up your
hearts joyful in affliction.

And now again the Passover, a Feast of the Jews was nigh: John 6.4.
our English Annotations on these words can tell us, that this seems to be So
Aretius, and others.
the third Passover after Christ's baptism. And therefore here I conclude the
third year of Christ's Ministry; there is but one year more before Christ's
death, to which now I come, and to some passages therein, most observable in
reference to our Souls salvation. CHAP. IV.
SECT. I. Of the fourth Year of Christ's Ministry, and generally of his Actings
in that Year.
THis was the last year of Christ's ministry, in which were thousands of
passages: The Evangelist John relates more of Christ this year than in all the
former; and if I studied not brevity, we might dwell more on his actings for us
this year, than hitherto we have done from the beginning of his ministry. Now
it was that he was tranfigured; now it was that he instituted that Sacrament
called the Lords Supper; now it was that after supper he made his farewell
Sermon, rarely mixed of sadness and joys, and studed with mysteries as with
Emeralds; now it was, that after Sermon he blessed his Disciples, and prayed
for them, and then having sung an Hymn, he went out into the Mount of Olives,
where in a Garden he began his sufferings. On these passages I had thought to
have enlarged, but I see the Book swells under my hands, and now that I am
drawing near Christ's sufferings, I shall only touch one point, which hitherto
I have pretermitted, and is the most comprehensive of any passage I can touch.

Many Questions are about the Holiness, or Righteousn^ss, or Obedience of
Christ. As whether it belong to us? And whether it be the matter of our
justification? And whether Christ was bound to observe the law of works as a
Mediator, or only as a mere man? And whether we are not justified by the
passive Righteousness of Christ only? and seeing now we are discovering Christ's
actings in reference to our souls salvation, we cannot pass this main business,
whereof much relates to Christ's life, as well as to his conception, or birth,
or death, or sufferings.

SECT. II. Of the distinctions, or several divisions of Christ's Righteousness.
FOr the better understanding of Christ's Righteousness, we usually
distinguish, that Christ's Righteousness is either that righteousness inherent
in him, or performed by him; the righteousness performed by him, is either his
fulfilling the Commandments, or his satisfying the curse of the Law. The same
distinction is given by others in these terms, Christ's Righteousness is either
his original conformity, or his active and passive obedience unto the Law: his
original conformity, is that gracious inherent disposition in Christ from the
first instant of his conception, whereby he was habitually conformable to the
Law; and this original righteousness answered for our original unrighteousness;
his active obedience is his doing of legal obedience unto the command, and his
passive obedience is his suffering of punishment due unto us for our sins. -- I
shall yet a little further enlarge this distinction of the righteousness of
Christ, and give it in thus; viz. The righteousness of Christ is either
negative (if I may so speak) or positive; by the negative I understand the
absence of all sins and vices, forbidden in the Law; by the positive, I mean
both a presence of all virtues, and duties, required to the perfect fulfilling
of the Law, as also a voluntary suffering of the penalty, to satisfy the
commination and curse of the Law.

1. The negative righteousness is that which we call the innocence of Christ:
we read often in Scriptures that he was both blameless and spotless. 1.
Blameless, free in himself from all imputation of sin; to this purpose Christ
challenged the Jews: Which of you convinces me of sin? John. 8.46.
In all his life he was unblameable and unreproveable; and therefore now
toward the end of his life he asks the people with whom he had conversed,
Which of you convinces me of sin? 1 Pet. 1.19. Heb. 7.26.
Spotless, free from all infection of sin; Peter calls him a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot; and Paul, an high Priest, Holy, Harmless, and
Undefiled; 2 Pet. 2.22.
one who never did evil, nor spoke evil; he did no sin (says the Apostle)
neither was guile found in his mouth; one who never offended so much as in
thought but was absolutely and in all respects (...), Heb. 4.15.
with out all sin.

2. The positive Righteousness of Christ is twofold, his perfect fulfilling of
all things commanded, and his perfect satisfying of the punishment threatened:
The former is the holiness of Christ; this also is twofold, the holiness of his
nature, and the holiness of his life and conversation; the former is that we
call his habitual Righteousness, the latter is that we call his actual
obedience. And thus much of the distinction of the Righteousness of Christ.

SECT. III. Of the Holiness of Christ's Nature.
NOw in the first place, for the holiness of his Nature, the Psalmist tells us,
Thou art fairer than the Children of men, and grace is poured into thy lips.
Psalm. 45.2.
Which is all one with that description of Christ by the Spouse, My beloved is
white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10.
the chiefest of ten thousands. As in the fairest beauty, there is a mixture of
these two colors, white and ruddy, so in Christ there is a gracious mixture,
and compound of all the graces of the Spirit; there is in him a sweet temper of
gentleness, purity, righteousness, meekness, humility; and what not? In him are
hid all the treasures of Wisdom, and Knowledge; Col. 2.3.
and I may add, of all other gifts and graces; not a grace but it was in
Christ, and that in an higher way than in any Saint in the World; and therefore
he is called fairer than all the children of men. Observe, There was more
habitual grace in Christ than ever was, or is, or shall be in all the Elect,
whether Angels or Men. He received the Spirit out of measure; there was in him
as much as possibly could be in a creature, and more than in all other
creatures whatsoever. As the Sun is the Prince of Stars, as the Husband is the
head of the Wife, as a Lion is the King of the Beasts, so is this Sun of
Righteousness, this Head of the Church, this Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the
chiefest of ten thousands; if we look at any thing in Heaven or Earth, that we
observe as eminently fair, by that is the Lord Jesus in respect of his inward
beauty set forth in Scriptures, he is the Sun of Righteousness, the bright
Morning Star, the Light of the World, the Tree of Life, the Lilly and the Rose;
fairer than all the Flowers of the Field, than all the precious Stones of the
Earth, than all the Lights in the Firmament, than all the Saints and Angels in
Heaven.

You will say, What Is all this to us; Certainly much every way; the Apostle
tells you, That the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Jesus Christ, Romans
8.2.
has freed me from the Law of sin and of Death; let us enquire into these
words, the law of the Spirit of life;] the Spirit of life is here put for life,
as else where, After three days and an half, Rev. 11.11.
the Spirit of life coming from God shall enter into them. Now life is that
whereby a thing acts and moves it self, and it is the cause and beginning of
action and motion: and this Spirit of life, or life it self, being here applied
to Christ, it is that in Christ which is the beginning and cause of all his
holy actions; and what was that but his Original holiness, or the holiness of
his humane Nature? But why is the holiness of Christ's nature called the Spirit
of life? I answer, 1. Because it was infused into his manhood by the Spirit of
God, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee -- therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee, Luke 1.35.
shall be called the Son of God. 2. Because it is a most exact, and absolute,
and perfect holiness; the Scripture Phrase setting out things in perfection or
fullness, usually adds the word Spirit unto them; as the spirit of pride, the
Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error; so then the meaning of the Spirit of
life is all one with the most absolute and most perfect purity, and holiness of
the nature of Christ. It is briefly, as if the Apostle had said, the law of the
Spirit of life, or the power of the most absolute and perfect holiness of the
nature of Christ, has freed me from the law of sin and death; has acquitted
me from the power of my sinful nature, and from the power of death due to me in
respect of my sinful and corrupt nature. We might draw from hence this
conclusion, that -- The benefit of Christ's habitual righteousness infused at
his first conception, is imputed to believers to their justification. As the
obedience of his life, and the merit of his death, so the Holiness infused at
his very conception, has its influence into our justification: it is by the
obedience of his life that we are accounted actually holy, and by the purity of
his conception (or habitual grace) that we are accounted personally holy. But I
must not stay here; Thus much of the Holiness of Christ's Nature.

SECT. IV. Of the Holiness of Christ's Life.
Romans 5.19.
2. FOr the holiness of Christ's life, the Apostle tells us, that by the
obedience of one many shall be made righteous; here is the obedience of Christ,
and its influence on us. 1. The obedience of Christ is that whereby he
continued in all things written in the book of the Law to do them: Matthew. 5.17.
John 8.29. Acts 3.14.
Observe, Christ's life was a visible commentary on Gods Law, For proof, Think
not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets (says Christ) but to
fulfill them. And, the Father has not left me alone (says Christ) for I do
always those things that please him. Hence Christ in Scripture is called Holy
and Just, and the Holy One, Acts 2.27. The most Holy, Dan. 9.24. by his actual
holiness Christ fulfilled in act every branch of the Law of God; he walked in
all the Commandments of God; he performed perfectly both in thought, word, and
deed whatsoever the Law of the Lord required. -- I do not, cannot limit this
obedience of Christ to this last year of his Ministry, for his whole life was a
perpetual course of obedience, he was obedient unto death, Phil. 2.8.
says the Apostle (...), even until his death; and yet because we read most of
his holy actings this year, and that this was the year wherein both his active
and passive obedience did most eminently shine, and break forth; the year
wherein he drew up all the dispersions of his precepts, and cast them into
actions, as into sums total; therefore now I handle it, and I shall make it out
by the passages following, only in this one year. As --

1. Now he discovered his charity in feeding the hungry, as at once five
thousand men with five Loaves and two Fishes, John 6.9, 10, 11. John 6.9, 10,
11.
and at another time four thousand men with seven Loaves, and a few small
Fishes, Matthew. 15.32. Matthew. 15.32.


2. Now he discovered his self-denial, and contempt of the World, in flying the
offers of a Kingdom; when the people were convinced that he was the Messiah
from that miracle of feeding five thousand men with five Loaves, presently they
would needs make him a King; but he that left his Fathers Kingdom for us, he
fled from the offers of a Crown and Kingdom from them, John 6.15.
as from an enemy, When Jesus perceived that they would come and take him by
force, to make him a King, he departed again into a Mountain himself alone.

3. Now he discovered his mercy, in healing the Woman's Daughter that had an
unclean spirit; Mar. 7.26, 27.
the Woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by Nation; and in that respect Christ
called her a Dog, and yet Christ gave her the desire of her soul: O the rich
mercy of Christ, that he would admit a Dog to his Kingdom! O grace! O mercy!
that Christ should black his fair hands in washing foul and defiled Dogs! what
a motion of free mercy was this, that Christ should lay his fair, spotless, and
chaste love, upon the black, defiled, and whorish souls? O what a favor, that
Christ makes the Leopard and Ethiopian white for Heaven?

Matthew. 16.19.
4. Now he discovered his bounty, in giving the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
to his Apostles, and to their Successors; this was a power which he had never
communicated before; it was a gift greater than the great Charter of Nature,
and the Donative of the whole Creation. Indeed at first God gave unto man a
dominion over the Fish of the Sea, Genesis 1.26.
and over the Fowl of the Air, and over the Cattle, and over the Earth; but
till now Heaven it self was never subordinate to humane Ministration; herein
was the acting of Christ's bounty, he gives unto his Ministers the Keys of
Heaven, that Whatsoever they shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever they shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

5. Now he discovered his patience, in suffering all injuries; from hence
forward to the death of Jesus, we must reckon his days like the Vigils, or
Eves of his Passion; for now he began, and often did ingeminate those sad
predictions of the usage he should shortly find, Matthew. 16.21.
that he should be rejected of the Elders, and chief Priests, and Scribes, and
suffer many things at Jerusalem, and be killed, and be raised up the third day,
and in the mean time he suffers both in word and deed; they call him a Glutton,
a Drunkard, a Deceiver, a Sinner, a Madman, a Samaritan, and one possed with a
Devil; sometimes they take up stones to stone him, and sometimes they lead him
to an Hill, thinking to throw him down headlong, and all this he suffers with
patience; yea with much patience he possesses his soul.

6. Now he discovered his glory, in being transfigured on the Mount; however
the Person of Christ was usually depressed with poverty, disgrace, ignominy; so
that neither Jews nor Gentiles, nor the Apostles themselves could at first
discern the brightness of his Divinity; yet now Christ gave an excellent
probation of that great Glory, which in due time must be revealed to all the
Saints; For taking with him Peter, James and John, Luke 9.28, 29, 30, 31.
he went up into the Mountain to pray, and while he prayed, he was transfigured
before them, and his face did shine like the Sun, and his garments were white
and glistering, and there appeared talking with him Moses and Elias, speaking
of the decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem; the embassy of Christ's
death was delivered in forms of Glory, that so the excellency of the reward
might be represented together with the sharpness of his sufferings. Now if
ever, whiles he was upon Earth, was the beauty of Christ seen at height, Peter
saw it; and was so ravished at the sight, that he talked he knew not what. In
respect of this glorious beauty, his face is said to shine like the Sun. I
cannot think, but his shine exceeded Sun, and Moon, and Stars; but the Sun is
the brightest thing we know, and therefore it is spoken to our capacity; Here Is
one strain of exaltation, though mostly all Christ's life was a state of
humiliation; it learns us to be content with, yea to expect most humiliation,
little exaltation here; we may have a taste, but no continued comforts till we
come to Heaven.

7. Now he discovered his meekness in riding upon an Ass, and a colt the foal
of an Ass; which was according to the Prophecy, Behold thy King comes unto
thee meek; Math. 21.5.
and especially in rebuking the furious, intemperate zeal of James and John,
who would fain have called for fire from Heaven to have consumed the
Inhabitants of a little Village, who refused to give Christ entertainment. Ah,
says Christ, Luke 9.55.
Ye know not of what spirits ye are of: q. d. you must learn to distinguish the
spirit of Christianity, from the spirit of Elias; why, Christ came with a
purpose to seek and to save men's lives, Ver. 56.
and not to destroy them: it were rashness indeed to slay a man on some light
displeasure, whose redemption cost the effusion of the dearest heart-blood of
the Son of God. See here the meekness of Christ, in opposition to the fury and
anger of his own Disciples.

8. Now he discovered his pity and compassion, in weeping over Jerusalem; Luke
19.41, 42.
And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, if
thou had known, even thou, etc. We read of Joseph, Genesis 43.30. Genesis 45.1.
that there was in him such a brotherly and natural compassion, that his bowels
yearned upon his Brethren, and he could not refrain himself before all them
that stood by him: his love was like an hot Furnace: now Jesus Christ has the
same heart and bowels of a man; and I conceive as Christ was a man void of sin,
so the acts of natural virtues (as to pity the afflicted, to compassionate the
distressed) were stronger in him than possibly they could be in any other man;
sin blunteth natural faculties, especially such as incline to laudable and good
acts, as to love, and pity, and compassionate, the miserable; in this respect
Joseph was nothing to Christ; when Christ saw Jerusalem, he wept, and wept; his
compassion strangled, and enclosed within him, it must needs break out; it may
be in some measure it eased Christ's mind, that his bowels of mercy found a
vent; we read that pity kept within Gods bowels, pains his very heart; so that
it must needs come out, Mine heart is turned within me, Hos. 11.8.
my repentings are kindled together.

9. Now he discovered his humility, in washing his Disciples feet; Supper being
ended, Joh. 13.4, 5.
he laid aside his garments, and took a towel, and girded himself, and poured
water into a basin, and began to wash his Disciples feet, and to wipe them with
the towel wherewith he was girded. In this ceremony, and in the discourses
following he instructs them in the Doctrine of humility; yea, he imprints the
lesson in lasting Characters, by making it symbolical. But why would he wash
their feet, rather than their hands, or heads? I answer, it is probable on this
account, that he might have the opportunity of a more humble posture. See how
he lays every thing aside, that he might serve his servants; Heaven stoops to
Earth, on abiss calls one another, the miseries of man which were next to
infinite, are excelled by a mercy equal to the immensity of God. It is storied
of one Guericus, that upon the consideration of this humility of Christ in
washing his Disciples feet, he cried out, Thou have overcome me, O Lord, thou
have overcome my pride, this example has mastered me.

10. Now he discovered his obedience to his Father, in preaching the Gospel up
and down. He foresaw that the night drew on in which no man could work, and
therefore now he hastened to do his Fathers business, now he pours out whole
Cataracts of holy Lessons; and still the people drew water from this Fountain,
which streamed out in continual emanations; he added wave to wave, and line to
line, and precept to precept; and at last he gave them his farewell Sermon,
which is the most spiritual and comfortable piece that ever was uttered, it
comprehends the intentions of his departure to prepare places for his Saints in
Heaven; and in the mean while he would send them the holy Ghost, to supply his
room, to furnish them with proportionable comforts, to enable them with gifts,
to lead them into all truth, and to abide with them for ever. In conclusion of
all, he gave them his blessing, and prayed for them, and then having sung an
hymn, he goes away and prepares for his sufferings.

Romans 5.19.
2. Hitherto of the obedience of Christ; what was it but a visible commentary of
Gods Law? but now for its influence on us, By the obedience of one, many shall
be made righteous. Observe, The righteousness of the Law fulfilled, and fully
accomplished in the person of Christ, is as truly ours, if we believe in
Christ, as if it were in our selves, or as if the Law had been fulfilled in our
own persons. Romans 10.4.
Thus Christ is the end of the Law (says the Apostle) for righteousness to
every one that believes. Christ has not only determined, and put an end to
the Ceremonial Law, but he is also the end of the moral Law, he has perfectly
in his own person accomplished the Moral Law, and that not for himself, but for
righteousness to every one that truly believes in him. Romans 8.4.
And God sent his Son -- that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in us: These words in us] much trouble Interpreters, for though we believe, yet
are we imperfectly holy, how then should the Law be fulfilled in us? But it is
answered, that the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, not by
inhesion, or sanctification, but by imputation, and application; (i.e.) in our
nature which Christ took upon him; it was in Christ, and is imputed unto us,
and so the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us. It is well observed of
Beza, that the Apostle says not, That the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled by us, or of us, or by any Righteousness inherent in our own persons,
but in us because it is to be found in Christ, whose members we are, who walk
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. The point is sweet, but I cannot
stay on it. In reference to what I have spoken of the righteousness of Christ,
habitual and actual, a great controversy is risen in our days; of which in
the next Section.

SECT. V. Of the great controversy, whether we are not justified by the
passive righteousness of Christ only, without any consideration had to the
righteousness of Christ either inherent in him, or performed by him.
FOr my part I am for the negative, upon these well known grounds.

Romans 10.5.
that the man which does these things shall live by them.

Against this are diverse exceptions of the Adversaries. As, 1. That the Law is
satisfied either by doing that which is commanded, or by sufferring the
punishment which is threatened. Answ. It is true in respect of the penal
Statutes of men, but not in respect of the Commandments of God, in which there
is not only a penalty threatened, but a blessedness promised: if man had
continued in his integrity, the Law might have been satisfied by obedience
only; but being fallen into a state of disobedience, two things are necessarily
required to the fulfilling of the Law, (i.e.) the bearing of the penalty, and
the performing of the Command; the one to escape Hell, and the other to obtain
Heaven. 2. They except that whosoever are freed from Hell, are also admitted to
Heaven. Answ. The reason thereof is because Christ who did bear the punishment
to free us from Hell, did also fulfill the Commands to bring us to Heaven; but
howsoever these two benefits of Christ do always concur in the party
justified, as the causes thereof concurred in Christ, who not only did both
obey and suffer, but in obeying suffered, and in suffering obeyed; yet both the
causes between themselves, and the effects between themselves, are carefully to
be distinguished; for as it is one thing to obey the Commandment, and another
thing to suffer the punishment; so it is one thing to be freed from Hell by
Christ his suffering the penalty, and another thing to be entitled to Heaven,
by Christ his fulfilling the Commandments. 3. They except, that God is a most
free Agent, and therefore he may if he will, justify men by the passive
righteousness of Christ only, without fulfilling of the Law. Answ. What God may
do, if he will, I will not dispute; but sure I am, that he justifies men
according to his will revealed in his Word; and there we find, that as we are
justified from our sins by the Blood of Christ, so also we are made just by the
active (though not only by the active) obedience of Christ; For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous. And if when we were enemies, Romans 5.19.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled
we shall be saved by his life: Romans 5.10.
by his life which he lived before his death, and by his life which he lived,
and does live after his death; by the acts of his life before his death
meritoriously, and by the acts of his life after his death (as by his
resurrection, ascension, session, and intercession) effectually. Christ is made
unto us of God (says the Apostle) both redemption and righteousness:
redemption to deliver us from sin; 1 Cor. 1.30. Dan. 9.24.
and righteousness to bring in everlasting righteousness. 4. They except, that
if we are justified by Christ his fulfilling the Law, then we are justified by
a legal righteousness, but we are not justified by a legal righteousness, but
by such a righteousness as without the Law is revealed in the Gospel. Answ. The
same righteousness by which we are justified, is both legal and evangelical in
diverse respects; legal in respect of Christ, who being made under the Law, that
he might redeem us who were under the Law, perfectly fulfilled the Law for us;
and evangelical in respect of us unto whom his fulfilling of the Law is
imputed. And herein stands both the agreement and difference betwixt the Law
and the Gospel; the agreement, in that both require the perfect fulfilling of
the Law unto justification; the difference, in that the Law requires perfect
obedience to be performed in our own persons; but the Gospel accepts of perfect
obedience perfomed by Christ our surety, and imputed to us; and so it is all
one as if it had been performed in our own persons.

2. If Christ by his conformity to the Law fulfilled the Law for us, then are
we justified by his habitual and actual righteousness, and not merely by his
passive; but Christ by his conformity to the Law, fulfilled the Law for us; for
so we read, He was born for us, Luke 2.11. Luke 2.11.
He was made subject to the Law for us, Gal. 4.4, 5. Gal. 4.4, 5.
and for our sakes he sanctified himself, John 17.19. John 17.19.
and for our sakes he did the Will of God, Then said I, lo I come to do thy
will O God; by the which Will we are sanctified, Heb. 10.7, 10. Heb. 10.7, 10.


Against this are diverse exceptions: As, 1. That Christ obeyed the Law, or
conformed to the Law (as need was) for himself, Christ (say they) as he was a
man, was bound to obey the Law for himself. Answ. This Assertion detracts from
the merit of his obedience, and from the dignity of his Person. 1. From his
merit, for if his obedience were of duty, then it were not Debitum non est
meritum.
meritorious, Luke 17.10. and if this be true, then have we no title to Heaven.
2. From the dignity of his Person, as if he needed either to obey for himself,
or by his obedience were any way bettered in himself. O that these men would
remember that the Person who did obey the Law was, and is, not only man, but
God also; Christ fulfilled the Law not only as man, but as God-man, Mediator;
and therefore as his blood was Gods blood, so his obedience was the obedience
of God, Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God -- And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, Acts 20.28. Phil. 2.6, 8.
or until death. We find him here God-man; and from hence we conclude, that all
the legal actions of Christ from his Incarnation to his Passion inclusively,
were the actions of Christ God-man, Mediator, and Surety for us in a way of
covenant; and consequently they were not performed of duty, nor for himself. 2.
They except, that if Christ obeyed the Law for us, that by his obedience we
might be justified, then shall not we our selves need to obey the Law; but the
Consequent is absurd, therefore the Antecedent. Answ. We need not to obey the
Law to that end, that we may be justified thereby, for this is impossible to us
by reason of the flesh, and therefore our Savior fulfilled it for us; and yet
it follows not but that we may endeavor to obey the Law for other ends; as to
glorify God, to obey his Will, to testify our thankfulness, to edify our
Brethren, to assure our selves of our justification, and so to make our calling
and election sure: in this Study and Practice of Piety consists our new
obedience, which we must therefore be careful to perform, though Christ as to
justification has performed it for us. 3. They except, that if Christ by his
active obedience fulfilled the Law for us, and that so we are justified from
all kind of sin both original and actual, then Christ's suffering was in vain.
Answ. Christ's active obedience is an essential part of our justification, but
not all our justification; the material cause of our justification is the whole
course of the active and passive obedience of Christ, together with his
original righteousness, or habitual conformity unto the Law; I say together
with his original righteousness, because many Authors express no more, but only
Christ's active and passive obedience; but they are to be understood, as
asserting his original righteousness implicitly, the act presupposing the
habit. And here observe the difference betwixt the Law in case of innocence,
and the Law in case of sin; the Law in case of innocence required only doing,
but the Law in case of sin cannot be satisfied without doing and suffering,
Gal. 3.10. Genesis 2.17. Original justice and active obedience was sufficient to
justify man in his innocence, but not to justify man fallen; and therefore we
do not separate these, the original, the actual, and the passive righteousness
of Christ, as to the matter of justification, but we imply all.

viz. the absolving of a believing sinner from the guilt of sin, and death; and
the accepting of a believing sinner as righteous unto life. The former is
wrought by the sufferings of Christ imputed as a full satisfaction for sin, the
other by imputation of Christ's perfect obedience, as a sufficient merit of
eternal life; by the former we are freed from Hell, by the latter we are
entitled to the Kingdom of Heaven, Romans 5.9, 19.
of them both the Apostle speaks, We are justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. and
we are made righteous by his obedience, Romans 5.19. -- Our Adversaries deny
these two parts of justification, saying that it consists wholly in remission
of sin. But we reply in every mutation, though it be but relative, we must of
necessity acknowledge two terms, terminum a quo, and terminum ad quem, the
denomination being commonly taken from the latter: as in justification there is
a motion or mutation from sin to justice, (from which term justification has
its name) from a state of death and damnation, to a state of life and
salvation; but if justification be nothing else but bare remission of sins,
then is there in it only a not imputing of sin, but no acceptance as
righteous; a freedom from Hell, but no title to Heaven. -- They say indeed,
that to whom sin is not imputed, to them righteousness is imputed; and we grant
that these things do always concur; but yet they are not to be confounded,
for they differ in themselves, and in their causes, and in their effects. 1. In
themselves; for it is one thing to be acquitted from the guilt of sin, and
another thing to be made righteous, as we see daily in the pardon of
Malefactors. 2. In their causes, for the remission of sin is to be attributed
to Christ's satisfactory sufferings, and acceptance as righteous unto life to
Christ's meritorious obedience. 3. In their effects, for by remission of sin we
are freed from Hell, and by imputation of Christ's obedience we have right unto
Heaven. I will not deny but that to Christ's habitual and actual righteousness
is sometimes attributed freedom from Sin and Hell, as in Romans 8.2. Romans 8.2.
The Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has made me free from
the Law of Sin and Death; and on the contrary side to Chrst's passive obedience
is sometimes attributed a right unto Heaven, as in Heb. 9.15. Heb. 9.15.
That by means of his death, -- they which are called might receive the promise
of eternal inheritance; but such places as these, are to be understood by a
Synechdoche, which puts only one part of Christ's obedience for the whole
obedience of Christ. But I must recall my self, my design in this work was not
for controversies; I leave that to others; See Downham, Burges, Norton, etc.
for my part I am sure I have before me a more edifying work, which is to take a
view of this Jesus, not only for intellection, but for devotion, and for the
stirring up of our affections.

Thus far I have held forth Jesus in his life, or during the time of his
Ministry, till the last Passover, John 13.1.
and now was it that Jesus knew his hour was come, and that he should depart
out of this World unto the Father; but of that hereafter; our next business is
to direct you in the Art or Mystery, how we are to look unto Jesus in respect
of his Life. CHAP. V.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our Salvation in
his Life.
FRom the Object considered, that we may pass to the Act. --

1. Let us know Jesus, carrying on the great work of our salvation during his
life. We have many Books of the lives of men, of the lives of heathens, of the
lives of Christians, and by this we come to know the Generations of old; Oh but
above all, read over the Life of Jesus, for that is worth thy knowing. To this
purpose we have four Evangelists, who in Blessed harmony set forth his life;
and to this purpose we have the Book of the generation of Jesus Christ. Now
these should be read over and over; Mat. 1.1. Hos. 6.3.
Then shall we know (says the Prophet) if we follow on to know the Lord. Ah my
soul! that which thou know of Christ already, it is but the least part of
what thou art ignorant of; We know but in part, says Paul of himself and
others; the highest knowledge, 1 Cor 13 9.
which the most illuminate Saints have of Jesus Christ, is but defective and
imperfect. Come then, and follow on to know the Lord: still inquire after him;
imitate the Angels who ever desire to stoop down, and to pry into the actings
of Christ for us men, 1 Pet. 1.12.
and for our Salvation; it is their study, yea it is their delight and
recreation; Paul seemed to imitate them, when he said, I determine not to know
any thing among you, but Jesus Christ: 1 Cor. 2.2.
if there be any thing in the world worth the knowing, this it is. And for thy
better knowledge that it may not be confused, but distinct; 1. Study over those
passages in the first year of Christ's ministry; as the preaching of John, the
Baptism of Christ, his fasting and temptation in the Wilderness, his first
manifestation by his several Witness^s, his whipping of the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple. 2. Study over those passages in the second year of Christ's
Ministry; as those several Sermons that he Preached; and because his Miracles
were as signals of his Sermons, study the several Miracles that he wrought:
thou have but a few Instances in comparison of all his Miracles, and yet how
fruit-are they of spiritual instructions? 3. Study over those passages in the
third year of Christ's Ministry: as his commissionating his Apostles to call
sinners in, his readiness to receive them that would but come in; and his
sweetning the ways of Christianity to them that are come in; For his yoke is
easy, and his burden is light. 4. Study over those passages in the last year
of his Ministry; as the holiness of his nature, and the holiness of his Life,
which appeared especially in the exercises of his Graces, of Charity, and
self-denial, and mercy, and bounty, and meekness, and pity, and humility, and
obedience. O what rare matter is here for a Christians study! Some have took
such pains in the study of these things, that they have writ large volumes; men
have been writing and preaching a thousand six hundredth years of the Life of
Christ, and they are writing, and preaching still; O my soul! if thou do not
write, yet study what is written; come with fixed thoughts, and beat thy brains
on that blessed subject, that will make thee wise unto Salvation; Paul
accounted all things but dung, or dogs meat, Phil. 3.8.
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord; if thou did
truly understand the excellency of this knowledge, thou could not but account
all things loss in comparison of this one necessary thing.

SECT. II. Of Considering Jesus in that Respect.
2. LEt us consider Jesus carrying on the great work of our Salvation during
his Life. It is not enough to study and know, but we must muse and meditate,
and consider of it, till we bring it to some profitable issue. By meditating on
Christ we may feel or find a kind of insensible change, we know not how; as
those that stand in the sun for other purposes, they find themselves lightened
and heated; so in holy meditation our souls may be altered and changed in a
secret insencible way; there is a virtue goes along with a serious meditation;
a changing, transforming virtue; and therefore look further, O my soul, have
strong apprehensions of all those several passages of the Life of Christ.

1. Consider the Preaching of John Baptist, we talk of strictness, but show me
among all the Ministers or Saints of this Age, such a pattern of sanctity and
singular austerity; the sum of his sermons was repentance, and dereliction of
Sin, and brings forth fruits worthy of amendment of life. In the promoting of
which Doctrine, he was a severe reprehender of the Pharisees, and Saduces, and
Publicans, and Soldiers, and indeed of all men, but especially of those that
remained in their impenitency; for against them he denounced judgment, and fire
unquenchable; Oh, he had an excellent zeal, and a vehement Spirit in Preaching;
and the Commentary upon all his Sermons was his own life; he was clothed in
Camels hair, his meat was locusts and wild honey; he contemned the world,
resisted temptations, despised to assume false honors to himself, and in all
passages was a rare example of self-denial, and mortification; and by this
means he made an excellent, and apt preparation for the Lord's coming. O my
Soul, that thou would but sit a while under this Preacher; or that thou
would but ruminate, and chew the cud; think over his Sermons of repentance,
and righteousness, and temperance, and of the judgment to come; Acts. 24.25.
and see what influence they have; when Paul preached such a Sermon to Felix,
it is said that he trembled; a Sermon of the chaffs burning with unquenchable
fire, is enough to make thy heart tremble, if Powerfully delivered, and
affectionately received; but see, what effect does it work on thy heart and
life? do thou feel in thee a Spirit of mortification? do thou with the
Baptist die to the world? do thou deny thy will of all its natural sinful
desires; do thou abstain from pleasures, and sensual complacencies, that the
Flesh being subdued to the Spirit, both may join in the service of God? do
thou kill the lusts of the flesh, by taking away the fuel and incentives of
Lusts? this is the work of meditation; it first employes the understanding in
consideration of things, and then the will in the reception of things; and both
these in order to Grace and a pious conversation: that meditation which
determines in notions, or speculations of knowledge, is like the winter Sun that
shines, but warms not: O my Soul, consider: and so long consider on the
preaching of this prodromus, or forerunner of Christ, till thou feel this
consideration to have some warmth in thy heart, and influence on thy life in
order to holiness, self-denial, and mortification.

2. Consider of the Baptism of Christ; he that never sinned was made sin for
us, and so it was proper enough for Christ to take upon him the Sacrament of
sinners, or of repentance for sin; but especially he was baptized, that in the
symbol he might purify our nature, whose stains and guilt he had undertaken.
Consider of this, O my soul, and bring it home to thy self, surely every soul
that lives the life of Grace, is born of water, and the Spirit: and to this
purpose Christ, who is our life, went down into the waters of Baptism, that we
who descend after him might find the effects of it; as pardon of Sin; adoption
into the Covenant of Grace, and holiness of life. Had not Christ been Baptized,
what virtue had there been in our Baptism? As it became him to fulfill all
righteousness, Matthew. 3.15.
and therefore he must needs be baptized; so he fulfilled it not for himself,
but for us; Christ's obedience in fulfilling the Law, is imputed to all that
believe unto righteousness, as if themselves had fulfilled; so that he was
Baptized for us, and the virtue of his Baptism is derived unto us; O the sweet
of this meditation! Christ was Baptized; and when Baptized, the Heavens were
opened, and the Holy Ghost descended, and a voice from Heaven proclaimed him to
be the Son of God, and one in whom the Father was well pleased; and the same
ointment that was cast upon the head of our High Priest, went unto his beard,
and thence fell to the borders of his garment; for as Christ our Head felt
those effects in manifestation, so through Christ do we believe the like
effects in our very Baptism; the Heavens then (as it were) opened unto us, and
the holy Ghost then descended upon us, and then were we consigned to the
inheritance of Sons, in whom the Father through his Son is also well pleased. O
my soul! what a blessing is there in the Baptism of Christ? and how may thou
suck and be satisfied, if thou will put thy meditation to the right use? the
Baptism of Christ is as a field of flowers, wherein is a world of privileges,
as justification, adoption, regeneration, sanctification, glorification; O then
fix thy soul at least on some of these flowers, and leave them not without
carrying some honey away with thee; if thou art in Christ thou art Baptized
into his death, and Baptized into his Baptism; thou partakest of the fruit and
efficacy both of his death and life, and baptism, and all.

3 Consider the fasting and temptation of Christ in the Wilderness. Now we see
what manner of adversary we have, how he fights, how he is resisted, how
overcome; in one assault Satan moves Christ to doubt of his Fathers
providence; in another to presume on his Fathers protection, and when neither
diffidence nor presumption can fasten upon Christ, he shall be tried with
honor: and thus he deals with us; if he cannot drive us down to despair, he
labors to lift us up to presumption, and if neither of these prevail, then he
brings out pleasures, profits, honors, temptations on the right hand, which
are indeed most dangerous: O my soul, whilst thou art in this warfare, here is
thy condition; temptations, like waves, break one in the neck of another; if
the devil was so busy with Christ, how should thou hope to be free? how
may thou account, that the repulse of one temptation will but invite to
another? well, but here is thy comfort, thou have such a Savior as was in all
things tempted in like sort, yet without sin; Heb. 4.15, 16.
how boldly therefore may thou go to the Throne of Grace to receive mercy,
and to find grace of help in time of need? Christ was tempted, that he might
succor them that are tempted, never art thou tempted O my soul, but Christ is
with thee in the temptation; he has sent his Spirit into thy heart to make
intercession for thee there, and he himself is in Heaven, making intercession,
and praying for thee there; yea his own experience of temptations has so
wrought it in his heart, that his love and mercy is most of all at work when
thou art tempted most. As dear parents are ever tender of their Children, but
then especially when they are sick, and weak, and out of frame; so though
Christ be always tender of his People, yet then especially when their souls
are sick, and under a temptation; O then his bowels yearn over them indeed.

4 Consider Christ's first manifestations by his several Witnesses; we have
heard of his Witnesses from Heaven, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and of his
Witnesses on Earth, the Baptist, his Disciples, and the works that he did in
his Fathers Name? and all these Witnesses being lively held forth in the
preaching of the Gospel, they are Witnesses to us; even to this day is Christ
manifested to us, yea and if we are Christ's, even to this day is Christ
manifested within us. O my soul, consider this above all the rest! O it is this
manifestation within, that concerns thee most, because ye are Sons, Gal. 4.6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts; if Christ be not
manifested in thy heart by his blessed Spirit, thou art no Son of God; and
therefore the Apostles puts thee seriously on this trial, Examine yourselves
whether ye be in the Faith, prove your selves, know ye not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ in you, 2 Cor. 13.5.
except ye be reprobates? Is Christ manifested in thee? surely this is more
than Christ manifested to thee; the bare history is the manifestation of Christ
unto thee, but there is a mystery in the inward manifestation. The Apostle
speaking of the Saints, he adds, Col. 1.27.
To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery
among the Gentiles, which is, Christ in you the hope of glory. O the Riches of
the Glory of this mystery! consider it, Oh my soul; God might have shut thee up
in blindness with the world, or he might only have given thee parts and gifts;
or at most he might have enlightened thy reason, to have taken in the outward
notions of the Gospel; but has he revealed Christ in thee? has he let thee
see into the wonders of his Glory; has he given thee the light of his Glory
within? Oh this argues the witness of Christ's Spirit! this only the
experimental Christian feels: Chrysostom sometimes speaking of the more hidden,
and choice principles of Christianity, he uses this phrase, Sciunt initiati
quid dico, those that are initiated or admitted into our mysteries, know what I
mean: so may the Ministers of Christ Preaching of these inward Manifestations,
say, Sciunt initiaty, etc. it is only the Spiritual man can know these things,
for they are spiritually discerned. O my soul, meditate on this until thou
feel Gods Spirit working in thy Spirit these inward Gracious, Glorious
manifestations. It is Christ in thee is the hope of Glory.

5. Consider Christ's whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.
Sometimes O my soul, thou art in secret; and sometimes thou art in the
Assemblies of Gods people; and if thou art in duty, wheresoever thou art,
consider the especial presence of Christ; and what is that but the presence of
his Spirit, and the presence of his Angels? 1. The presence of his Spirit; this
we know by his working in us, certainly the Spirit does not only hover over us,
but works in us: How in us? I answer by his quickening, feeding, cherishing,
healing, mollifying, melting, comforting. In this manner he works in us when we
are in Ordinances. Why now is he (I hope) riding with triumph in the midst of
the Assembly, now is he in his Chariot, in his Throne, in the hearts of his
people, and therefore away, away with all buyers and sellers, out of that
Temple of the holy Ghost. -- 2. The Presence of Christ is the presence of his
Angels; as a King is where his Court is, so is Christ the King of Kings
especially present where his blessed Angels pitch their Tents. And the presence
of Angels is worthy (O my soul) of thy consideration. Certainly they are
ministering Spirits, that have a work to do upon thy inward man; I grant the
Spirit of Christ can only enlighten the understanding, and determine the will
effectually; it is he only can bend, and turn, and form the mind which way
soever he pleases; but the Angels can speak also to thy spiritual parts, and
though the spirit only determine, yet their speaking carries a Power with it.

By way of digression, it is a fine skill to know how the Angels can speak to
us, and how we may know when they speak; and how we may discern what is spoken
by the immediate inspiration of the spirit, and what by the mediation of the
Angels.

1. How do the Angels speak to us? We must conceive if we understand this,
first that the Images, or phantasms of things received by the outward senses,
are kept, and preserved by the inward senses, as the species of sounds, of
shapes, or whatsoever else. 2. That the images phantasms so kept, may be so
moved by our spirits, or humors, or some extrinsecal things, as that they may
move the fancy, and provoke it to represent, and conceive such things as
neither appear, nor are at that time perceived by any outward sense at all.
This appears, 1. In our ordinary course, as we can sit in the dark, where we
hear and see nothing, and yet there we can multiply a fancy in infinitum, by an
act of our own Will. 2. This appears in our dreams, when though we hear or see
nothing, yet the humor can stir up the memory of things, and provoke our
fancies to the apprehension of this or that. 3. This appears also in sickness,
which altering the body, and the humors, and so troubling the fancy, it begets
strange fancies, and makes dreadful and fearful representations unto us: now
this we must know, that whatsoever an inferior Power can do, that a superior
Power can do much more; whatsoever an act of our own Will, or natural Dreams,
or preternatural sickness can do, that the Angels can do most orderly, and
efficaciously; they know exactly how the Spirits and humors must be moved, that
the images or phantasms may be applied to such and such conceptions or
apprehensions, most accommodate and fitted for the knowledge of what truth they
would suggest. So that to me here is the difference between the converse of Men
and Angels; Men can speak to our understandings by the mediation of our
external senses, but Angels go a nearer way to work, and speak to the internals
first of all: they do no more but come into the memory (the treasurer of all
our phantasms and imaginations) and there make such and such compositions even
as they please, and then the understanding takes them off, and reads what is
written, without more ado.

2. How may we know when the Angels speak to us? I confess it is an hard
question, and easily it cannot be solved; only some conjecture we may have; as
in a case of evil; thou art in a way of sin, and near to fall into it, it may
be on a sudden thou hear within thee some contrary whisperings, which also
are above the whisperings of a natural conscience, common to the wicked; or in
case of good, it may be on a sudden thou hear within thee some independent,
supernatural persuasions, and reasonings to this or that good, or to this or
that object, which may more easily lead thee to choose the good: in these cases
thou may conjecturally think, that these whisperings or motions are of the
Angels of God. Bodin tells a story of one who desired of God a guidance, and
assistance of an Angel; and accordingly he had sencible manifestations of a
Spirit that assisted him, and followed him till his death; if in company he
spoke any unwary words, he was sure to be advertised, and reproved for it by a
dream in the night; or if he read any Book that was not good, the Angel would
strike upon the book, to cause him to leave it.

3. But how should we discern what is spoken by the immediate inspiration of
the spirit, and what by the mediation of the Angels? here indeed we are at a
stand; and therefore my best resolution is that of Calvin, That in such secrets
we should keep one rule of modesty and sobriety; and that we should neither
speak, nor think, nor yet desire to know any other thing than such as has been
taught us by Gods Word. I know not any great use there may be of this Question,
and therefore I shall not amuse my self in giving any account of it; only these
remain as sure truths. 1. That the things communicated to our inward man, (I
mean those inward motions, and suggestions to holiness and obedience) are
frequently and usually by the administration of Angels. 2. That the same things
communicated to our inward man, are ever originally and primarily from the
Spirit of Christ; and hence it is that commonly we put them all on that score,
we give them all to Christ's Spirit. 3. That it is proper to the spirit to
enlighten the, understanding and to determine the will effectually; the Angels
are but Cisterns, the spirit is the fountain; the Angels may speak and move us
to our duties, but the blessing, the efficacy is of the Spirit, and in this
respect we leave to Christ and his Spirit the all in all. Well then, O my soul,
consider (especially in Church assemblies, and in the enjoyment of Ordinances)
the especial presence of Christ, in the presence of his spirit, and in the
presence of his Angels: What? do thou feel any stirrings, actings, movings in
thy spirit? do thou feel any quickening, warming, feeding, cherishing,
healing, Genesis 28.16, 17
mollifying, melting, comforting, strengthening in thy inward parts? say then,
Surely the Lord is in this place, -- this is none other but the House of God,
this is the gate of Heaven. O here is the Spirit, and here are the Angels
ascending, and descending; and therefore avoid Satan! avoid all profane
thoughts, and earthly-mindedness! avoid dullness, deadness, drousiness! avoid
looseness, lasciviousness, and all irreverence, 1 Cor. 11.10.
because of the Angels; and because of the Spirit; and because of the especial
presence of Christ which encauses them both.

6. Consider the the Preaching of Christ. O the admirable Sermons of this great
Prophet! the Spouse tells us, His Lips like Lillies dropped sweet smelling
Myrrh, his Doctrine was sweet as the Lillies, and sound as the Myrrh; His Lips
were like Lillies, Cant. 5.13.
as certain odoriserous Lillies, that cast forth a sweet smelling savor; they
were full of Heavenly Grace and sweetness; Grace, says the Psalmist, was
poured into his lips, Psalm. 45.2.
and they dropped sweet smelling Myrrh; the nature of this Herb is to keep from
putrefaction, as it is sound it self, so it makes other things sound. Error is
of a putrefying nature, corrupting, and defiling the soul; but the Doctrine of
Christ keeps the soul sound; it is the souls preservative, it keeps the soul
free from all corruption and defilement. See here the prophetical office of
Christ held forth in similitudes, his lips were ever dropping, distilling,
publishing sweet and sound truths. -- Read and peruse those Sermons he has
left on record; yea ruminate and meditate on them, in order to piety and an
holy life: How sweet was the first Sermon of Christ? Repent, Matthew. 4.17. John
3.3.
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; And how Spiritual was that Sermon of
Christ? Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; It may be
thou art a Doctor, a Master of Israel, thou art a learned Scholar, thou art a
man of parts and abilities in other things; it may be thou have read so long in
the Bible, thou have heard so many, and so many Sermons, etc. but ah! miserable
soul, it may be all the work is to do still within; Come, say this Sermon of
Christ to thine own soul; Unless I be born again, I cannot enter into Heaven;
born again? O Lord what is that? was ever such a thing done upon me? was ever I
cast into the pangs of a new birth? and continued I in those pangs until
Christ Jesus was formed in me? are old things done away, and are all things now
become new? is the old man, the old lusts, the old conversation quite abandoned
and left? are my principles new? my aims and ends new? my life and conversation
new? Thus might I paraphrase on all the Sermons: but I intend brevity; only
consider O my soul; as if this Sermon, and all the rest had been preached to
thee: Reallize Christ standing by thee, Heb. 12.25.
and opening his mouth, and teaching thee, thus and thus; surely there is a
speaking of Christ from Heaven; See that ye refuse not him (says the Apostle)
that speaks from Heaven. And besides, he has his Ministers here on earth,
and they are daily Preaching over these Sermons of Christ, again, and again;
they Preach such things as were first spoken by the Lord himself, Heb. 2.3. 2
Cor. 5.20. 1 Timothy 4.15.
they beseech, and pray thee in Christ's stead. O then, meditate on these
things, and give thy self wholly to them, that thy profitting may appear to all.

7. Consider the miracles of Christ in pursuance of the Doctrine delivered in
his blessed Sermons. Here Is a world of matter to run over; such miracles are
done by Christ as never man did before. Moses indeed smote the Rock, and the
waters gushed out, but he could not turn Water into Wine; Elisha raised a Child
that was dead, to life, but Jesus raised one who had been dead four days, yea
who was buried and corrupted; Elias and Samuel, and all the Prophets, and the
succession of the high Priests in both the Temples, put all together, never did
so many, and so great miracles as Jesus did: he turned water into Wine; he
healed the Noble-mans Son even at the point of death; he cured the Leaprous by
his touch; he made the lame man to walk; and the crooked limbs to become
straight; he made habitual diseases, and inveterate, of eighteen years
continuance (and once of thirty eight years) to disappear at his speaking, even
as darkness at the brightness of the Sun; John. 9.23.
he fed thousands of People with two small fishes, and five loaves; he cast out
Devils, and commanded them whithersoever he pleased; he restored sight to the
blind; in a word, he did such miracles as no man else ever did; and the poor
blind man proved it by instance of himself. It was never heard that any man
opened the Eyes of one that was born blind. O my Soul, consider of these
miracles, and believe that Doctrine which was ratified with Arguments from
above! how should thou but assent to all those mysterious truths which were
so strongly confirmed by an Almighty hand? -- What? do thou think a
meditation needless in this respect? art thou fully satisfied of the truth of
Scriptures? It is well? I hope thou art; and yet who knows how soon thou may
be put to it by an enemy, or a strong temptation? One can tell us in print,
Some are now talking of a tolleration of all Religions; and some desire that
the Jews may have a free commerce amongst us: it is good therefore to be well
armed at this point; and the best Argument to prove the verity of the Gospel,
next to the inward testimony of the Spirit, is this demonstration, or common
place of the miracles of Christ.

Luke 6.13. Mat. 28.19.
8. Consider Christ's ordination of his Apostles. He chose twelve, whom he Named
Apostles: and what was the office of these Apostles, but to Go and teach all
Nations? The Gospel was first Preached in Jewry, but afterward the sound of it
came unto us. Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, Mich. 4.2.
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Gildas affirms plainly, That Britain
received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius, under whom Christ suffered: and
that Joseph of Arimathea, after the dispersion of the Jews, was sent of Philip
the Apostle from France to Britain, and here remained in this Land all his
time. Niceph. l. 2. c. 40.
Nicephoras adds, That Simon Zelotes did spread the Gospel Christ to the West
Ocean, and brought the same into the Isles of Britain. Howsoever it was
brought hither, of this we are sure; that Christ was first discovered to his
Apostles, and from the Apostles was discovered to our Forefathers, and from
them unto us, and from us will be the discovery to others to the end of the
world. O the goodness of God in Christ! What? That repentance and remission of
Sins, should be preached in his Name, beginning at Jerusalem; Luke 24.47.
and afterward among all Nations? Of what near concernment, O my soul, is this
to thee? What art thou but a sinner of the Gentiles? Understand that term! When
the Apostle would express the greatest sinners that the World had, he calls
them Sinners of the Gentiles; Gal. 2.15.
Why? the Gentiles knew not God, the Gentiles were unacquainted with Christ,
the Gentiles walked in nothing but sin; O then what a love is this, that God
should ever have thought of good will toward thee? surely this is one of the
great mysteries of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifested in the flesh, Justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles: What? that sinners, and the worst of sinners, should be made
the subjects of the utmost discovery of Christ, and the Gospel of Christ? this
is a mystery indeed; had Christ sent his Apostles to proclaim the riches of his
Grace to some Jews only, or to some unspotted souls among the Gentiles (if any
such were) whose hearts might presently have fallen down before it, this had
been something suitable; but, that sinners of the Gentiles, that Children of
wrath should be the subject of this great design. O the Mystery! q. d. Go my
Apostles into all the Nations of the world; and amongst them all, go into
Britain, into that corner of the world England, and there open the mystery of
Christ, there preach life, and reconciliation, and redemption, and
Glorification to those poor Souls; lay you (or at least some of you) the
foundation of the Christian Fath amongst those heathens, those sinners of the
Gentiles; and after you, I will raise up some other Ministers of the Gospel to
confirm the same: Yea in the last times I will raise up many Worthyes, as Juel,
Usher, Downham, Perkins, Hooker, Rogers, Shepherd, Bolton, Ash, Whittaker,
etc. who shall be as bright Stars in the Firmament of that Church; and after
them I will raise up others to discover this great design to their generations,
amongst whom shall live such and such men, such and such women (and herein O my
soul think of thy self, and if thou will of thine own family and relations) for
I owe a good will toward England, it shall be said of England, as sometimes of
Zion, Psalm. 50.2.
out of England the perfection of beauty, has God shined. O my Soul! how
should thou be ravished in this one meditation? what? that Christ should
cause the Sun of his Gospel to come into this Zodiac, and that now in these
latter times (when the Sun is set in Zion, where it first arose) it should make
a Noon with us, and shine more brightly here (for ought I know, or c^n yet
learn) than in any other Nation, Country, Kingdom, throughout all the World?
Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and council of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

9. Consider Christ's reception of sinners. He sent forth his Apostles to call
them in, and if they would but come, how ready was he to receive them? John
6.38, 39.
This was Christ's errand from Heaven, this was the work he came to do; I came
down from Heaven, not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me;
and this is the Fathers Will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me I should lose nothing. He must receive all his Father gives him, but
he must lose none; John 17.22.
Christ must give an account to God the Father of all which he has given him,
and this will be his account; Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none
of them is lost. Ah poor Soul! why should thou despair because of sin? look
on Christ as spreading out both his arms to receive thee to him; look on the
Gracious Nature and Disposition that is in Christ; look on the Office of
Christ, it is an office of saving, and showing mercy, that Christ has
undertaken; Luke 19.10.
it is an Office to receive sinners; yea to seek, and to save that which was
lost; to bring home straying souls to God; to be the great peacemaker between
God and man; to reconcile God to man; and man to God, and so to be the Head,
and Husband of his people, Certainly the Devil strangely wrongeth many a poor
troubled Soul, that he can bring them to have hard thoughts, and suspicious
thoughts of Jesus Christ, how can they more contradict the Office of Christ?
how can they more contradict the Gospel-description of Christ, than to think
him a destroyer of his Creatures; one that watches for their haltings, and one
that has more mind to hurt, than help them? Away, away with all prejudicate
opinions! resolve O my soul to throw thy self on him for life and for
Salvation; why, if thou will but come, he has promised freely to make thee
welcome; all the day long he stretches out his arms, and would fain gather
thee, and all others into his sweet embraces.

10. Consider the easiness of his yoke, and the lightness of his burden. Psalm
40.8. 1 John 5.3. Psalm. 34.8.
Many a one is willing to take Jesus as their Savior, but they are unwilling
to take him on his own sweet terms; O they imagine it an hard task, and an
heavy burden, Who may endure it? it was otherwise with Christ, I do delight to
do thy will O my God; and it is otherwise with Christians, for his Commandments
are not grievous, says John; Act. and Mon. fol. 1361.
and therefore David calls on others to try this truth, Oh taste, and see how
good the Lord is. It is said of Master Sanders, that a little before his death
and martrydome he told his Wife, that he had no riches to leave her, but that
treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is to hungry Consciences; And of that
(said he) as I feel some part, and I would feel more, so I bequeath it unto
thee, and to the rest of my beloved in Christ. O my soul if thou can but
taste, Psalm. 119.10.3.
thou will find a world of sweetness in Christ's ways; there is sweetness in
the Word, How sweet are thy Words to my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my
mouth? There is sweetness in prayer, Romans 10.12.
have thou not known the time that thou have touched the hem of Christ's
garment, and tasted of the joys of Heaven in prayer? have thou not seen heaven
cleft, and Christ sitting at Gods right Hand? surely the Lord is Rich to all
them that call upon him. There is sweetness in meditation, some call this very
duty, The Saints pastime, which recreates and perfumes the tired Spirits: Now O
my soul thou art in the exercise of this duty, now thou art in the meditation
of the easiness of Christ's burden, Psalm. 119.99.
and of the sweetness of his ways, tell me, is there nothing of Heaven in this
meditation? is it sweet? or is it bitter to thy Soul? thou may read in
Scripture of many admirable effects of meditation, as that it confirms our
knowledge; I have more understanding than all my teachers, Psalm. 119.99. Ver.
97. Ver. 15.
for thy Testimonies are my Meditations: that it inflames our love, Oh how love
I thy Law? it is my Meditation all the day; that it casts a sweet influence on
our lives, I will Meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways;
What? is it thus with thee? Psalm. 104.34. Psalm. 94.19.
can thou say with David, My Meditation of him shall be sweet? And in the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy Comforts exceedingly delight my soul?
Why then thou have truly, tasted of God's goodness, thou have actual
discoveries of the sweetness of Gods ways; thou have experienced this truth,
that his yoke is easy, and his burden is light; Matthew. 11.3. Psalm. 119.99.
that his ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are peace. Oh if
men did but know what ravishing sweetness were in the ways of God, they could
not but embrace them, and esteem one days society with Jesus Christ (as
Caracciolus did) better than all the gold in the world

11. Consider the holiness of Christ's Nature, and the holiness of Christ's
Life. 1. For the holiness of his Nature; if thou could but clearly see it,
what work would it make in thy Breast? Christ's inward beauty would ravish Love
out of the Devils, if they had but Grace to see his beauty; yea, he would lead
captive all hearts in Hell, if they had but eyes to behold his loveliness. O
what a Flower? what a Rose of love and light is the Lord Jesus Christ? Cant.
5.10.
My Beloved is white and ruddy, said the Spouse, the chiefest of ten thousands.
Summon before Christ, fair Angels, glorified Spirits, the azure Heavens, the
lightsome Stars, all the delicious Flowers, Gardens, Meadows, Forests, Seas,
Mountains, Birds, Beasts, yea and all the Sons of Men, as they should have been
in the world of Innocence, and let them all stand in their highest excellency
before Jesus Christ, and what are they? Rev. 22.4.
the Saints in Glory now see the face of Christ; (i.e.) they see all the
dignity, beauty, that is in Christ; and they are so taken, with his sight, that
they do nothing else but stare, and gaze, and behold his Face for Ages, and yet
they are never satisfied with beholding; suppose they could wear out their eyes
at the eye holes in beholding Christ, they should still desire to see more. O
this loveliness of Christ ravishes the souls of the glorified; how is it, O my
soul, that thou art not taken with this meditation? But, 2. Go from the
holiness of his Nature, to the holiness of his Life, it may be that will make
deep impressions on thy spirit; consider his charity, his self-denial, his
contempt of the world, his mercy, his bounty, his meekness, his pity, his
humility, his obedience to his Father. A fruitful meditation on these
Particulars cannot, cannot but cause some resemblance within, and make thee
like Christ. O the wonder that any should disclaim the active obedience of
Christ, as to his own Justification! Away, away with these cavils, and consider
the obedience of Christ in relation to thy self. God sent forth his Son made of
a woman made under the Law, Gal. 4.4.
to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons. It is a sweet note of Doctor Andrews, Christ made under the Law, (i.e.)
under the whole Law; the one half of the Law (which is the directive part) he
was made under that, and satisfied it by the innocence of his Life, without
breaking one jot or title of the Law, and so he answers that part, as it might
be the principal; the other half of the Law (which is the penalty) he was under
that also, and satisfied it by suffering a wrongful death, no way deserved or
due by him, and so he answered that part as it might be the forfeiture. But if
we come now to ask for whom is all this? it is only for us, that we might be
redeemed und adopted; redeemed from all evil, and adopted or interested into
all good. If this be so, O who would for a world of Gold lose the influence,
and the benefit of Christ's active obedience? consider of this, O my soul! till
thou feel some virtue to come out of Christ's life into thy self.

SECT. III. Of desiring after Jesus in that respect.
3. LEt us desire after Jesus carrying on the work of our salvation in his
Life: It is not enough to know and consider, but we must desire; our meditation
of Christ, should draw forth our affections to Christ; and amongst all
affections, I place this first of all, a desire after Christ.

But what is it in Christ's Life that is so desirable? I answer, every passage
or particular named; yea, every thing of Christ is desirable (named or
un-named) all that concerns Christ in any kind whatsoever (if to the former
particulars, I should add a thousand and a thousand more) it is very precious,
and excellent, and necessary, and profitable, and comfortable, and therefore
desirable: but to put them in order:

1. The meanest things of Christ are desirable things; the very filings of
Gold, the dust or sparkles of precious Stones are of real price and value, yea,
of much worth; yea, the very Leaves of the Tree of Life are healing: the very
Hem of Christ's garment, but even touched, sends forth its virtue: the meanest
and worst things of Christ are incomparably to be desired above all things; the
dust of Zion, the very ground that Christ's feet treads on, any thing that
has the poorest relation to Jesus Christ, it is desirable for him. Hence we
read that one poor woman sought no more of him but to wash Christ's feet, and
to kiss them; another woman breaths out these desires after Christ, If I may
but touch the hem of his garment, I shall be whole. Mat. 9.21.
Mary Magdalen sought only to have her Arms filled with his dead body: Joseph
of Arimathea was of the same mind: O the bloody winding sheet, together with
the dead and torn Body of Christ in his arms are most precious and sweet.
Christ's Clay is Silver, and his Brass Gold: John the Baptist thinks it an
honor to unloose the Latchets of his shoes: David, John 1.27.
though he was a great Prophet, and appointed to be King over Israel, yet his
soul pants thus, O that I might be so near the Lord, as to be a doorkeeper in
the house of my God. Yea, Psalm. 84.10. Ver. 3.
he puts an happiness on the Sparrow and the Swallow, that may build their Nest
besides the Lords Altar.

2. The more considerable actions of Christ are especially desirable. Oh my
soul, would thou but run through his Life, and consider some of his more
eminent actions, in relation to his Friends, or in relation to his Enemies,
what desires would these kindle in thine heart after Christ? 1. To his Friends,
he was sweet and indulgent; where there was any beginnings of Grace, he did
encourage it: so was the Prophecy, A bruised reed shall he not break, and
smoking flax shall he not quench: Nay, Mat. 12.20.
where was but a representation of Grace, he seemed to accept of it: Thus, when
the young man came and said, What good thing shall I do to inherit eternal
life? he embraced him, Mar. 10.17, 21
and made much of him; then Jesus beholding him, he loved him: And so the
Scribe which asked him, which is the first Commandment of all? in the
conclusion Christ told him, Mar. 12.28, 34
Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God: He labored to pull him further, in
telling him he was not far from Heaven and Glory. Mat. 9.36.
And so the people that fainted for bread of Life, that were scattered abroad
as sheep having no shepherd -- he was moved with compassion on them, (...): he
was bowelled in heart, his very bowels were moved within him. 2. To his enemies
he was kind and merciful; many a time he discovers himself most of all unto
sinners; he was never more familiar with any at first acquaintance, than with
the woman of Samaria that was an Adultress; and Mary, that had been a sinner,
how sweetly did he appear to her at the very first view? how ready was he to
receive sinners? how ready to pardon and forgive sinners? how gracious to
sinners after the pardon and forgiveness of sin? See it in Peter, he never cast
him in the teeth with his Apostasy, he never upbraided him with it, he never
so much as tells him of it; only he looks upon him: and afterward, Love thou
me? O Peter, love thou me? why, Peter love thou me? Often he was wronged
and injured by men, but what then? was he all on a heat? did he call for fire
down from heaven to destroy them? Indeed his Disciples, being more flesh than
spirit, would fain have had it so; but he sweetly replies, O, you know not what
spirits you are of: Luke 9.55, 56.
the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Sometimes
we find him shedding tears for those very persons that shed his precious blood:
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. -- if thou had known, even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things belonging to thy peace, etc. Why O my soul, Isa. 26.1,
8.
if thou would but run through such passages as these, how desirable are
they? well might they sing in that day in the Land of Judah, -- In the way of
thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee, the desire of our soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

Cant. 5.10, 16.
3. The ever blessed and holy person of Christ is desirable above all. My
Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousands; -- yea, he is
altogether lovely, or desirable; so Vatablus renders it, Christus est totus
desideria, Christ is all desir^s. If the actions of Christ be desirable, what
must himself be? If the parings of his bread be so sweet, what must the great
Loaf Christ himself be? Christ is admirable in action and person, but above
all, his person is most admirable; no creature in the world yields the like
representation of God, as the person of Jesus Christ; he is the express Image
of the person of his Father; Heb. 1.3.
as the print of the Seal on the Wax is the express image of the Seal it self,
so is Christ the highest representation of God; he makes similitude to him, who
otherwise is without all similitude. And hence it is that Christ is called the
Standard Bearer of ten thousands: Cant. 5.10.
all excellencies are gathered up in Christ, as Beams in the Sun. Come, poor
Soul! thy eyes run to and fro in the world to find Comfort and happiness; thou
desire after worldly Honor, worldly Pleasure, worldly Profits; cast thy eyes
back and see Heaven and Earth in one; look if thou will at what thy vast
thoughts can fancy, not only in this world, but in the world to come; or if
thou can imagine more variety; see that, and infinitely more, shining forth
from the person of the Lord Jesus Christ: no wonder if the Saints adore him; no
wonder if the Angels stand amazed at him, no wonder if all Cteatures vail all
their glory to him. Oh what are all things in the world to Jesus Christ? Paul
compares them together, Phil. 3.8.
(...), all things with this one thing; And I account all things but loss, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ. And I count all things] surely all
things is the greatest count that can be cast up; for it includes all prices,
all sums; it takes in, Earth, and Heaven, and all therein, that are but as
created things; q. d. Nations, and all Nations; Gold, and all Gold; Jewels, and
all Jewels; Angels, and all Angels; all these, and every all besides all these;
what are they in comparison of Christ, but as feathers, dung, shadows, nothing?
If there be any thing worthy a wish, it is eminently, transcendently,
originally in the Lord Jesus Christ; there is no honor, no felicity like that
which Christ has; some are sons, Christ is an only Son; some are Kings, but
Christ is King of Kings; some are honorable, none above Angels, Christ is
above Angels and Archangels: To which of the Angels said he at any time, thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Heb. 1.5.
Some are wealthy, Christ has all the sheep on a thousand hills; the very
utmost parts of the earth are his; some are beautiful, Christ is the fairest of
all the children of men; he is spiritually fair, he is all glorious within; if
the beauty of the Angels (which I believe are the beautifullest creatures the
world has) should be compared with the beauty of Christ, which consists in the
perfection of the divine nature, and in the perfection of his humane nature,
and in the perfection of the graces of his Spirit, they would be but as lumps
of darkness: The brightest Cherub is forced to skreen his face from the dazzling
and shining brightness of the glory of Christ. Alas! the Cherubims and
Seraphims are but as spangles and twinkling stars in the canopy of Heaven, but
Christ is the Sun of righteousness, that at once illuminates and drowns them
all.

Come then, cast up thy desires after Christ, breath, O my soul, after the
enjoyments of this Christ; fling up to heaven some divine ejaculations, Oh that
this Christ were mine! Oh that the actions of Christ, and the person of Christ
were mine! Oh that all he said, and all he did, and all he were from top to the
were mine! Oh that I had the silver wings of a Dove, that in all my wants I
might fly into the bosom of this Christ! Oh that I might be admitted to his
person? or if that may not be, Oh that I may but touch the very hem of his
Garment. If I must not sit at Table, Oh that I might but gather up the Crumbs!
Surely there is Bread enough in my Fathers House; Christ is the Bread of Life;
this one Loaf Christ is enough for all the Saints in heaven and earth to feed
on; and what must I pine away, and perish with hunger? Oh that I might have one
Crum of Christ! Thousands of Instructions dropped from him whiles he was on
earth; Oh that some of that food might be my nourishment! Oh that my ways were
directed according to his Statutes! many a stream, and wave, Psalm. 119.15. John
7.37.
and line, and precept flowed from this Fountain, Christ; Oh that I might drink
freely of this water of life! He has proclaimed it in my ears, if any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink; Oh that I might come, and find welcome!
why sure I thirst, I am extremely a thirst, I feel in me such a burning
drought, that either I must drink or die; either the righteousness of Christ,
the holiness of Christ, the holiness of his Nature, and the holiness of his
Life must be imputed unto me, or farewell happiness in another World; why come,
come Lord Jesus, come quickly; Oh I long to see the beauty of thy face! thy
glory is said to be an enamouring glory; such is thy beauty, that it steals
away my heart after thee, and cannot be satisfied till with Absolon, I see the
Kings face; come Christ! or if thou will not come, I charge you, O Daughters of
Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, Cant. 5.8.
that ye tell him I am sick of Love.

SECT. IV. Of Hopeing in Jesus in that respect.
4. LEt us hope in Jesus carrying on the great work of our Salvation in his
Life. By this hope I mean not a fluctuating, wavering, doubtful hope, but an
assured hope; an hope well grounded. The main soul question is, whether
Christ's life be mine? whether all those passages of his life l^id open, belong
unto me? whether the habitual righteousness, and actual holiness of Christ be
imputed to my justification? and what are the grounds and foundations on which
my hope is built? The Apostle tells us, that God gives good hopes through
Grace; if hope be right and good, 2 These. 2.16.
it will manifest it self by operations of saving Grace: O look into thy soul!
what gracious effects of the life of Christ are there? certainly his life is
not with out some influence on our spirits, if we be his Members, and he be our
Head. The Head we say, communicates life and sense, and motion to his members;
and so does Christ communicate a spiritual life and sense, and motion to his
members; O the glorious effects flowing out of Christ's life into a Believers
soul! I shall lay down these. As, --

1. If Christ's life be mine, then am I freed from the Law of sin: This was the
Apostles evidence; For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2.
has made me free from the Law of sin and death. Christ's Life is called the
Spirit of Life, because of its perfection; and this Spirit of Life has such a
power in it, here termed a Law, that it works out in Believers a freedom from
the Law or Power in Sin. I cannot think, notwithstanding the influence of
Christ's life on me, but that sin still-sticketh in me, I am still a sinner in
respect of the inherency of sin, but I am freed from the power of sin (i.e.)
from the guilt of sin, as to its condemning power; and from the filth of sin as
to its ruling reigning power: Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof. --

I grant there is some difference among Divines in their expressions,
concerning the sins of Gods own people, though they mean one and the self-same
thing. Some call them only sins of infirmity; and others grant the name of
reigning sins; but with this limitation, that this is not a total reigning. Sin
reigns as a Tyrant over them, not as a King; at sometimes (as in David's case)
the will and consent may run along with sin, no actual resistance may be made
against sin at all; 1 John 3.9.
and yet at the very same time the seed of God remains in them, though it
seem dead; and in Gods good time, that very seed will revive again, and throw
out the Tyrant; there is not, cannot be that antecedent and consequent consent
to sin in the godly, as in the wicked: O my soul, consider this! if the virtue
of Christ's life come in, it will take down that sovereign high reign of sin
which the wicked suffer, and will not strive against; the flesh indeed may
sometimes lust against the Spirit, but it shall not totally prevail or get the
upper hand; Sin shall not have dominion over you. Sin may tyrannize in me for a
time, but it shall not King it in me. Look to this! Romans 6.14.
Does the power and dominion of Christ's Life throw out of thy heart and life
that Kingly power and dominion of my sin? here is one ground of hope.

2. If Christ's life be mine, then shall I walk even as he walked; such is the
efficacy of Christ's life, that it will work sutableness, and make our life in
some sort like his life. The Apostle observes that our communion with Christ
works on our very conversations; he that abides in him, walks even as he
walked: and to this purpose are all those holy admonitions; walk in love, as
Christ also loved us. -- and, 1 John 2.6. Ephesians. 5.2. John 13.15. 1 Pet. 1.15.
I have given you an example, that you should do as I have done unto you. --
And, as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. Then is Christ's life mine, when my actions refer to him as my
Copy, when I transcribe the Original of Christ's life (as it were, to the life.
Alas, what am I better to observe in the life of Christ his Charity to his
Enemies, his Reprehensions of the Scribes and Pharisees, his subordination to
his heavenly Father, his ingenuity toward all men, his effusions of love
toward all the Saints, if there be no likeness of all this in my own actions?
The Life of Jesus is not described to be like a Picture in a chamber of
Pleasure, only for beauty and entertainment of the eye, but like the Egyptain
Hieroglyphics, whose very feature is a precept, whose Images converse with men
by sense, and signification of excellent discourses; to this purpose, 2 Cor.
3.18.
says Paul, we all with open face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the
Lord, are changed in the same Image from Glory to Glory: Christ is the Image of
his Father, and we are the Images of Christ; Christ is Gods Masterpeice, and
the most excellent device and work, and frame of heaven that ever was, or ever
shall be; now Christ being the top-excellency of all, he is most fit to be the
the pattern of all excellencies whatsoever; and therefore he is the Image, the
Idea, the Pattern, the Platform of all our sanctification. Come then, O my
soul, look unto Jesus, and look into thy self; yea, and look and look, till
thou art more transformed into his likeness: Is it so that thou art changed
into the same image with Christ? took into his disposition as it is set forth
in the Gospel? look into his carriage, look into his conversation at home and
abroad; and then reflecting on thy self; look there, and tell me, can thou
find in thy self a disposition suitable to his disposition, a carriage suitable
to his carriage, a conversation suitable to his conversation? art thou every way
like him in thy measure, in Gospel allowance; in some sweet resemblance? why
then, here is another ground of hope: O rejoice in it, and bless God for it.

3. If Christ's life be mine, then shall I admire, adore, believe, and obey this
Christ. All these were the effects of those several passages in Christ's life
respectively. 1. They admire at his Doctrine and Miracles: Luke 4.22. Matthew.
15.31.
For his Doctrine; all bear him witness, and wondered at those gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth: and for his Miracles; they wondered, and they
glorified the God, the God of Israel: yea sometimes their admiration was so
great, that they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered.
Mark 6.51. Luke. 9.43.
-- They were amazed at the mighty Power of God, and they wondered every one at
all things which Jesus did. 2. And as they admired, so they adored: there came
a Leaper and worshipped him, Matthew. 8.2. Matthew. 9.18. Matthew. 14.33.
saying, if thou will thou can make me clean: and there came a Ruler and
worshipped him, saying, My Daughter is even now dead, come lay thy hand on her,
and she shall live; and they that were in the Ship came and worshipped, saying,
of a truth thou art the Son of God. The very worshipping of Christ confesses
thus much, that he is the Son of God. 3. And as they adored, so they believed:
If thou can believe (said Christ to the Father of the possessed Child) all
things are possible to him that believes; Mark 9.23, 24.
and straight way he cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou
my unbelief. And when many of his Disciples fell away, then said Jesus to the
twelve, will ye also go away? Peter answers for the rest, to whom shall we go?
-- Why Lord, we believe, John 6.66, 69.
and are sure that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God: not only
worshipping of Christ, but believing in Christ is a right acknowledgment that
Christ is God. Romans 6.17. Mat. 4.19, 20, 22.
4. And as they believed, so they obeyed: ye have obeyed from the heart (said
Paul to the Romans) that form of Doctrine which was delivered to you; no sooner
Peter and Andrew heard the voice of Christ, follow me, but they left all and
followed him: and no sooner James and John heard the same voice of Christ,
follow me, but they left all and followed him; Matthew. 9.9. John 8.31.
and no sooner Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom, heard that voice of
Christ, follow me, but he rose and followed him. Why then are ye my Disciples
indeed (said Christ to the believing Jews) if ye continue in my word. Come
then, put thy self, O my soul, to the test; thou have seen and heard, the
wonderful passages of Christ's Life; the Baptism of Christ, the Fasting of
Christ, the Temptations of Christ, the Manifestations of Christ; the Doctrine
of Christ, the Miracles of Christ, the Holiness of Christ; and is this the
issue of all? Do thou now begin to admire, and adore, and believe, and to
obey this Christ? is thy heart warmed? thy affections kindled? Forbs tells us
that the word of God has three degrees of opperation in the hearts of his
chosen, first it falls to men's ears as the sound of many waters, a mighty,
great, and confused sound, and which commonly brings neither terror nor joy,
but yet a wandering and acknowledgment of a strange force, and more than humane
power, this is that effect which many felt hearing Christ, when they were
astonished at his Doctrine, as teaching with authority; Mat. 1.22, 27. Luke
4.32. John 7.46.
what manner of Doctrine is this? never man spoke like this man: the next
effect is the voice of thunder, which brings not only wonder, but fear also:
not only fills the ears with sound and the heart with astonishment, but
moreover shakes and terrifieth the conscience: the third effect is the sound
of harping, while the Word not only ravisheth with admiration, and strikes the
Conscience with terror, but also lastly fills it with sweet peace and joy. In
the present case, give me leave to ask, O my soul, art thou struck into a maze
at the mighty Miracles, and divine Doctrine of Jesus Christ? do thou fall
down and worship him as the Lord and thy God? do thou believe in him, and
rely on him for Life and Salvation? do thou obey him, and follow the Lamb
which way soever he goes? do thou act from Principles of Grace in newness of
life, and holiness of conversation? do thou walk answerably to the commands
of Jesus Christ; or at least is there in thee an earnest endeavor so to walk,
and is it the sorrow of thy soul, when thou observest thy failings? and do
thou rejoice in spirit when thou art led by the Spirit? why then here is another
ground hope, that virtue is gone of Christ's life into thy soul.

4. If Christ's life be mine, then I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
Gal. 2.20.
Paul speaks out this evidence, I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I
live, etc. he conjoins the death of Christ, and the life of Christ in one and
the same soul; q. d. no man knows the benefit of Christ's death, but he that
feels the virtue of Christ's life; there is no assurance of Christ's dying for
us, but as we feel Christ living in us; if the power of Christ's death mortify
my lusts, then the virtue of Christ's life will quicken my soul: but what means
he by this, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me? It seems some Paradox;
I live, yet not I: but a right interpretation reconciles all; as this, I live
to God, and not unto my self; I live to Christ, and not unto the World; I live
according to the Will of God, and not after my own lust and fancy; or (as some
would have it) I live under grace, and not under the Law. q. d. Sometimes I
lived wholly under the Law, which made me a persecutor of the Church of God,
which wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence, and slew me; and then I found
my self to be dead in sin: but now I have embraced Christ, and am no more the
man I was; now I feel Christ quickening, ruling, guiding, and strengthening me by
his Spirit, now I live spiritually and holily, not of my self, but from
another: The very whole of Christians is from Christ; Christ is both
Fountain-filling, and Life-quickning; I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me. Christ's life has an influence, infusion, transmission into our selves in
reference to spiritual life: Look as the Heavens by an influence into the
Earth, do quicken and enliven the Earth, and make all the seeds and roots
hidden in the Earth, to revive and put forth themselves; Matthew. 4.2.
so there is an influence that goes forth from the Sun of Righteousness into
the Souls of men, reviving and quickening them, and making them of dead, to
become living; and of barren, to become fruitful; To you shall the Sun of
Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow
up as the Calves of the Stall. O my Soul! question thy self in these few
particulars; do thou live to God, and not to thy self? do thou live to
Christ, and not to the World? do thou derive thy life from Christ? and has
that life of Christ a special influence into thy soul? do thou feel Christ
living in thy understanding and will, in thy imagination and affections, in thy
duties and services? 1. In thy understanding, by prizing the knowledge of
Christ, by determining to know nothing in comparison of Christ? 2. In thy will,
by making thy will free to choose and embrace Christ; and by making his will to
rule is thy will? 3. In thy imagination, by thinking upon him with more
frequency and delight; by having more high, and honorable, and sweeter
apprehensions of Christ than of all the Creatures? 4. In thy affections, by
fearing Christ above all earthly powers, and by loving Christ above all earthly
persons? 5. In thy duties and services, by doing all thou do in his Name, by
his assistance, and for his glory? why then here is another ground of thy hope,
surely thou have thy part in Christ's Life.

Away, away with all dejecting doubts, and perplexing fears! while Christ was
in Augustines eye, he said, I dare not despond, I know who has said it, and I
dare build upon it; this Anchor of hope thus cast out, and fastening upon
Christ, it would be admirably useful when Billows of Temptation beat upon
Souls; this Helmet of Hope thus used, would keep off many blows, whereby the
comforts of distrustful spirits are many times sadly battered. O my Soul, look
to the grounds of thy hope! if thou find the power of sin dying in thee, if
thou walk as Christ walked, if thou admirest, adorest, believe, and
obeyest thy Christ; if thou live, and live not, but in deed, and in truth,
it is Christ that lives in thee; why then thou may comfortably hope and
assure thy self that Christ's habitual righteousness, and actual holiness is
imputed to thy justification; thou may confidently resolve that every passage
of Christ's Life (so far as Legal or Moral) belongs unto thee. What? would ever
Christ have come with his power against thy power of sin, if he had not meant
to rescue thee? Would Christ ever have set thee a Copy, and have held thy hand
and thy heart, to have writ legibly after him, if he had not meant thee for a
Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven? Mat. 13.55.
would Christ in his several actings have set himself before thee as the Object
of Admiration, Adoration, Belief and Obedience, if he had not meant to own
thee, and to be owned by thee? would Christ ever have come so near to thee, as
to have lived in thee, to have been the soul of thy soul, and the life of thy
life, the All of thy understanding and will, imaginations and affections,
duties and services, if he had not purposed to have saved thee by his life?
Romans 5.10. Lam. 3.26.
Surely it is good that I both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of God.
I cannot hope in vain if these be the grounds of my hope.

SECT. V. Of Believing in Jesus in that respect.
5. LEt us believe in Jesus carrying on the great work of our Salvation in his
Life. Many Souls stand aloof, not daring to make a particular application of
Christ, and his Life to themselves; but herein is the property of Faith, it
brings all home, and makes use of whatsoever Christ is or does, for himself. To
ponder Christ's actions during his Life, and the influence of his actions to
all that are his, what is this to me, unless I believe my own part in all this?
Oh I dare not believe (cries many a poor soul) is it credible that Jesus Christ
the Son of God, the brightness of his Fathers Glory, the express Image of his
Fathers Person, should be incarnate for me, and lead such a life upon Earth for
my soul? What! to be baptized, to be tempted, to manifest himself in the form
of man, to whip the Buyers and Sellers out of his Temple, to preach up and down
the Gospel of the Kingdom, to work miracles among men, to send abroad his
Apostles with a commission to preach, to invite sinners, to ease the burden of
duties, and in a word, to publish the righteousness of his Nature and Life; and
all this, and a thousand times more than all this, for my soul? O what am I, or
what is my Fathers House? If God should let me live one year in Heaven, it were
infinite mercy; but that the God of Heaven should live so many years on Earth,
and that all that while he should empty himself, in watching, fasting, praying,
preaching for my sake; Oh the depth! Oh the depth! I cannot believe.

Sweet Soul, be not faithless, but believing; I know it is an hard and
difficult thing; but to help on a trembling soul, I shall first direct, and
then encourage.

First for direction, let souls be acquainted how to act their Faith on Christ
in respect of his Life. The manner of its proceedings I suppose is thus: --

1. Faith must directly go to Christ. Many poor souls humbled for sin, and
taken off from their own bottom, they run immediately to the promise of pardon,
and close with it, and rest on it, not seeking for, or closing with Christ in
the promise; this is a common error among thousands; but we should observe,
that the first promise that was given, was not a bare word simply promising
pardon, peace, or any other benefit, which God would bestow; but it was a
promise of Christ's Person, as overcoming Satan, Genesis 3.15.
and purchasing those benefits, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents
head. So, when the Promise was renewed to Abraham, it was not a bare promise of
blessedness and forgiveness, but of that Seed, that is, Christ, Gal. 3.6. in
whom that blessedness was conveyed; Genesis 22.18.
In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. So that Abraham's
Faith first closed with Christ in the Promise, and therefore he is said to see
Christ's day, and to rejoice in embracing him. Christ in the first place, and
more immediately, is every where made the thing which Faith embraces to
salvation, and whom it looks unto and respects, John 3.16. John 11.25.
as it makes us righteous in the sight of God. God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. -- I am the resurrection and the life, he that
believes in me, Acts 13.39. Acts 16.31. Acts 10.43.
though he were dead, yet shall he live. -- And by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. -- and, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. --
And, To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. And hence it is that Faith
is called the Faith of Christ, Gal. 2.16. Phil. 3.9. Because Christ is it whom
Faith apprehends immediately; and as for the other promises they depend all on
this, John 3.36. John 6.47.
Whosoever believes on him shall receive remission of sins: and he that
believes on the Son of God shall have life everlasting; verily, verily I say
unto you, he that believes on me has everlasting life. O remember this in the
first place, Faith must go unto Christ; and yet I mean not to Christ, as
abstractly and nakedly considered; but to Christ as compassed with all his
Promises, Privileges, Benefits.

2. Faith must go to Christ, as God in the flesh. Some make this the difference
of Faiths acting betwixt Believers of the New and Old Testament: Under the Old
Testament, when Christ was but in the Promise, and not as then come in the
flesh, their Faith had a more usual recourse unto God himself; as for Christ
(God-man, man-God) they had not so distinct, but only a confused knowledge of
him; and therefore we read not so frequently and usually of their recourse unto
him, but only unto God. 2 Chronicles. 20.12, 20. Psalm. 78.21, 22
O our God, will thou not judge them? we know not what to do, but our eyes are
upon thee -- and, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in
the Lord your God, so shall ye be established. -- and, The Lord heard this, and
was wrath -- because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his
salvation. But now under the New Testament, because Christ as Mediator, who was
promised, is come, our Faith more usually and immediately addresseth it self
unto Christ, as God in the flesh, God dwelling in our nature is made more
familiar to our Faith, than the person of the Father, who is merely God: God in
the flesh is more distinctly set forth in the New Testament, and so he is more
distinctly to be apprehended by the Faith of all Believers: Ye believe in God
(says Christ to his Disciples, whose faith and opinion of the Messiah was till
Christ's Resurrection of the same Elevation with that of the
Old-Testament-Believers) Ye believe in God; but he rests not there, believe
also in me, John 14.1.
make me the object of your trust and salvation, as well as the Father, believe
also in me, not only so, but believe in the first place on me. One sweetly
observes, that when Faith and Repentance came more narrowly to be distinguished
by their more immediate objects, it is laid down thus, Repentance toward God,
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; Acts 20.21.
not but that God and Christ are objects of both; but that Christ is more
immediately the object of Faith, and God i^ more immediately the object of
Repentance; so that we believe in God through believing in Christ first; and we
turn to Christ by turning to God first. O remember this! Le^ our Faith in the
more direct and immediate exercise of it be pitch upon Christ as God (...) the
flesh.

3. Faith must go to Christ as God in the flesh, made under the Law: Gal. 4.4.
and hence it is that the Apostle joins these together, God sent his Son made
of a woman, made under the Law: If Christ had been out of the compass of the
Law, his being incarnate, and made of a woman, had done us no good. Suppose one
in debt, and danger of the Law, to have a Brother of the same flesh and blood,
of the same Father and Mother; what will this avail, if that same Brother will
not come under the Law (i.e.) become his Surety, and undertake for him? It is
our case; we are debtors to God, Col. 2.14.
and there is an handwriting against us, and contrary to us: here is a Bond of
the Law which we have forfeited; now what would Christ avail, if he had not
come under the Law, if he had not been our Surety, and undertook for us? Our
Faith therefore must go to Christ as made under the Law, not only taking our
nature upon him, but our debt also; 2 Cor. 5.21.
our nature as men, and our debt as sinful men: He has made himself to become
sin for us who knew no sin, (i.e.) he made him to be handled as a sinner for us
under the Law, though he knew no sin on his part, but continued in all things
written in the Book of the Law to do them. If Faith be inquisitive, when was
Christ made under the Law? I answer, Gal. 5.3.
even then when he was circumcised: Thus Paul protests, I testify to every man
that he that is circumcised, is a debtor to do the whole Law. Christ at his
Circumcision entered into bond with us, and undertook for us; and therefore
then, and not till then, Luke 2.21.
he had his Name given him, Jesus a Savior: and from that time he was a debtor
to do the whole Law. Not only to suffer, but also to do; for he both satisfied
the Curse, and fulfilled the Commandments. O remember this! as Christ, and as
Christ in the flesh, so Christ in the flesh made under the Law, is principally
to be in the eye of of our Faith. If we put all together, our first view of
Faith is to look on Christ God in the flesh, made under the Law.

4. Faith going to Christ as God in the flesh, and as made under the Law, it is
principally to look to the end and meaning of Christ, as being God in the
flesh, and as fulfilling the Law.

Now if we would know the meaning of Christ in all this, the Apostle tells us
of a remote, and of a more immediate end.

1. Of a remote end: God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the
Law, Gal. 4.4, 5.
to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons. This was Christ's meaning, or the remote end of Christ. Alas! we were
strangers from the Adoption, and we lay under the Law as men whom sentence had
passed on: Now from this latter we are redeemed; he was under the Law, that we
might be redeemed from under the Law; nor is that all; but as we are redeemed,
so are we adopted the Children of God: And this end I rather attribute to the
Life of Christ, that we might receive the Adoption (i.e.) from the estate of
Prisoners condemned, that we might be translated into the estate of children
adopted. O the mercy of God! who ever heard of a condemned man to be afterward
adopted? would not a condemned Prisoner think himself happy to escape with
Life? But the zeal of the Lord of Hosts has performed this; we are in Christ
both pardoned and adopted; and by this means the joy and glory of Gods heavenly
inheritance is estated upon us: O let our Faith look mainly to this design and
plot of Christ! he was made under the Law, yea, and under the directive part of
the Law by his life; he fulfilled every jot and title of the Law by his active
obedience, that we might be entitled to glory; that we might be adopted to the
inheritance of the Saints in glory.

2. For the more immediate end of Christ: the Apostle tells us Christ was made
under the Law, Romans 8.4.
or fulfilled all Righteousness, that the Law might be fulfilled in us. In
Christ's life were we represented, and so this fulfilling of all righteousness
is accounted ours; that the Law might be fulfilled in us. O my soul, look to
this! Herein lies the pith and the marrow of thy Justification: of thy self
thou can do nothing that good is; but Christ fulfilled the Law in thy stead;
and if now thou will but act, and exercise thy Faith, thou may thereby find
and feel the virtue and efficacy of Christ's righteousness and actual
obedience, flowing into thy own soul. But here is the question, how should I
manage my Faith? or how should I act it to feel Christ's righteousness my
righteousness? I answer, 1. Thy way is to discover and discern this
righteousness of Christ, this holy and perfect life of the Lord Jesus Christ in
the whole, and in all the parts of it, as it is laid down in the written Word;
Much has been said of it in those four years of Christ's Ministry, but
especially in the last year; I shall say more anon in our conformity unto
Christ, whither also thou may have recourse. 2. Thy way is to believe and to
receive this discovery as sacred and unqestionable in reference to thy own
soul, as intended for thee, for thy use and benefit. 3. Thy way is to
apprehend, apply, and to improve this discovery according to that judgment and
proposal, to those uses, ends, and benefits to which thou believe they were
designed. Yea, but there lies the question, how may that be done? I answer, --

1. Setting before thee that discovery (that perfect life of Christ in the
whole, and all the parts of it) thou must first endeavor to be deeply humbled
for thy great inconformity thereto in whole and in part.

1. Still keeping thy Spirit intent on the Pattern, thou must quicken, provoke
and increase thy sluggish and drowsy soul with renewed, redoubled vigilance,
and industry to come up higher toward it, and (if it were possible) completely
to it.

3. Yet having the same discovery, rule and copy before thee, thou must
exercise faith thereupon, as that which was performed, and is accepted on thy
behalf. And so go to God, and there represent, offer, and tender Christ's holy
life and active obedience unto him. And that first to fill up the defects of
thy utmost endeavor: Secondly, to put a righteousness, price, value, and worth
upon what thou do and attainest to. Thirdly, to make Christ's righteousness
thy own, that thou may say with the Psalmist in way of assurance, O God my
righteousness. O my soul, if thou would thus live by Faith, or thus act thy
Faith on Christ's Life, Christ's Righteousness, Christ's active obedience; what
a blessed life would thou live? then might thou find and feel Christ's
righteousness thy righteousness; I say thy Righteousness in respect of its
efficacy, but not in respect of its formality; for so sinners would be their
own Mediators. But of some of these Particulars I shall speak more largely in
our conformity to Christ's holy Life.

2. For encouragements to bring on souls thus to believe on Christ, consider,
--

1. The fullness of this Object; Christ's life is full, it is very
comprehensive, it contains holiness, and happiness, sanctification, and
justification: if Christ's Garments were healing, how much more so main and
essential a part of Christ, even the half of Christ as it were? for so is
Christ's Life. It is vehemently to be suspected, that the true reason why so
much is said of his Death, and so little in comparison of his Life, it is
either because we understand not the fullness of his life, or because we are
carnal and selfish, affecting freedom from hell, more than holiness on earth;
some benefit by Christ, more than conformity to Christ. O come! see the fullness
of Christ's life: in reference to our sanctification, was it not an exact model
of perfection? a most curious exemplification of Gods whole Word? an express
Idea, Image, Representation of the whole mind of God? a full president for all
others to walk by, to work by, to live by? and in reference to justification,
is not Christ's life the object of Faith and justifying? nay, is not Christ's
life the object of justifying faith, as well as Christ's death, resurrection,
ascension, session, intercession? The assertors of Christ's active and passive
obedience for us, can tell us of two things in the Law intended; one principal,
viz. Obedience: and another secondary, viz. malediction upon supposition of
disobedience; so that sin being once committed, there must be a double act to
justification, the suffering of the Curse, and the fulfilling of Righteousness
anew, the one is satisfaction for the injury we have done unto God as our
Judge; and the other is a performance of a service which we owe unto God as our
Maker. O then how large, and full, and comprehensive is this life of Christ?

2. Consider the excellency, the glory of this Object: Christ's life is
glorious, and hence it is that the righteousness of Christ is the most glorious
garment that ever the Saints of God did wear. It is Marlorat's saying,
Marlorat. Rev. 12.1.
that the Church which puts on Christ and his righteousness, is more
illustrious than the Air is by the Sun. John thus sets her out in his Vision;
And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, and
the Moon under her feet. I take this to be a lofty Poetical description of
Christ's imputed righteousness: imagine a garment were cut out of the Sun, and
put upon us, how glorious should we be? O but the righteousness of Christ is
much more glorious: No wonder if the Church clothed with the Sun, tread the
Moon under her feet (i.e.) if she trample on all sublunary things, which are
uncertain and changeable as the Moon, I count all things but dung (says Paul)
that I may win Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9.
and be found in him; not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
Faith. When Paul compares Christ's righteousness with the glory of the world,
then is the world but dung. O the glory, O the excellency of the righteousness
of Christ!

3. Consider the suitableness of this object; Christ's life, and the virtue of
it, is most suitable to our condition. Thus I might apply Christ to every
condition; if thou art sick, he is a Physician; if thou fear death, he is
the way, the truth, and the life; if thou art hungry, he is the bread of Life;
if thou art thirsty, he is the water of Life: But not to insist on these words.
It is the daily complaint of the best of Saints, O my sins! I had thought these
sins had been wholly subdued, but now I feel they return upon me again; now I
feel the springs in the bottom fill up my soul again; Oh I am weary of my self,
and weary of my life, Oh what will become of me? In this case now Christ's life
is most suitable, his righteousness is a continual righteousness; it is not a
Cistern, Zech. 13.1.
but Fountain open for thee to wash in; as sin abounds, so grace in this gift
of righteousness abounds much more. Christ's life in this respect, is compared
to changes of Garments: Thou criest, O what shall become of me? Oh I feel new
sins, and old sins committed afresh; why but these changes of garments will
hide all thy sins: Zech. 3.4.
if thou art but clothed with the robes of Christ's righteousness, there shall
never enter into the Lords heart one hard thought toward thee of casting thee
off, or of taking revenge upon any new occasion or fall into sin. Why here is
the blessedness of all those that believe. Oh then believe! Say not, would
Christ be incarnate for me? would he lead such a life on earth for my soul? Why
yes, for thy soul: never speak of thy sins, as if they should be any hinderance
of thy Faith. If the wicked that apply this righteousness presumptiously, can
say, Let us sin that grace may abound, and so they make no other use of Grace,
but to run in debt, and to sin with a license; how much rather may thou say
on good ground, Oh let me believe! Oh let me own my portion in this
righteousness of Christ! that as my sins have abounded, so my love may abound;
that as my sins have been exceeding great, so the Lord may be exceeding sweet;
that as my sins continue and increase, so my thankfulness to Christ, and glory
in God, and triumph over sin, death, and the grave, may also increase. Why thus
be encouraged to believe thy part in the Lord Jesus Christ.

SECT. VI. Of Loving Jesus in that respect.
6. LEt us love Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us
during his Life. Now what is Love but a motion of the Appetite, by which the
Soul unites it self to what seems fair unto it? And if so, O what a lovely
Object is the Life of Christ? who can read over his Life, who can think over
his worthiness, both in his person, relations, actions, and several
administrations, and not love him with a singular love? That which set the
Daughters of Jerusalem in a posture of seeking after Christ, was that
Description of Christ, which the Spouse made of him; My Beloved is white and
ruddy, Cant. 5.10, 11.12, 13, 14, 15.
the chiefest of ten thousands, his head is as the most fine Gold, his Locks
are bushy and black as a Raven; his eyes are as the eyes of Dov^s, by the
Rivers of water, washed with milk, and finely set, his cheeks are as a bed of
Spices, and sweet flowers; his lips like Lillies dropping sweet smelling
myrrh, etc. By these are intimated unto us the government of Christ, the
unsearchable counsels of Christ, the pure nature of Christ, without any
impurity or uncleanness; the gracious promises of Christ, the soul saving
instructions of Christ, the holy actions and just administrations of Christ,
the tender affections, and amiable smilings of Christ, the gracious, inward and
wonderful workings of Christ; so that he is altogether lovely, or he is
composed of loves; from top to toe there is nothing in Christ, but it is most
fair and beautiful, lovely and desirable -- Now as this Description enflamed
the Daughters of Jerusalem; so to act our loves toward the Lord Jesus Christ,
take we a copy of the Record of the Spirit in Scriptures; see what they say of
Christ; John 5.39.
this was his own advice, Search the Scriptures, for -- they are they which
testify of me.

O my soul, much has been said to persuade thee to Faith; and if now thou
believe thy part in those several actings of Christ, why let thy Faith take
thee by the hand, and lead thee from one step to another; from his Baptism to
his Temptations; from his Temptations to his Manifestations; and so on: Is not
here fuel enough for Love to feed upon? Can thou read the history of Love
(for such is the history of Christ's Life) and not be all on a flame? Come,
read again! there is nothing in Christ but it is lovely, winning, and drawing;
as, --

1. When he saw thee full of filth, he goes down into the waters of Baptism,
that he might prepare a way for the cleansing of thy defiled and polluted soul.

2. When he saw the Devil ready to swallow thee up, or by his baits to draw and
drag thy soul down to hell, he himself enters into the List with the Devil, and
he overcomes him, that thou might overcome, and triumph with Christ in his
Glory.

3. When he saw thee in danger of death through thy own unbelief, for ( except
thou saw in his hands the print of the nails, and put thy finger into the
print of the nails; except thou had clear manifestations of Christ even to
thine own sense, thou would not believe) he condescends so far to succor
thy weakness, as to manifest himself by several witnesses; three in heaven, and
three on earth: yea, he multiplies his three on earth to thousands of
thousands; so many were the signs witnessing Christ, that the Disciple which
testified of them, John 21.25.
could say, If they should be written every one, the world could not contain
the Books that should be written.

4. When he saw the buying and selling in the Temple, yea, making Merchandise
of the Temple it self, I mean of thy Soul, which is the Temple of the holy
Ghost; he steps in to whip out those Buyers and Sellers, those Lusts and
Corruptions: O (cries he) will you sell away your souls for Trash? O what is a
man profitted though he gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul?

Prove. 30.2, 3.
5. When he saw thee like the horse and mule, more brutish than any man, not
having the understanding of a man; thou neither learned wisdom, nor had the
knowledge of the most holy; he came with his instructions, adding line unto
line, and precept on precept, teaching and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom;
and sealing his truths with many Miracles, Mat. 4.23.
that thou may believe, and in believing thou might have life through his
Name: and Oh! what is this but to make thee wise unto salvation?

6. When he saw thee a sinner of the Gentiles, a stranger from the
commonwealth of Israel, and without God in the world, he sent his Apostles and
Messengers abroad, and bad them preach the Gospel to thee; q. d. Go to such a
one in the dark corner of the world, an Isle at such a distance from the Nation
of the Jews, and set up my Throne amongst that people, open the most precious
Cabinet of my Love there; and amongst that People, tell such a Soul, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom he is one. O admirable Love!

7. When he saw thee cast down in thy self, and refusing thy own Mercy, crying
and saying, what! is it possible that Jesus Christ should send a Message to
such a dead Dog as I am? why the Apostles Commission seems otherwise: Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5, 6.
or into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost
sheep of the House of Israel. O I am a lost sheep, but not being of the House
of Israel; what hope is there that ever I should be found? He then appeared,
and even then he spread his arms wide to receive thy soul; he satisfied thee
then of another Commission given to his Apostles; Go, teach all Nations: And he
cried even then, Come unto me thou that art weary and heavy laden with sin, and
I will receive thee into my bosom, Mat. 28.19.
and give thee rest there.

8. When he saw thee in suspense, and heard thy complaint, But if I come, shall
I find sweet welcome? I have heard that his ways are narrow and straight; Oh it
is an hard passage, and an high ascent up to heaven! Many seek to enter in, but
shall not be able: Luke 13.24.
Oh! what shall become of my poor Soul? why then he told thee otherwise; Prove.
3.17.
that all his ways were ways of pleasantness, and all his paths peace; he would
give thee his Spirit that should bear the weight, and make all light; he would
sweeten the ways of Christianity to thee, that thou should find by
experience, that his yoke was easy, Mat. 11.29.
and his burden was light.

9. When he saw the wretchedness of thy Nature, and original pollution, he took
upon him thy Nature, and by this means took away thy original sin. O here is
the lovely Object! What is it but the absolute holiness and perfect purity of
the Nature of Christ? This is the fairest Beauty that ever eye beheld; this is
that compendium of all Glories: now if Love be a motion and union of the
Appetite to what is lovely, how should thou flame forth in loves upon the
Lord Jesus Christ? this is rendered as the reason of those sparklings, Thou art
fairer than the children of men. Psalm. 45.2.


10. When he saw thee actually unclean, a transgressor of the Law in thought,
word, Heb. 10.9.
and deed; then he said, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God; and wherefore would
he do Gods will, but merely on thy behalf?

O my Soul, can thou read over all these passages of Love, and do thou not
yet cry out, O stay me, comfort me; for I am sick of Love? Can a man stand by
an hot and fiery furnace, and never be warmed? Oh for an heart in some measure
answerable to these Loves! Surely even good natures hate to be in debt for
love; and is therein thee (O my soul) neither grace, nor yet good nature? O God
forbid! awake! awake thy ardent love toward the Lord Jesus Christ! why thou
art rock, and not flesh, if thou be not wounded with these heavenly darts;
Christ loves thee, is not that enough? fervent affection is apt to draw love,
where is little or no beauty; and excellent beauty is apt to draw the heart
where there is no answer of affection at all; but when these two meet together,
what breast can hold against them? See, O my soul, here is the sum of all the
particulars thou have heard, Christ loves thee, and Christ is lovely; his heart
is set upon thee, who is a thousand times fairer than all the children of men;
does not this double consideration, like a mighty loadstone, snatch thy heart
unto it, and almost draw it forth of thy very breast? O sweet Savior, thou
could say even of thy poor Church (though laboring under many imperfections)
Thou have ravished my Heart, Cant. 4.9, 10.
my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished mine heart with one of thine eyes,
with one chain of thy neck; how fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse? how
much better is thy love than wine, and the smell of thy ointments than all
Spices? Could thou, O blessed Savior, be so taken with the incurious and
homely features of the Church, and shall not I much more be enamoured with thy
absolute and divine Beauty? It pleased thee, my Lord, out of thy sweet
ravishments of thy heavenly love, to say to thy poor Church, Turn away thine
Eyes from me, for they have overcome me; but Oh let me say to thee, Turn thine
eyes to me, that they may overcome me; my Lord, Cant. 6.5.
I would be thus ravished, I would be overcome; I would be thus out of my self,
that I might be all in thee.

Thus is the Language of true love to Christ; but alas, how dully and flatly do
I speak it; O my soul, how art thou out of frame? in creature-communion I
usually feel the warm, and vigorous, active, and very strong; but now thy heart
is enditing of a good matter, thou art speaking of the things which thou have
made concerning the King, thy words do almost freeze between thy lips; how
chill and cold art thou in thy converses with Jesus Christ? Oh this puts me in
mind of my deserts; surely had Christ's love been but like this faint and
feeble love of mine, I had been a damned wretch without all hope: O Christ, I
am ashamed, that I love thee so little; I perceive thy loves are great by all
those actings in thy life; come blow upon my Garden, persuade me by thy Spirit
that I may love thee much; many sins are forgiven me, O that I may love thee
much!

SECT. VII. Of Joying in Jesus in that respect.
7. LEt us joy in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our Salvation for us,
during his Life. But what is there in Christ's life, or in all the passages of
his Life to stir up Joy? I answer, all his life, and all the passages of his
life, if rightly applied, are excellent matter for the stirring up of this
Affection: indeed the main of the work is in the application of Christ's life;
if ever we rejoice spiritually in Christ, we must bring together the object and
the faculty; and this Union of the object and the faculty, is usually wrought
by contemplation, or by confidence, or by fruition; I shall but a while insist
on these, that we may come up at last to rejoice in Christ, yea, if it were
possible to rejoice, and again rejoice.

1. Let us contemplate on this life of Christ, let us think of it in our minds;
there is a kind of delight in knowing some things speculatively, which we would
abhor to know experimentally; and therefore the Devil's first temptation was
drawn from the knowledge of evil, as well as good; he knew that the mind of man
would receive content in the understanding of that, which in its own nature had
no perfection at all; now if there be a delight in the contemplation of evil,
how much more in the contemplation of that which is good? And is not the life
of Christ, the Graces, the Virtues, the holy Actions, the dear Affections of
Jesus Christ to usward, good, and very good? Come then, stir up our memories,
let us be settled men; let us spend our frequent thoughts upon this blessed
Object; the reason we miss of our joys, is, because we are so little in
comtemplations of our Christ. It is said that he pities us in our sorrows, but
he delights in us, when we delight in him. Certainly he would have us to
delight in him, and to that purpose he way-layes our thoughts, that wheresoever
we look, we shall still think on him: O my soul, cast thine eyes which way thou will, and thou shall hardly look on any thing, but Christ Jesus has taken the
name of that very thing upon himself. What, is it day? and do thou behold the
Sun? He is called the Sun of righteousness: Mal. 4.2. Number. 24.17, 19.
Or, is it night? and do thou behold the Stars? He is called a Star: There
shall come a Star out of Jacob -- out of Jacob shall he come that shall have
dominion. Or, is it Morning? and do thou behold the morning star? He is
called the bright morning star. Rev. 22.16.
Or, is it Noon? and do thou behold clear light all the world over in thy
Hemisphere? He is called the Light, and that Light, and that Light that
lights every man that comes into the world. John 1.7, 8, 9.
Or, to come a little nearer; if thou look on the earth, and take a view
of the Creatures about thee, see thou the silly sheep? He is called a sheep;
Isa. 53.7.
as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth: or see
thou a Lamb bleating after the harmless sheep? John 1.29.
He is called a Lamb; Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world: See thou a Shepherd watching over his flock, by day or night? He is
called a Shepherd: I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of
mine: John 10.14.
Or see thou a Fountain, Rivers, Waters? He is called a Fountain: In that day
there shall be a Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, Zach. 13.1.
for sin and for uncleanness: Or see thou a Tree good for Food, Prove. 3.18.
Cant. 2.3.
or pleasant to the eye? He is called the Tree of Life: and, as the Apple Tree
among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons. See thou a
Rose, a Lilly, any fair Flower in a Garden? Cant. 2.1.
He is called a Rose, a Lilly: I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the
Valleys: or to come a little nearer yet; art thou within doors? I am the door,
by me if any man enter in he shall be saved, John 10.9.
and shall go in and out, and shall find pasture. Art thou adorning thy self,
and take a view of thy Garments? He is called a Garment: Romans 13.14.
Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. Art thou eating meat, and take a view on
what is on thy Table? He is called Bread: The bread of God, true bread from
Heaven, the bread of life, John 6.32, 35, 51.
the living bread which came down from heaven. Why thus Christ way-layes our
thoughts, that wheresoever we look, we should ever think of Christ -- Now these
thoughts or contemplations of Christ, are they that bring together the object
and the faculty of joy: I cannot think of Christ, or the life of Christ, of
Christ preaching, or of Christ preached, but I must rejoice in Christ; as
sometimes the Apostle said; Christ is preached; whether in pretense or truth, I
matter not, but that he is preached, I therein do rejoice, Phil. 1.18.
yea and will rejoice.

2. Let us consider in Christ, let us upon good grounds hope our share and
interest in the Life of Christ: O this would strengthen our joy, yea fill us
with joy unspeakable and glorious; where true joy is, there is first a thinking
of the good in our mind; and secondly, an expecting of it in our heart; hence
it is that whatsoever does encourage our hope, the same does enlarge our
delight; the Apostle joines both these together: Rejoice in hope: Hope and Joy
go both together; if I have but assured hope that Christ's life is mine, I
cannot but rejoice therein: on the contrary, Romans 12.12.
if my hope fluctuate, if I am but uncertain, if I look on the influence and
benefits of Christ's life as only possibly mine, and no further; then is my
comfort but unstable and weak: sometimes we find Christ compared to a rich
Storehouse: In him (says the Apostle) are hid all the treasures of w^sdom and
knowledge; but alas, what am I richer for all his treasures, Col. 2.3.
if I have no claim thereto, or interest therein? or what can I joy in
another's riches, when I my self am wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked? Look to this, O my soul; peruse again and again thy grounds
of hope as before laid down; do not slightly run them over; thou can not be
too sure of Christ: thou read in the Gospel this and that passage of thy
Jesus, can thou lay thine hand on every Line, and say this passage is mine?
this Sermon was preached, and this miracle was wrought for me, that I might
believe, and that in believing I might have life through his Name? O then how
should thou but rejoice? When Zacheus in the Sycamore Tree heard but Christ's
voice, Zacheus make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide in thy house.
Luke 19.5, 6.
O what haste made Zacheus to receive Christ! he came down hastily, and
received him joyfully. This offer of Christ to Zacheus is thine as well as his,
if thy hope be right; Come down, poor Soul (says Christ) this day must I abide
in thy house. O then what joy should there be in thy heart when Christ comes
in, or when thou feel Christ come in! The friend of the Bridegroom rejoices
greatly because of the Bridegroom's voice; John 3.29.
how much more may the Bride her self rejoice.

3. Let us come up to more and more and more fruition of Christ; all other
things work our delight but as they look toward this; now in this fruition of
Christ are contained these things: first a propriety unto Christ; for as a sick
man does not feel the joy of a sound man's health, so neither does a stranger to
Christ feel the joy of a Believer in Christ; how should he joy in Christ that
can make no claim to him in the least degree? But to that we have spoken.
Secondly, a possession of Christ; this exceedingly enlarges our joy. O how
sweet was Christ to the Spouse, when she could say, Cant. 6.3.
I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine; he feeds among the Lillies, q. d.
we have took possession of each other; he is mine through faith, and I am his
through love; we are both so knit by an inseparable union, that nothing shall
be able to separate us two; he feeds among the Lillies; he refreshes himself
and his Saints, by his union and communion with them; many are taken up with
the joy and comfort of outward possessions, but Christ is better than all; in
one Christ is comprised every scattered comfort here below: Christ mine (says
the soul) and all mine. 3. An accommodation of Christ to the soul; and this is
it that compleats our joy; It is not bare possession of Christ which brings
real delight; but an applying of Christ unto that end and purpose for which he
was appointed: it is not the having of Christ, but the using of Christ, which
makes him beneficial. O the usefulness of Christ to all believing Souls! The
Scriptures are full of this; as appears by all his Titles in Scripture; he is
our life, our light, our bread, our water, our milk, our wine; his flesh is
meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed: he is our father, our brother, our
friend, our husband, our King, our Priest, our Prophet: he is our
justification, our sanctification, our wisdom, our redemption; he is our peace,
our mediation, our atonement, our reconciliation, our all in all. Alas! I look
on my self, and I see I am nothing, I have nothing without Jesus Christ, here is
a temptation, I cannot resist it; here is a corruption, I cannot overcome it;
here is a persecution, I cannot down with it: well, but Christ is mine, I have
interest in Christ, and I have possession of Christ, and I find enough in
Christ to supply all my wants; he was set up on purpose to give me grace, and
to renew my strength, so that if I make my application to Christ, I can do all
things, Phil. 4.13. I can suffer the loss of all things, Phil. 3.8. I can
conquer all things, nay, in all things be more than a conqueror through him
that loves me, Romans 8.37. Oh the joy now that this accommodation brings to my
soul! I see it is nothing but Christ, and therefore I cannot but rejoice in
this Christ, Phil. 3.3.
or I must rejoice in nothing at all: Surely we are the Circumcision which
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

O my soul! where is thy faculty of joy? come bring it to this blessed object,
the Lord Jesus Christ: If thou know not how, first contemplate on Christ;
think on those several passages in his life; those that lived with him, and
stood by to see them, it is said of them, Luke 13.17.
that they all rejoiced for the glorious things that were done by him. Or if
thy heart be so dull and heavy, that this will not raise it up, then look to
thy grounds of hope and confidence in Christ: so long as thou doubtest of him,
or of thy interest in him, how should thou rejoice or be cheerful in thy
spirit? The poor man could not speak it without tears, Mark 9.24.
Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief; a believing unbelief, a wavering,
staggering, trembling faith cannot be without some wounds in spirit: O be
confident, and this will make thee cheerful; or if yet thou feel not this
affection to stir, aspire to fruition, yea to more and more fruition of Christ,
and union with Christ; and to that purpose consider thy propriety to Christ,
thy possession of Christ, and the accommodation or usefulness of Christ to thy
condition, whatsoever it is. What? will not these things move thy spiritual
delight? can thou not hear Christ say; All I am is thine, and all I have done
is thine, for thy use, and for thy benefit. And does not thy heart leap within
thee at each word? O my soul, I cannot check thee for thy deadness: it is said,
Luke 19.37.
that when Christ was at the descent of the Mount of Olives, that the whole
multitude of the Disciples began to rejoice, and praise God with a loud voice,
for all the mighty works that they had seen. What? a multitude of disciples
rejoicing in Christ's acts? and art not thou one amongst the multitude? If thou
art a Disciple, rejoice thou: surely it concerns thee as much as them; and
therefore rejoice, lift up thy voice in harmony with the rest, rejoice, and
again rejoice.

SECT. VIII. Of calling on Jesus in that respect.
8. LEt us call on Jesus, or on God the Father in and through Jesus. Thus we
read that looking up to Jesus, or lifting up the eyes to Jesus, goes also for
Prayer in Gods Book: Psalm. 5.3.
My prayer will I direct to thee (says David) and will look up, and mine eyes
fail with looking upwards. Psalm. 69.3.
Faith in prayer will often come out at the eye in lieu of another door; our
affections will often break out at the window, when the door is closed. Thus
Stephen looked up to Heaven; he sent a Post, a greedy, pitiful and hungry look
up to Jesus Christ out at the window, Acts 7.55.
at the nearest passage, to tell him that a poor friend was coming to him: why
thus let us look up to Jesus by calling on him; now this calling on him
contains Prayer and Praise.

1. We must pray that all these transactions of Jesus during his Life, or
during his Ministry upon earth, may be ours; we hope it is so, and we believe
it to be so; but for all that, we must pray that it may be so. There is no
contradiction betwixt Hope, and Faith, and Prayer, but rather a concatenation:
Lord, I believe, yet help my unbelief; or, Mark 9.24.
be it to me according to my Faith, how weak soever; it will bear that sense.

2. We must praise God for all those passages in Christ's life. Thus did the
multitude; they praised God with a loud voice, Luke 19.37, 38
for all the mighty works that they had seen; saying, blessed be the King that
comes in the name of the Lord, peace in heaven, and glory in the highest! What
(my Soul) has Christ done all this for thee? was he made under the Law, to
redeem thy soul, and adopt thee for his Son, to the inheritance of Heaven? came
he down from heaven, and traveled he so many miles on earth, to woo and win
thy heart? spent he so many Sermons, and so many Miracles to work thee into
Faith? O how should thou bless, and prize, and magnify his Name? how
should thou break out into that blessed Hymn, To him that loved us, Rev.
1.5, 6.
and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father, to him be Glory
and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

SECT. IX. Of conforming to Jesus in that respect.
9. LEt us conform to Jesus, as he acted for us in his Life. Looking to Jesus
intends this especially; we must look as one looks to his Pattern; as Mariners
at Sea, that they may run a right course, keep an eye on that Ship that bears
the Light: so in the Race that is set before us, we must have our eye on Jesus,
our blessed Pattern. This must be our constant Query, Is this the course that
Jesus steered? Or that I may enlarge, --

In this Particular I shall examine these three Queries: 1. Wherein we must
conform? 2. Why we must conform? 3. How we must conform to this Life of Jesus?

For the first, wherein we must conform? I answer;

1. Negatively: we must not, cannot conform to Christ in those works proper to
his Godhead; as in working Miracles: I deny not but that the works of Miracles
were by way of privilege, and temporary dispensation granted to the Apostles,
and some others; but this was but for Ministry and Service, not for their
Sanctity or Salvation; nor must we conform to Christ in those works of
mediation, as in redeeming souls, in satisfying Divine Justice for our sin: No
man can redeem his Brother, Psalm. 49.7.
nor give to God a ransom for him. There is but one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus: Nor must we conform to Christ in those works of his
Government, and influence into his Church; as in dispensing of his Spirit, in
quickening of his Word, in subduing of his enemies, in collecting of his
Members; all these are personal honors, which belong unto Christ, as he is
Head of the Church; and to these works, if we should endeavor to conform, we
should Crack our Sinews, dissolve our silver cords, and never the nearer. --
Nor need we to conform to Christ in some other Particulars; in his voluntary
poverty; he became poor for our sakes, 2 Cor. 8.9. In his Ceremonial
performances, as in going up to Jerusalem at the Feasts; in his perpetual grave
deportment; we never read that Jesus laughed; and but once or twice that he
rejoiced in spirit. Alas! the declensions of our Natures cannot come up to this
Pattern: nor do I look at these passages as any acts of moral obedience at all.

2. Affirmatively, or positively; we must conform to Christ's life.

1. In respect of his Judgment, Will, Affections, Compassions. Look we at his
Spirit, observe what mind was in Jesus Christ, and therein do we endeavor to
conform: Let the same mind be in you (says the Apostle) which was in Christ,
Phil. 2.5. Phil. 2.5.
And we have the mind of Christ (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 2.16. 1 Cor. 2.16.


2. In respect of his Virtues, Graces, habitual Holiness. Mat. 11.29.
Learn of me (says Christ) for I am meek and lowly in heart: Christ was of a
meek and gentle Spirit. 2 Cor. 10.2.
I beseech you, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, says Paul. And
Christ was of an humble and lowly Spirit. Being in the form of God, Phil. 2.6,
7.
he thought it no robbery to be equal with God; yet he made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant. I might instance in all
other Graces; for he had them all in fullness: John 1.16.
And of his fullness have all we received, Grace for Grace.

3. In respect of his words, talk, spiritual and heavenly Language. The very
Officers of the Priests could say of Christ, Never man spoke like this man:
John 7.46.
and sometimes they all wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of
his mouth: Luke 4.22.
He never sinned in word; neither was guile found in his mouth; who, when he
was reviled, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23
reviled not again: The Apostle speaking thus of Christ, he tells us, that
herein Christ left us an example, that we should follow his steps. Ver. 21.


4. In respect of his Carriage, Conversation, Close-walking with God. The
Apostle sets forth Christ as an high Priest, who was holy, harmless, undefiled,
Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 2.9.
and separate from sinners; and in like manner, says Peter, Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye
should show forth the virtues of him, who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light: that ye should show forth the virtue] (i.e.) that in your
lives and conversations you should express those graces and virtues which were
so eminent and exemplary in Jesus Christ; that you should not only have them,
but that you should hold them forth; (...), the word signifies properly to
preach; so clearly should we express the virtues of Christ, as if our lives
were so many Sermons of the life of Christ.

In respect of all his acts, practices, duties of moral obedience; we find in
the life of Christ many particular carriages, and acts of obedience to his
heavenly Father; whereof some were moral, and some ceremonial: now all these
are not for our imitation, but only such moral acts, as concerning which, we
have both his pattern and precept. Come, let us mark this one Rule, and we need
no more; Whatsoever he commanded, and whatsoever he did, of precise Morality,
we are therein bound to follow his steps. I join together his Commands and
Deeds, because in those things which he did, but commands not, we need not to
conform; but in those things which he both did and commanded, we are bound to
follow him; in such a case his Laws and Practice differ, but as a Map and
guide, a Law, a Judge, a Rule, and Precedent.

In respect of all these particulars, and especially in respect of Christ's
moral obedience, the whole life of Christ was a Discipline, a living, shining,
and exemplary precept unto men; and hence it is that we find such names given
to him in Scripture, as signifies not only pre-eminence, but exemplariness;
thus he was called a Prince, Dan. 9.25. a Leader, Isa. 55.4. a Governor, Mat.
2.6. a Captain, 2.10. a chief Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5.4. aforerunner or conduct into
glory, Heb. 2.20. a light to the Jews, Exodus 13.21. a light to the Gentiles,
Luke 2.3. a light to every man that enters into the world, John 1.9. All which
titles, as they declared his dignity, so his exemplariness, that he was the
Author and pattern of holiness to his people. And as for all other Saints,
though they are imitable, yet with limitation unto him, only so far as they
express his life in their conversation: 1 Cor 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ.

For the second; why we must conform? upon what Motives? I answer, 1. Because
Christ has done and suffered very much to that end and purpose? Sometimes I
have wondered why Christ would do so much, and suffer so much as the Evangelists
in their histories relate. This I believe, that Jesus was perfect God, and
perfect man; and that every action of his life, and but one hour of his Passion
and death might have been satisfactory, and enough for the expiation and
reconcilement of ten thousand worlds; but now I am answered, that all those
instances of holiness, and all those kinds of virtues, and all those degrees of
passion, and all that effusion of his blood, was partly on this account, that
he might become an example to us, that he might shine to all the ages and
generations of the world, and so be a guiding star, and a pillar of fire to
them in their journey toward heaven: O my soul, how does this call on thee to
conform to Christ? What? that a smaller expense should be enough to thy
justification, and yet that the whole Magazine should not procure thy
sanctification? that at a lesser sum of obedience God might have pardoned thy
sin, and yet at a greater sum thou will not so much as imitate his holiness? In
a dark night, if an Ignis Fatuus go before thee, thou art so amuzed with that
little flame, that thou art apt to follow it, and lose thy self; and will thou
not follow the glories of the Sun of Righteousness, who by so many instances
calls upon thee, and who will guide thee into safety, and secure thee against
all imaginable dangers? God forbid! If it had not been for thy imitation, I
cannot think that Christ would have lived on earth so many years, to have done
so many gracious and meritorious works. O think of this!

2. Because Christ is the best and highest Exemplar of holiness that ever the
world ever had: hence we must needs conform to Christ (as the Apostle argues)
because he is the firstborn among many Brethren; Romans 8.29.
the first in every kind is propounded as a pattern of the rest; now Christ is
the firstborn. Christ is the head of all the predestinate, as the firstborn
was wont to be the head in all Families. The old saying is, Regis ad exemplar,
etc. A very deformity was sometimes counted an honor, if it were in imitation
of the Prince. It is storied of Nero, that having a wry neck, there was such an
ambition in men to follow the Court, that it became the fashion and Gallantry
of those times, to hold their necks awry; and shall not Christ, the King of
Saints, be much more imitated by his Saints? Col. 1.18.
Christ is the head of the body, the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
in all things he has the pre-eminence; and the rule is general, that, that
which is first and best in any kind, is the rule and measure of all the rest.
Why such is Christ; O then let him be the guide of our life, and of our manners.

3. Because Christ does not only give us an example, but he does cherish,
succor, and assist us by its easiness, complacency, and proportion to us. Some
sweetly observe, that Christ's piety (which we must imitate) was even,
constant, unblameable, complying with civil society, without any affrightment
of precedent, or without any prodigious instances of actions, greater than the
imitation of men. We are not commanded to imitate a life, whose story tells us
of ecstasies in prayer, of abstractions of senses, of extraordinary fastings to
the weakening of our spirits, and disabling of all animal operations; no, no;
but a life of justice, and temperance, and chastity, and piety, and charity,
and devotion; such a life as without which humane society cannot be conserved;
-- And it is very remarkable, that besides the easiness of this imitation,
there is a virtue and efficacy in the life of Christ; a merit, and impetration
in the several passages of Christ's life, to work out our imitation of him. In
the Bohemian history it is reported that Winceslaus their King, one winters
night going to his devotion in a remote Church, his servant Podavivus, who
waited on his Master, and endeavored to imitate his Masters piety, he began to
faint through the violence of the snow, and cold; at last the King commanded
him, to follow him, and to set his feet in the same footsteps which his feet
should mark, and set down for him; the servant did so, and presently he
fancied, or found a cure; thus Christ deals with us; it may be we think our way
to Heaven is troublesome, obscure, and full of objection; well, says Christ,
But mark my footsteps; come on, and tread where I have stood, and you shall
find the virtue of my example will make all smooth, and easy; you shall find
the comforts of my company, you shall feel the virtue and influence of a
perpetual guide.

4. Because Christ in his Word has commanded us to follow his steps: Learn of
me, Mat. 11.19. John 13.13.14, 15.
for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say
well, for so I am; if I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye
also ought to wash one another feet, for I have given you an example, that ye
should do as I have done to you. -- Put on therefore bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, Col. 3.12.13.
longsuffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. 1 Pet.
1.15, 16.
-- And as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation; because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy. -- Against this
some object, how can we be holy as Christ is holy, first, the thing is
impossible; and secondly, if we could, there would be no nee^ of Christ. But I
answer to the first; the thing if rightly understood, is not impossible; we are
commanded to be holy as Christ is holy, not in respect of equality, as if our
holiness must be of the same compass with the holiness of Christ; but in
respect of quality, our holiness must be of the same stamp, and truth, as the
holiness of Christ; as when the Apostle says, That we must love our neighbor
as our self; the meaning is, Romans 13.9.
not that our love to our neighbor should be Mathematically equal to the love
of our self, for the Law does allow of degrees in love, accordingly to the
degrees of relation in the thing beloved. Romans 12.9.
Do good unto all men, specially to those of the household of faith; love to a
friend may safely be greater than love to a stranger; or love to a wife, or
child, may safely be greater than to a friend; yet in all our love to others,
it must be of the self same nature, as true, as real, as cordial, as sincere,
as solid as that to our selves; We must love our neighbor as our selves (i.e.)
unfeignedly, and without dissimulation. -- Again, I answer, to the second,
Christ is needful notwithstanding our utmost holiness in two respects. 1.
Because we cannot come to full and perfect holiness, and so his grace is
requisite to pardon and cover our failings. 2. Because that which we do attain
unto, it is not of, or from our selves, and so his spirit is requisite to
strengthen us unto his service. We must be holy as Christ is holy, yet still we
must look at the holiness of Christ, as the sun, and root, and fountain; and
that our holiness is but as a beam of that sun, but as a branch of that root,
but as a stream of that fountain.

For the third, how we must conform to this life? I answer;

1. Let us frame to our selves some Idea of Christ, let us set before us the
life of Christ in the whole, and all the parts of it, as we find it recorded in
God's Book. It would be a large picture if I should draw it to the full, but
for a taste I shall give it in few lines. Now then setting aside the
consideration of Christ as God, or as Mediator, or as Head of his Church.

1. I look at the mind of Christ, at his judgment, will, affections; such as
love, joy, delight, and the rest; and especially at the compassions of Jesus
Christ. O the dear affections, and compassions which Christ had toward the
sons of men! this was his errand from Heaven, and while he was upon the earth
he was ever acting it, I mean his pitifulness, Luke 4.18. Psalm. 147.3.
I mean his affections, and compassion in healing broken hearts; so the
Psalmist, He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds; it is
spoken after the manner of a Surgeon, he had a tender heart toward all
broken hearts; he endeavored to put all broken bones into their native place
again; nor speak I thus only of him in respect of his office; but as he was
man, he had in him such a mind, that he could not but compassionate all in
misery; O what bowels! what stirrings, and boylings, and wrestlings of a pained
heart, touched with sorrow, was ever, upon occasion, in Jesus Christ? Matthew.
14.1. Mark 6.34.
peruse these texts, and Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and he
was moved with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick. -- And Jesus
when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward them,
because they were as sheep not having a shepherd. Mark 1.40, 41.
-- And there came a leper to him, and kneeling down to him, and saying to him,
if thou will, thou can make me clean, and Jesus moved with compassion, put
forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will, be thou clean. -- Then Jesus
called his disciples unto him, Mat. 15.32.
and said, I have compassion on the multitude. And for the two blind men that
cried out, Have mercy on us O Lord, thou son of David, Matthew. 20.34. Luke 15.20.
it is said, that Jesus stood still, -- and he had compassion on them, and
touched their eyes. And the poor prodigal returning, When he was yet a great
way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck
and kissed him. How sweet is this last Instance! that our sense of sinful
weakness, should be sorrow and pain to the bowels and heart of Jesus Christ!
you that are Parents of young Children, let me put the case; if some of you
standing in the relation of a Father, should see his Child sweat, and wrestle
under an over-load, till his back were almost broken, and that you should hear
him cry, Oh I am gone, I faint, I sinck, I dye; would not your bowels be moved
to pity? and would not your hands be stretched out to help? or if some of you
standing in the relation of a Mother, should see your sucking Child fallen into
a pit, and wrestling with the water, and crying for help, would you not stir,
nor be moved in heart, nor run to deliver the Child from being drowned? Surely
you would, and yet all this pity and compassion of yours is but as a shadow of
the compassions and dear affections that were, and that are in the heart of
Jesus Christ; O he had a mind devoid of sin, and therefore it could not but be
full of pity, mercy, and tender bowels of compassion.

2. I look at the grace in Christ; O he was full of grace, yea, full of all the
graces of the Spirit; Cant. 1.13, 14.
A bundle of Mirrh, is my well-beloved to me: -- My Beloved is unto me as a
cluster of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi: a bundle of Myrrh, and a
cluster of camphire denote all the graces of the Spirit; as many flowers are
bound together in a nosegay, so the variety of the graces of the Spirit,
concentered in the heart of Jesus Christ, ex. gr.

Matthew. 21.5.
1. In him was meekness, He comes unto thee meek: he had a sweet command and
moderation of his anger; Number. 12.3.
he was meek as Moses, nay, though Moses was very meek, and very meek above all
the men that were upon the face of the earth, yet Christ's meekness exceeded
Mose's, as the body does exceed the shadow.

2. In him was humility, he saved not the world by his power, but by his
humility; in his incarnation, Christ would be humble; and therefore he was born
of a poor Virgin, in a common Inn; in his life, his way on earth was a
continual lecture of humility; a little before his death he gave such an
example of humility as never was the like, He poured water into a basin, John
13.5.
and began to wash the disciples feet. O ye Apostles, why tremble ye not at the
wonderful sight of this so great humility? Peter, what do thou? will thou
ever yield that this Lord of Majesty should wash thy feet? methinks I hear
Peter, saying, What Lord, will thou wash my feet? art not thou the Son of the
living God? the Creator of the world, the beauty of the heavens; the Paradise
of Angels, the Redeemer of men, the brightness of the Fathers glory? and I,
what am I, but a worm, a clod of earth, a miserable sinner? and will thou
notwithstanding all this wash my feet? leave Lord, O leave this base office for
thy servants; lay down thy towel, and put on thy apparel again; beware that the
heaven, or the Angels of heaven be not ashamed of it, when they shall see that
by this ceremony thou set'st them beneath the earth; take heed least the
daughter of King Saul despise thee not, when she shall see thee girded about
with this towel, after the manner of a servant, and shall say, that she will
not take thee for her beloved, and much less for her God, whom she sees to
attend upon so base an office. Thus may I imagine Peter to bespeak his Master,
but he little knew what glory lay hid in this humility of Christ; it was for
us, and our example; an humble Christ, to make humble Christians.

3. In him was patience; O when I think of Christ's labors in preaching,
weariness in traveling, watchfulness in praying, tears in compassionating, and
then I add to all these his submission of Spirit, notwithstanding all the
affronts, injuries, and exprobrations of men; how should I but cry out, O the
patience of Christ! 1 Pet. 2.23.
the Apostle tells us that when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, -- I have already given a touch of these graces in Christ, which
now I may set before me. -- In him was wisdom, and knowledge, and justice, and
mercy, and temperance, and fortitude, and every virtue, or every grace that
possibly I can think of, A bundle of Myrrh is my Beloved unto me, as a cluster
of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi.

3. I look at the conversation of Christ in word and deed; for his words, they
were gracious. Not an idle word ever came out of the lips of Christ; himself
tells us that of every idle word we must give an account; O then how free was
Christ of every idle word? Mat. 12.36.
he knew the times and seasons when to speak, and when to be silent; he weighed
every word with every Circumstance, time, and place, and manner, and matter;
Eccles. 3.7.
There Is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak, said Solomon, when he
returned again to his wisdom; and hence we read that sometimes Jesus being
accused, he held his peace; Mat. 26.63.27, 12.
and when he was accused of the chief Priests and Elders, he answered nothing;
but other whiles he pours out whole Cataracts of holy instructions; he takes
occasion of vines, of stones, of water, and sheep, to speak a word in season;
he is still discoursing of the matters of the Kingdom of Heaven; and he speaks
such words as give grace unto all the hearers round about him; so for his deeds
and actions they were full of grace and goodness; the Apostle Peter gives him
this character (which I look upon as a little description of Christ's life) who
went about doing good; Acts 10.38.
it was his meat and drink to do all the good he could; it was as natural to
him to do good, as it is for a fountain to stream out, he was holy and
heavenly, unspotted every way; O the sweet conversation of Christ! how humbly
carries he it amongst men? how benignly toward his Disciples? how pitiful was
he toward the poor? to whom (as we read) he made himself most like, 2 Cor. 8.9.
He became poor, that we might be made rich; he despised, or abhorred none; no
not the very Leapers, that were eschewed of all; he flattered not, the rich and
honorable; he was most free from the cares of the world; his prescriptions
were, Care not for the things of the morrow; and in himself he was never
anxious of bodily needs; above all, he was most solicitous of saving souls. --
Much more I might add, if I should go over the particulars in the Gospel; but
by these few expressions of Jesus Christ we may conceive of all the rest. --

2. Let us be humbled for our great inconformity to this copy; what an
excellent pattern is here before us? and how far, how infinitely do we come
short of this blessed pattern? O alas! if Christ will not own me, unless he see
his Image written upon me, what will become of my poor soul? why Christ was
meek, and humble, and lowly in spirit; Christ was holy, and heavenly; Christ
ever went about doing good; and now when I come to examine my own heart
according to this original, I find naturally a meet antipathy, a contrariety, I
am as opposite to Christ as Hell and Heaven. 1. For my thoughts, within I am
full of pride, and malice; I am full of the spirit of the world; what is there
in my heart but a world of passions, rebellions, darkness, and deadness of
spirit to good? and, 2. If the fountain be so muddy, can I expect clear
streams? what words are these, that come many a time from me? Christ would not
speak an idle word, but how many idle, evil, sinful words come daily flowing
from my lips? Out of the abundance of the mouth the heart speaks; and if I
may guess at my heart by my words, where was my heart this Sabbath, and the
other Sabbath, when my discourse was all on my calling, or on the world, or it
may be on my lusts, or on my Dalilah's, on my right-hand-sins, or on my
right-eye-sins? and, 3. What actions are these so frequently performed by me?
if I must read my state by my conversation, Whose image and superscription is
this? the last oath I swear, the last blasphemy I belched out, the last act of
drunkenness, idolatry, adultery I committed, (or if these sins are not fit to
be named) the last piece of wrong I did my neighbor, the last prank of pride I
played on this stage of the world, the last expense of time when I did no good
in the world, neither to my self nor others, the last omission of good, as well
as commission of evil; O my soul, whose Image is this? is it the Image of
Christ, or of Satan? If the worst Scholar in the School should write thus
untowardly after his copy, would he not be ashamed? if in my heart and life I
observe so many blots and stains, so great inconformity, and dissimilitude to
the life of Christ, how should I but lie in the dust? O woe is me! what a vast
disproportion is betwixt Christ's life and mine? why thus, O my soul, should
thou humble thy self; each morning, each prayer, each meditation, each self
examination, should thou fetch new, fresh, clear, particular causes,
occasions, matters of humiliation: as thus; lo there the evenness, gravity,
graciousness, uniformity, holiness, spiritualities, divineness, heavenliness of
Jesus Christ; lo there the fragrant zeal, dear love, tender pity, constant
industry, unwearied pains, patience, admirable self-denial, contempt of the
world in Jesus Christ; lo there those many, yea continual devout, divine
breathings of soul after God his Fathers glory, after the spiritual and
immortal good of the precious souls of his redeemed ones; Oh all the admirable
meekness, mercifulness, clemency, charity, with all other excellent temperance,
rare composure, wonderful order of his blessed soul! O the sweet expressions,
gracious conversation! O the glorious shine, blessed luster of his divine Soul!
Oh the sweet countenance, sacred discourse, ravishing demeanor, winning
deportment of Jesus Christ! and now I reflect upon my self, on alas! Oh the
total, wide, vast, utter difference, distance, disproportion of mine there
from! I should punctually answer, perfectly resemble accurately imitate,
exactly conform to this life of Christ; but ah my unevenness, lightness,
vanity! Ah my rudeness, grossness, deformity, odiousness, sleightness,
contemptibleness, execrableness! Ah my sensuality, brutishness, devilishness!
how clearly are these, and all other my enormities discovered, discerned, made
evident, and plain by the blessed and holy life of Jesus? so true is that rule,
Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.

Psalm. 103.1.
3. Let us quicken, provoke, and incense our sluggish, drousie souls to conform
to Christ. If we will but strictly observe our hearts, we shall find them very
backward to this duty, and therefore let us call upon our souls as David did,
Bless the Lord O my soul, Romans 8.29.
and let all that is within me bless his holy Name; let us work upon our souls
by reasoning with our own hearts, as if we discoursed with them thus, O my
heart, or O my soul, if in the deep counsels of eternity this was Gods great
design to make his Son like thee, that thou also might be like his Son, how
then should thou but endeavor to conform? and what says the Apostle? For
whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of
his Son: this was one of his great purposes from eternity; this law God set
down, before he made the world, that I should conform to his Son: and what, O
my soul, would thou break the eternal bands of predestination? O, God
forbid! Again, if this was one of the ends of Christ's coming, to destroy the
works of the devil, to deface all Sathan's works, especially his work in me,
his Image in me, and to set his own stamp on my soul; how then should I but
endeavor to conform? I read but of two ends of Christ's coming into the world
in relation to us, whereof the first was to redeem his people, and the other
was to purify his people; He gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself, a
peculiar people, zealous of good works: the one is the work of his merit* which
goes upward, to the satisfaction of his Father; the other is the work of his
Spirit and grace, which goes downwards to the sanctification of his Church* in
the one he bestows his righteousness on us by imputation, on the other he
fashioneth his Image in as by renovation; and what, O my soul, would thou
destroy the end of Christ's coming in the flesh? or would thou miss of that
end for which Christ came in relation to thy good; O, God forbid! Again,
consider the example of the Saints before thee; if this was their holy ambition
to be like their Jesus, emulate them in this, for this is a blessed emulation;
it is observable how the heathens themselves had learnt a rule very near to
this; Seneca Senec. Ep. 11.
advised that every man should propound to himself, the example of some wise,
and virtuous personage, as Cato, or Socrates, or the like; and really to take
his life as the direction of all their actions; but is not the life of Jesus
far more precious, and infinitely more worthy of imitation? we read in history
of one Cecilia a Virgin, who accustomed her self to the beholding of Christ for
imitation, and to that purpose she ever carried in her breast some pieces of
the Gospel, which she had gathered out of all the Evangelists, and thereon
night and day she was either reading, or meditating; this work she carrried on
in such a circulation, that at last she grew perfect in it, and so enjoyed
Christ and the Gospel, not only in her breast, but also in the secrets of her
heart; as appeared by her love of Christ, and confidence in Christ, and
familiarity with Christ, Cant. 1.13.
as also by her contempt of the world, and all its glory, for Christ his sake;
There is some resemblance of this in the Spouse, when she resolved of Christ,
He shall lie all night betwixt my breast; q. d. he shall be as near me as near
may be, my meditation of him (and by consequence my imitation of him) shall be
constant and continual; not only in the day, but He shall lie all night betwixt
my breasts. What, O my soul, was this the practice of the Saints? and will thou
not be of that communion? O God forbid! thus let us quicken and provoke our
souls to this conformity; let us excite, rouse, incense, awake, and sharpen up
our wretched, sluggish, drouzy, lazy, souls; our faint, feeble, sl^gging
faultering, drooping languishing affections, desires, endeavors! let us with
enlarged industry engage, and encourage our backward and remiss spirits to fall
upon this duty of conformity, again and again; let us come up higher toward
it, or if possibly we may completely to it, that the same mind, and mouth, and
life may be in us that was in Jesus Christ, that we may be found to walk after
Christ, that we may tread in the very prints of the feet of Christ, that we may
climb up after him, into the same h^^ven! Kingdom, that we may aspire
continually toward him, and grow up to him, even to the measure of the statu^e
of the fullness of Christ.

4. Let us regulate our selves by the life of Christ; whatsoever action we go
about, let us do it by this rule, what? Would Christ have done this? or at
least, Would Christ have allowed this? It is true, some things are expedient
and lawful with us, which were not suitable to the Person of Christ, Marriage is
honorable with all men, and the bed undefiled; but it did not befit his
Person, who came into the world only to spiritual purposes, to beget sons and
daughters; writing of books is commendable with men, because like Abel, being
dead, they may still speak, and teach those who never saw them, but it would
have been derogatory to the Person and office of Christ, for it is his
Prerogative to be in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, to be present
to all his Members, to teach by power, and not by ministry, to write his Law in
the hearts of his people, and to make them his Epistle. Contrition,
Compunction, Mortification, Repentance, Acts 11.18.
for sin, are acts and duties necessary to our state and condition; for we are
sinners, and sinners of the Gentiles; To whom God also has granted repentance
unto life; but these were in no sort agreeable to Christ, for, he was without
sin, and needed not to repentance, nor to any part of it. The several states of
men, as of Governors, Kings, Judges, Lawyers, Merchants, etc. are convenient
for us, otherwise what ataxye, John 18.36.
and confusion would there be in the world? and yet Jesus never put himself
into any of these states; My Kingdom (says he) is not of this world. Now as in
these things we must only respect the Allowance of Christ, so in other things
we must reflect upon the example of Christ; as, 1. In sinful acts eschewed by
Christ. 2. In moral duties that were done by Christ.

1. In sinful acts eschewed by Christ, as when I am tempted to sin, then am I
to reason thus with my self, would my blessed Savior if he were upon earth
does thus and thus? when I am tempted to looseness and immoderate living, then
am I to ask conscience such a question as this, would Christ have done thus?
would he have spent such a life upon earth as I do? when I am moved by my own
corruption, or by Satan to drunkenness, gluttony, sinful and desperate
society, to swearing, cursing, revenge, or the like, then am I to ask, is this
the life that Christ led? or if he were to live again, would he live after this
manner? when I fall into passion, peevishness, rash words, or if it be but idle
words, then am I to consider, O but would Christ speak thus? would this be his
language? would such a rotten or unprofitable speech as this drop from his
honey lips?

2. In case of moral obedience, concerning which we have both his pattern, and
precept, I look upon Christ as my rule; and I question thus, did Christ
frequently pray both with his Disciples, and alone by himself? and shall I
never in my family, or in my closet think upon God? did Christ open his wounds
for me? and shall not I open my mouth to him? did Christ serve God without all
self ends, merely in obedience, and to glorify him? and shall I make God's
worship subordinate to my aims and turns? did Christ show mercy to his very
enemies? and shall I be cruel to Christ's very Members? O my soul, look in all
thy sins, and in all thy duties to thy original, and measure them by the
holiness of Christ* whether in avoiding sin, or in doing duty, think, What
would my blessed Savior do in this case? Or what did he in the li^e case, when
he was upon earth? If we had these thoughts every day, if Christ were
continually before our eyes, if in all we do or speak we should still muse on
this, What would Jesus Christ say if he were here? I believe it would be a
blessed means, of living in comfort, and spiritual conformity to the Commands
of God, yea, of acting Christ's life (as it were) to the life.

5. Let us look fixedly on Jesus Christ, let us keep our spiritual eyes still
on the pattern, until we feel our selves conforming to it: it is a true
saying, that Objects and moving reasons kept much upon the mind by serious
thoughts, are the great engine, both appointed by nature and grace, to turn
about the soul of man. If I may deliver it in fewer terms, Objects considered
much, or frequently, do turn the soul into their own nature. Such as the things
are we must think of, and consider of, such will be our selves; or if we be not
so, it is not through any imperfection in the object (especially in such an
object as Jesus Christ is) but because it is not well applied, and by
consideration held upon the heart, till it may work there; indeed the manner of
this working may be secret, and insensible, yet if we follow on, we shall feel
it in the issue; the beholding of Christ is a powerful beholding; there is a
changing, transforming virtue goes out of Christ, by looking on Christ; can we
think of his humility, and not be humble? can we think of his meekness and
gentleness of Spirit, and yet we continue in our fierceness, roughness,
frowardness of Spirit? can a proud fierce heart apprehend a meek, and sweet,
and lowly Jesus? no, no; the heart must be suitable to the thing apprehended,
it is impossible otherwise; certainly if the look be right, there must be a
suitableness betwixt the heart and Christ. Sight works upon the imagination in
brute creatures; as Laban's Sheep, when they saw the party-colored Rods, they
had Lambs suitable; now will sight work upon imagination, and imagination work
a real change in nature? and is not the eye of the mind (especially the eye of
faith) more strong and powerful? if I but write after a copy, I shall in a
while learn to write like it, if I seriously meditate on any excellent subject,
it will leave a print behind it on my spirit; if I read but the life and death
of some eminently gracious and holy man, it molds, and fashions, and
transforms, and conforms my mind to his similitude; even so, and much more is
it in this case; since the eye of faith works in the matter, which in it self
is operative and effectual, and therefore it cannot but work more, than where
is only simple imitation, or naked meditation; O then let us set the copy of
Christ's life (as before described) in our view, and let us look upon it with
both eyes, with the eye of reason, and with the eye of faith.

But how should we keep the eye of our faith on this blessed object, until we
feel this conformity in us? I answer. --

1. Let us set apart some times on purpose to act our faith in this respect;
There is a time for all things under the Sun, Eccles. 3.1.
says Solomon. It may be sometimes we are in our civil employments, but then
is not the time; yet when they are done, and the day begins to close, if
together with our closet prayer we would fall on this duty of looking unto
Jesus by lively faith, how blessed a season might this be? I know not but that
some Christians may do it occasionally, but for any that sets some time apart
for it every day, and that in conscience, as we do for prayer, where is he to
be found?

2. Let us remove hindrances; Satan labors to hinder the soul from beholding
Christ with the dust of the world, The God of this world blinds the eyes of
men; O take heed of fixing our eyes on this worlds vanity! our own corruptions
are also great hindrances to this view of Christ; away, away with all carnal
passions, base humors, sinful desires; unless the soul be spiritual, it can
never behold spiritual things.

3. Let us fix our eyes only on this blessed Object; a moving, rolling eye sees
nothing clearly; 1 Pet. 1.12.
When the Angels are said to look into these things, the word signifies that
they look into them narrowly, as they who bowing or stooping down do look into
a thing, so should we look narrowly into the life of Christ; our eye of faith
should be set upon in a steady manner, as if all the world could not move us,
as if we forgot all the things behind, and had no other business in the world
but this.

4. Let us look wishingly and cravingly; there is affection, as well as vision
in the eye; Acts 3.5.
as the lame man that lay in Solomon's porch looked wishly on Peter and John,
expecting to receive something of them, so let us look on Christ with a craving
eye, with an humble expectation to receive a supply of grace from Christ, Why
Lord thou art not only anointed with the the oil of gladness above thy fellows,
but for thy fellows; I am earthly minded, but thou art heavenly; I am full of
lusts, but the Image of God is perfect in thee; thou art the fountain of all
grace, an head of influence, as well as of eminence; thou art not only above
me, but thou have all grace for me, and therefore O give me some portion of thy
meekness, lowliness, heavenly-mindedness, and of all other the graces of thy
Spirit. Surely thou art an heaven of grace, full of bright shining stars, Oh
that of that fullness thou would give me to receive even grace for grace; I
pray Lord with an humble expectation of receiving from thee; Oh let me feel the
dropping of the two-olive trees into the golden candlesticks, yea even into my
soul.

5. Be we assured that our prayer (if it be in faith) is even now heard; never
any came to Christ with strong expectations to receive grace, or any benefit
prayed for, that was turned empty away; besides Christ has engaged himself by
promise to write his Law in our hearts; to make us like himself; As he which
has called us is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.
so should (yea, and so shall) we be holy in all manner of conversation. Oh let
us build on his gracious promise; Heaven and earth shall pass away before one
jot or title of his Word shall fail; only understand we his promise in this
sense, that our conformity must be gradual, not all at once, We all with open
face, beholding as in a glass, 2 Cor. 3.18.
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory
(i.e.) from grace to grace; or from glory inchoate in obedience, to glory
consumate, in our heavenly inheritance.

6. If notwithstanding all this, we feel not for the present this conformity in
us, at least in such a degree; let us act over the same particulars again and
again; the gifts of grace are therefore communicated by degrees, that we might
be taken off from living upon a received stock of grace; and that we might
still be running to the spring, and drink in there; why alas, we have a
continual need of Christ's letting out himself, and grace into our hearts, and
therefore we must wait at the wellhead, Christ; we must look on Christ as
appointed on purpose by his Father to be the Beginner and Finisher of our
holiness; and we must believe that he will never leave that work imperfect,
whereunto he is ordained of the Father. We may be confident (says the Apostle)
of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in us, will perform
it, or finish it, until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. Oh then be not
weary of this work until he accomplish the desires of thy soul.

I have now done with this subject: only before I finish, one word more.
Sometimes I have observed that many precious souls, in their endeavors after
grace, holiness, sanctification, have been frequent in the use of such and such
means, duties, ordinances; wherein I cannot say, but they have done well; and
for their help I therefore composed that piece called Media; but of all the
ordinances of Christ, this Looking unto Jesus is made least use of, though it
be chief of all: It is Christ (when all is done) that is that great Ordinance
appointed by God for grace and holiness; and certainly those souls which trade
immediately with Jesus Christ, will gain more in a day, than others in a
month, in a year. I deny not other helps, but amongst them all, if I would
make choice which to fall upon, that I may become more and more holy, I would
set before me this glass, (i.e.) Christ's holy life, the great examplar of
holiness; we were at first created after his Image in holiness, and this Image
we lost through our sin, and to this Image we should endeavor to be restored
by imitation; And how should this be done, but by looking on Christ as our
pattern? by running through the several Ages of Christ, and by observing all
his graces, and gracious actings? in this respect I charge thee, O my soul (for
to what purpose should I charge others, if I begin not at home, and with thee?)
that thou make conscience of this practical Evangelical duty; O be much in the
exercise of it! not only in the day intend Christ, but when night comes, and
thou lie down on thy bed, let thy pillow be as Christ's bosom, in which John
the beloved Disciple was said to lean; there lean thou with John; yea, lie thou
between his breast; and Let them lie all night betwixt thy breasts; thus may
thou lie down in peace and sleep, Cant. 1.13. Psalm. 4.8.
and the Lord only will make thee to dwell in safety; and when day returns
again, have this in mind, yea, in all thy thoughts, words, and deeds, even look
unto Jesus as thy holy examplar; Say to thy self, If Christ my Savior were now
upon earth, would these be his thoughts, words, and deeds? would he be thus
disposed as I now feel my self? would he speak these words that I am now
uttering? would he do this that I am now putting my hand unto? O let me not
yield my self to any thought, word, or action, which my dear Jesus would be
ashamed to own! yea (if it were possible for thee to be so constant in this
blessed duty) going and standing, sitting and lying, eating and drinking,
speaking and holding thy peace, by thy self or in company, cast an eye upon
Jesus; for by this means thou can not choose but love him more, and joy in him
more, and trust in him more, and be more and more familiar with him, and draw
more and more grace and virtue, and sweetness from him; O let this be thy
wisdom, to think much of Christ; so as to provoke thee to the imitation of
Christ! then shall thou learn to contemn the world, to do good to all, to
injure no man, to suffer wrong patiently, yea, to pray for all those that
despightfully use thee, and persecute thee; then shall thou learn to condescend
to the weak, to condole sinners cases, to embrace the penitent, to obey
Superiors, to minister to all; then shall thou learn to avoid all boasting,
bragging, scandal, immoderate eating and drinking; in a word, all sin. Then
shall thou learn to bear about in thy body the dying of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in thy body: So the Apostle,
For we which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh, 2 Corinthians. 4.10,
11. Why this is to follow Christ's steps, he descended from heaven to earth for
thy sake; do thou trample on earthly things, Seek after the Kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, for thy own sake; though the world be sweet, yet Christ is
sweeter; though the world prove bitter, yet Christ sustained the bitterness of
it for thee: and now he speaks to thee, as he did to Peter, Andrew, James, and
John, Come, follow me; O do not faint in the way, lest thou lose thy place in
thy Country, that Kingdom of glory.

Thus far we have looked on Jesus as our Jesus in his life, during the whole
time of his Ministry; our next work is to look on Jesus, carrying on the great
work of man's salvation, during the time of his suffering and dying on the
cross, until his resurrection from the dead. LOOKING UNTO JESUS In His Death.
The Sixth Book. PART III.
CHAP. I.
Lam. 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see.

Heb. 12.3. Consider him who has endured such contradiction of sinners against
him.


SECT. I. Of the day of Christ's Sufferings, divided into parts and hours.
THe Son of Righteousness, that arose with healing, we shall now see go down in
a ruddy Cloud. And in this Piece, as in the former, we must first lay down the
Object, and then direct you to look upon it.

The Object is Jesus, carrying on the work of man's Salvation during the time of
his Sufferings; now in all the transactions of this life, we shall observe
them, as they were carried on successively in those few hours of his Passion
and death.

As this work of man's salvation was great, so we cannot but observe how every
piece of it was carried on in its due time, even from eternity to eternity. The
very time of Christ's passage depended not on the will of man; for his enemies
sought many a time before to slay him* as Herod in his Infancy, Matthew. 2.16.
The Jews in his riper age, when sometimes they took up stones to stone him,
John 8.59. and sometimes they would have broke his neck from an hill, Luke
4.29: but his time was not then come. We read of the Paschal Lamb, that it was
to be slain on the fourteenth day of the first Month called Abib, or Nisan:
Exodus 12.2, ^.
at the full of the Moon in the evening or between the evenings; some think
this Month answers to our March, others to our April, I shall not be too
curious in the Inquisition; for I think it not worth the while: only this, I
cannot but observe, that the same day that the Lamb must be slain, must our
Paschal Lamb begin his sufferings; and as then it was full Moon, so it notes
unto us the fullness of time which now was come; and as it was in such a Month,
as when light prevails against darkness, and every thing revives and springs;
so Christ by his sufferings was to chase away our darkness and death, and to
bring in light and life, and a blessed spring of Grace and Glory; and as it was
to be slain in the evening, or between the evening; so must Christ the true
Paschal Lamb be sacrificed about the very same hour that the Mystical Lamb was
slain: to understand which, we must know, that the Jews distinguished their
Artificial day into four parts; from six to nine, from nine to twelve, from
twelve to three, from three to eight; this last part was counted the Evening of
the Day, and the next three hours the Evening of the Night; now in this last
part of the Day used the Paschal Lamb to be slain; and after it was slain, some
time was taken up to dress it whole for Supper; so Christ at the fourth part of
the day, at their nineth hour, that is, at our three of the Clock in the
afternoon, between the Evenings, Mat. 27.50.
with a loud voice yielded up the Ghost.

For the whole time of these last and extreme sufferings of Christ, I shall
reduce them to somewhat less than one natural day; or if we may take the whole
day before us consisting of twenty four hours, and begin with the Evening,
according to the beginning of natural days from the Creation (as it is said,
Genesis 1.5.
the evening and the morning made the first day). In this revolution of time, I
shall observe these several passages. -- As.

1. About six in the Evening Christ celebrated, and eat the Passover with his
Disciples, at which time he instituted the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
this continued till the eighth hour.

2. About Eight in the Evening he washed his Disciples feet, and then leaning
on the Table, he pointed out Judas that should betray him; and this continued
until the nineth hour.

3. About Nine in the Evening (the second Watch in the night) Judas that
Traitor, went from the Disciples; and in the mean time Christ made that
spiritual Sermon, and afterward that spiritual Prayer recited only by John;
John 14, 15, 16, 17 chapt. and this, (together with a Psalm they sung)
continued at least until the tenth hour. Thus far we proceeded before we had
done with the Life of Christ. That which concerns his Passion, follows
immediately upon this; and upon that only I shall take notice in my following
Discourse.

This Passion of Christ I shall divide between the night and day. 1. For the
night, and his sufferings therein, we may observe these periods, or
thereabouts. As --

1. From ten to twelve he goes over the Brook Cedron to the Garden of
Gethsemani, where he prayed earnestly, and sweat water and blood.

2. From twelve till three he is betrayed, and by the soldiers and other
Officers, he is bound, and brought to Jerusalem, and carried into the house of
Annas, who was one of the chief Priests.

3. From three till six, they led him from Annas to Caiaphas, when he and all
the Priests of Jerusalem sat upon Jesus Christ; and there it was that Peter
denied Christ, and at last the whole Sanhedrim of the Jews gave their consent
to Christ's Condemnation.

2. The Night thus dispatched, at six in the morning, about sunrising, our
Savior was brought unto Pilate, and Judas Iscariot hanged himself, because he
had betrayed innocent Blood. -- About seven in the same morning Christ is
carried to Herod, that cruel Tyrant, who the year before had put John the
Baptist to death. -- At eight of the same day our Savior Christ is returned to
Pilate, who propounded to the Jews, whether they would have Jesus or Barabbas
let loose unto them. -- About the ninth, (which the Jews call the third hour of
the day) Christ was whipped, and crowned with Thorns. About ten, Pontius Pilate
brought forth Jesus out of the Common Hall, saying, Behold the man; and then in
the place called Gabbatha, he publicly condemned Christ to be Crucified. About
eleven our Savior carried his Cross, and was brought to the place called
Golgotha, where he was fastened on the Cross, and lifted up, as Moses lifted up
the Serpent in the Wilderness. -- About twelve (in that Meridian which the Jews
call the sixth hour) that supernatural Eclipse of the Sun happened. -- And
about three in the afternoon (which the Jews call the nineth hour) the Sun now
beginning to receive his Light, Christ cried, It is finished; and commending
his Spirit into his Fathers hands, he gave up the Ghost. -- I shall add to
these; that about four in the Afternoon, our blessed Savior was pierced with a
Spear, and there issued out of his side both Blood and Water. -- And about five
(which the Jews call the eleventh, and the last hour of the day) he was buried
by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. -- So that in this round of our natural
day, you see the wonderful transaction of Christ's sufferings. I shall take
them in order, and begin with his sufferings in that night before his
crucifying. And Jesus said unto his Disciples, Mat. 21.31. Mark 16.30.
all ye shall be offended because of me this night: and he said unto Peter,
that this day, even in this night, before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny
me thrice.

SECT. II. Of the Brook over which Christ passed.
THe first passage of that Night, was Christ's going over the Brook Cedron, to
the Garden of Gethsemane. When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with
his Disciples over the Brook Cedron, where was a Garden, into which he entered,
John 18.1.
and his Disciples.

In this passage observe we these Particulars. 1. The River over which they
passed. 2. The Garden into which they entered. 3. The Prayer he there made, and
the dolours and agonies he there suffered.

1. He and his Disciples went over the Brook Cedron. So it was called (say
some) from the same Cedars that grew all along the Banks; or (say others) from
the darkness of the Valley, so Kader signifies darkness; and this was done to
fulfill a Prophecy; Psalm. 110.7.
He shall drink of the Brook in the way. By the Brook or Torrent, we may
understand mystically the wrath of God, and the rage of men, the very
afflictions, which befell Jesus Christ: and by his drinking of the Brook, we
may understand Christ enduring afflictions, or (as others) his enduring many
afflictions, and not a few. 1. That afflictions are understood by waters, we
find it very frequently in Scriptures; Psalm. 18.4. Psalm. 42.7. Psalm. 69.1.
Psalm. 124.1, 4, 5.
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of Belial made me afraid. --
Deep calls unto deep, at the noise of the water spouts, all thy waves and thy
billows are gone over me. -- And, Save me, O God, for the waters are come in
unto my soul; and, if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, -- then the
waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul, then the proud
waters had gone over our soul.

2. As waters signify afflictions; so Christ drinking of those waters, it
signified Christ's suffering of afflictions; or as others, it signifies
Christ's suffering of many afflictions. Thus we find together two words with
relation thereunto, are ye able to drink of the cup (says Christ) that I shall
drink of, Mat. 20.22.
and to be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with? He that drinks,
has the water in him, and he that is baptized, dipped, or plunged, has the
water about him; so it notes the variety or universality of afflictions which
Christ suffered; it was within him, and it was about him, he was every way
afflicted.

Not to speak yet of those sufferings, which yet we are not come to speak unto;
we find here in the way, betwixt the City and the Garden, that Christ went over
the Brook Cedron; in the night he wades through cold waters on bare feet; and
as he wades through them, he drinks of them, he does not sip, but drink; he
shall drink of the Brook in the way. I know some would not have this Prophecy
accomplished till before Christ's apprehension, when it is said that the rude
rout brought him again to Jerusalem, over the Brook Cedron; and then he drunk
of the Brook; but I find no mention of this Brook in Scripture at such a time;
only now in this way, I find these passages. 1. His Conference with his
Disciples as they go along. 2. The Disciples reply upon his Conference. 3. His
dolorous passage over the Brook, betokening the very wrath of God.

1. In the way Vid. Arot. in locum. Mat. 26.30, 36
he has a serious conference with his disciples: so the Evangelist; and when
they had sung an hymn, they went out toward the mount of Olives, and then
says Jesus unto them, all ye shall be offended because of me this night; for
it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered abroad. Christ now begins the story of his Passion; the shepherd
shall be smitten; and he proves it from Gods Decree, and from the Prophecy of
the Prophet, Zech. 13.7. Zech. 13.7.
Awake, O Sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow. --
Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad. God the Father is
here brought in, as drawing and whetting his Sword, and calling upon it, to do
execution against Jesus Christ; God the Father had an hand in the sufferings;
It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief. Isa. 53.10.
-- I will smite the shepherd, says God; it was not a naked permission, but a
positive decree, and actual providence of God that Christ should suffer; the
plot was long since drawn, and lay hid in Gods bosom, till he was pleased by
the actions of men to copy it out, and to give the world a draught of it. This
was not a thing of yesterday; no, no; God spent his eternal thoughts about it;
the Story was long since written in Zecharie's Book, Psalm. 40.8. Acts 2.23.
and in the Volume of Gods Book; Christ was ordained to be a Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world; him being delivered by the determinate council and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken (says Peter) and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain: the enemies of Christ, though they broke Commands, yet
they fulfilled Decrees. Acts 4.27, 28.
Against thy holy Child Jesus whom thou have anointed, both Herod, and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel were gathered together, for to
do whatsoever thy hand and thy council determined before to be done. The Story
of Christ's sufferings was long since taken up, and resolved on in the Councils
of Heaven; and now in the way the only begotten Son which lay in the bosom of
his Father, reveals this story; he tells his Disciples, It is written, it is
written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered.

2. The Disciples hearing this discovery of the shepherd being smitten, and the
sheep being scattered, they are amazed; what shall Christ die? and shall we
like cowards run away, and leave him alone in the combat? Peter, who seems
boldest, he speaks first; Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet
will I never be offended. O rash presumption! It appears in these particulars;
-- 1. Peter prefers himself before the rest, as if all the other Disciples had
been weak, and he only strong; though all should be offended, yet will not I.
2. Peter contradicts Christ's great discovery of his Fathers great design from
all eternity, with a few bragging words; q. d. what though Zechary has said
it, and God has decreed it, yet on my part, I will never do it; Though I
should die with thee, I will not deny thee. 3. Peter in his boast never
mentions God's help, or God's assistance; whereas in relation to future
promises, and future purposes, the Apostles Rule is, Jam. 4.15.
ye ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, and that: So
Peter should have said, by God's assistance I will not be offended; by the
Lord's help, I will not deny thee; if the Lord will, I will do this and that; I
will live with thee, and die with thee, rather than I will deny thee; but we
find no such word in all the Story; and therefore Christ takes him off his
bottoms in the first place; Mat. 26.35.
Verily I say unto thee Peter, that this night before the Cock crow twice, thou
shall deny me thrice: Oh no, says Peter; he will not go off his presumptuous
confidence; though I should die with thee, I will not deny thee; likewise also
said all his Disciples. But I must not dwell on these passages.

3. His dolorous passage over the Brook succeeds; He went forth with his
Disciples over the Brook Cedron: I never read of this Brook Cedron, but some
way or other it points at the sufferings of our Savior; I shall instance in
some places. 1. When David fled from Absalom out of Jerusalem, it is said that
all the Country wept with a loud voice, 2 Samuel 15.23.
and all the people passed over; the King also himself passed over the Brook
Cedron. -- toward the way of the wilderness. In this story we find David
passing over this Brook Cedron with bare head and bare feet; and he and all his
men weeping as they went up by the Ascent of Mount Olivet: I cannot think but
in this, King David was a type of King Jesus: Christ, as another David, with
his Soldiers or Disciples, goes out of Jerusalem, bare-head and barefoot (as
this type seems to speak) what weeping was in the way, I cannot tell; but
probably sadness was in the hearts both of him and his Disciples; whose
conference was of flying, suffering, dying the most grievous death that ever
was; all the difference that I find betwixt the type and antitype in this
passage, is, in that David fled from the face of Absalom, but Christ goes out
of Jerusalem, not to fly from Judas, or the Jews, but rather to commit himself
into their hands.

1 Kin. 2.36, 37
2. When Solomon confined Shimei to his House in Jerusalem, saying, Dwell there,
and go not forth thence any whither; for it shall be, that on the day thou
go out, and passest over the Brook Cedron, thou shall know for certain that
thou shall surely die. Now two of the servants of Shimei running away from him,
he follows after them, and passing over this Brook Cedron, it became his death;
why, here was a type of Jesus Christ; we were those fugitive servants that run
away from God; and to fetch us home, Jesus goes over the brook Cedron; rather
than he will lose his servants, he will lose his life, All the difference that
I find betwixt Shimei and Christ in this, is, in that Shimei was but a wicked
man, and yet he died an honorable death, not for his servants, but for his own
transgression; but Christ, being a just man (so Pilate's wife sent her Husband
word, Have thou nothing to do with that just man) he died a most ignominious
shameful death, even the death of the Cross, and that not for himself, but for
us; Isa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities.

3. When the good Kings, Hezekiah, and Asa, and Josiah purged the City and the
Temple of Idolatry, they burnt the cursed things at the Brook Kidron, and cast
them therein. And Asa cut down the Idol, 2 King, 23.6. 2 Chr. 29.16.
and he brought out the Grove from the House of the Lord without Jerusalem unto
the Brook Kidron, and burnt it at the Brook Kidron; -- and the Priests went
into the inner part of the house of the Lord, to cleanse it, and brought all
the uncleanness that they found in the Temple of the Lord, into the Court of
the house of the Lord; and the Levites took it to carry it out abroad into the
Brook Kidron. -- and they arose and took away the Altars that were in
Jerusalem, and all the Altars for Incense took they away, 2 Chr. 20.14.
and cast them into the Brook Kidron, or Cedron. All these note unto us, that
the Brook was as it were the sink of the Temple, into which all the purgamenta,
and uncleanness of Gods house, and all the accursed things were to be cast:
and here again was a type of Christ; upon him was cast all the filths of our
sins, that as a River or Fountain he might cleanse us from them; in this
respect he is said to be made sin for us who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: he was made sin for us,
and a curse for us, that so he might swallow up Sin and Death, and might be
destruction of Hell, and all.

I cannot pass over this passage of the Brook without some Use or Application
to our selves.

1. It informs. Methinks this Valley, and this Brook of Cedron is a right
representation of a Christians Life; Jesus went forth with his Disciples over
the Brook Cedron: Use.
What is our life if we are Christ's, but a passage through a vale of tears,
and over a Brook of several afflictions? Many are the troubles of the
righteous. Psalm. 34.19.
The very word Cedron, which signifies darkness, denotes this state, an horror
of great darkness was said to fall on Abraham, and then said God, Genesis 15.12, 13
know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not
theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years.
As God made the evening and the morning the first day, and second day, and
third day, etc. See, O the life of Gods Saints is as the evening of troubles,
and their happiness hereafter is as the morning of Glory; God's worst is first,
with those that are his; the way to Canaan is through the wilderness; the way
to Sion is through the valley of Baca. Through much tribulation we must enter
into the Kingdom of God. Psalm. 84.6. Acts 14.22. John 16.33. 2 Timothy 3.12,
In the world ye shall have tribulation, says Christ; yea, all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, says the Apostle; -- Our rest
is not here in this world; what is this world, but an Ark of travel, a school
of vanities, a fear of deceits, a Labarinth of error, a barren wilderness, a
strong field, a tempestous sea, a swelling brook, a vale of tears full of all
miseries?

2. It reproves. It is the first passage of Christ when he begins his
sufferings, to go over the Brook Cedron, and it is the A, B, C of Christianity
(as Bradford said) to learn the Lesson of taking up the Cross and following
Christ. Surely this world is no place, and this life it is no time for
pleasure; God has not cast man out of Paradise, that he should find another
Paradise on this side heaven. Oh why do we seek the living among the dead? Why
do we seek for living comforts, where we must expect to die daily? it is only
heaven that is above all winds, and storms and tempests, and seas, and brooks,
and waves: Oh why do we look for joys in a vale of tears? It was an heavy
charge that the Apostle James laid upon some, that they lived in pleasure upon
earth, q. d. Earth is not the place for pleasure; earth is the place of sorrow,
of trouble, of mourning, Jam. 5.5.
of affliction; Remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things,
Luke. 16.25.
and Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art Tormented. All
the pleasure that wicked men have, it is upon earth; but the condition of the
godly is clean contrary: Oh it is sad to outlive our happiness, and when we
should live indeed, then to want our comforts and our joys. Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward; Mat. 6.2. Job 21.13.
said Christ of Hypocrites; their Heaven is past; they spend their days in
wealth, or in mirth (says Job) of the wicked, and in a moment go down to the
Grave: Alas, their best days are then past, and they must never be merry any
more. Ah fond Fools, of Adam's seed, to lose Heaven for a little earthly
contentment! How should this sour your carnal joys, when you remember, all
this is only upon earth, it cannot be for ever? there must be a change of all
these things; here you laugh, and hereafter you must howl: no sooner death
comes, but then you will cry, Farewell world; Oh into what a Gulf am I now falling!

3. It instructs. Ah my Brethren! let us remember, we are pilgrims and strangers
upon earth, and our way lies over the Brook and Valley of Cedron; we cannot
expect to enter with Christ into glory, but we must first drink of the Brook in
the way; (i.e.) we must endure many afflictions, variety of afflictions. -- You
will say, this an hard saying, who can hear it? I remember when Jesus told his
Disciples of his sufferings to be accomplished at Jerusalem, Peter takes the
boldness to dehort his Master; Be it far from thee, Mat. 16.22.
Lord, this shall not be unto thee; but Jesus thereupon calls him Satan,
meaning that no greater contradictions can be offered to the designs of God and
Christ, than to diswade us from sufferings. There Is too much of Peter's humor
abides amongst us: Oh this Doctrine of afflictions will not down with
Libertines, Antinomians, and the like; and hence we believe we have our
Congregations so thin in comparison of some of theirs; they that can break off
the yoke of Obedience, and untie the Bands of Discipline, and preach a cheap
Religion, and present heaven in the midst of flowers, and strew palms and
carpets in the way, and offer great liberty of living under sin, and reconcile
eternity with the present enjoyment, shall have their Schools filled with
Disciples; but they that preach the Cross, and sufferings, and afflictions, and
strictness of an holy life, they shall have the lot of their blessed Lord,
(i.e.) they shall be ill thought of, and deserted, and railed against. Well,
but if this be the way that Christ has led us, whilst others abide at ease in
Zion, let us follow him in the valley, and over the Brook that is called Cedron.

Thus far have we observed Christ in the way; together with his passage over
Cedron: we come now to the Garden, into which he entered, and his Disciples.

SECT. III. Of the Garden into which Christ entered.
Mat. 26.36.
MAtthew relates it thus, then comes Jesus with them unto a place called
Gethsemane; (...), it signifies in special, a Field, a Village; but more
generally a Place, as we translate it; and this place was called Gethsemane
(i.e.) a valley of fatness: Certainly it was a most fruitful and pleasant
place, seated at the foot of the Mount of Olives: accordingly John relates it
thus, John 18.1.
Jesus went forth with his Disciples over the Brook Cedron, where was a Garden;
many Mysteries are included in this Word; and I believe it is not without
reason, that our Savior goes into a Garden. As, -- 1. Because Gardens are
solitary places fit for meditation and prayer; to this end we find Christ
sometimes on a Mountain, and sometimes in a Garden. 2. Because Gardens are
places fit for repose and rest, when Christ was weary with preaching, working
of Miracles, and doing acts of Grace in Jerusalem, then he retires into this
Garden. 3. Because a Garden was the place wherein we fell, and therefore Christ
made choice of a Garden, to begin there the greatest work of our Redemption: In
the first Garden was the beginning of all evils, and in this garden was the
beginning of our restitution from all evils; in the first Garden, the first
Adam was overthrown by Satan, and in this Garden the second Adam overcame, and
Satan himself was by him overcome; in the first Garden sin was contracted, and
we were indebted by our sins to God; and in this Garden sin was paid for, by
that great and precious price of the blood of God: in the first Garden man
surfeited by eating the forbidden fruit; and in this Garden Christ sweat it out
wonderfully, even by a bloody sweat: in the first Garden, Death first made its
entrance into the world; and in this Garden Life enters to restore us from
Death to Life again: in the first Garden Adam's Liberty to sin brought himself
and all us into bondage; and in this Garden, Christ being bound and fettered,
we are thereby freed and reduced to liberty. I might thus descant in respect of
every Circumstance; but this is the sum; in a Garden first begun our sin, and
in this Garden first began the Passion, that great Work and Merit of our
Redemption. 4. Christ goes especially into this Garden, that his enemies might
the more easily find him out; the Evangelist tells us, that this Garden was a
place often frequented by Jesus Christ; so that Judas, which betrayed him, knew
the place, John 18.2.
for Jesus oftentimes resorted thither with his Disciples; sure then he went
not thither to hide himself, but rather to expose himself; and like a noble
Champion, to appear first in the field, and to expect his enemies. Thus it
appears to all the world, that Christ's death was voluntary. He poured forth
his soul unto death (says the Prophet) he gave himself for our sins (says the
Apostle) nay, Isa. 53.12. Gal. 1.4. John 10.17, 18
himself tells us, therefore does my Father love me because I laid down my
life: no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it up again. But I will not stay you at
the Door; let us follow Christ into the Garden, and observe his Prayer and his
Sufferings there.

SECT. IV. Of the Prayer that Christ there made.
JEsus entering the Garden, he left his Disciples at the entrance of it, calling
with him Peter, James and John; they only saw his transfiguration, the earnest
of his future Glory, and therefore his pleasure was, that they only should see
of how great glory he would disrobe himself, even for our sakes. -- In the
garden we may observe, first his Prayer, and secondly his Passion.

1. He betakes himself to his great Antidote, which, himself, the great
Physician of our souls, prescribed to all the world; he prays to his heavenly
Father; he kneels down; and not only so, but falls flat upon the ground; he
prays with an intention great as his sorrow, and yet with a submission so
ready, Mat. 26.39.
as if the Cup had been the most indifferent thing in the world. The Form of
his Prayer ran thus, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me,
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. In this Prayer observe we these
Particulars: 1. The person to whom he prays, O my Father. 2. The matter for
which he prays; Let this Cup pass from me. 3. The Limitation of this Prayer;
If it be possible, and if it be thy will.

1. For the Person to whom he prays; it is his Father: As Christ prayed not in
his Godhead, but according to his Manhood, so neither prayed he to himself as
God; but to the Father, the first person of the Godhead: Hence some observe,
that as the Father sometimes saying, This is my beloved Son, he spoke not to
himself, but to the Son; so the Son usually saying, O my Father, he prays not
to himself, but to the Father.

2. For the Matter of his Prayer: Let this Cup pass from me: Some interpret
thus; Let this Cup pass by me, Oh that I might not taste it! But others thus;
Let this Cup pass from me; though I must taste it, yet Oh that I may not be
Quod dicit, transfer calicem istum a me, non hoc est, non adveniat mihi; nisi
enim advenerit, transferri non poterit, sed sicut quod praeterit, nec intactum
est, noc permanens; sic Salvator leviter invadentem tentationem flagitat pelli.
Sic Dionisius Alexandrin. Heb. 5.7.
too long, or tediously annoyed by it! That which leads unto this last
interpretation is that of the Apostle, Christ in the days of his flesh offered
up Prayers and Supplications with strong cries and tears unto him that was able
to save him from death, and he was heard in that which he feared, Heb. 5.7. How
was he heard? not in the removal of the Cup; for he drank it up all: but in
respect of the tedious annoyance or poisoning of the Cup; for though it made
him sweat drops of blood, though it grieved him, and pained him, and made him
cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Though it cast him into a
sleep, and laid him dead in his Grave, and there sealed him for a time; yet
presently within the space of forty hours, or thereabouts, he revived, and
awakened as a Lion out of sleep, or as a Giant refreshed with wine; and so it
passed from him, as he prayed, in a very short time, and by that short and
momentary death, he purchased to his people everlasting Life.

3. For the Limitation of his Prayer; If it be possible, if it be thy will: He
knows what is his Fathers will, and he prays accordingly, and is willing to
submit unto it: if the passing of the Cup be according to the last
interpretation, we shall need none of these many distinctions to reconcile the
will of God and Christ: If it be possible, signifies the earnestness of the
Prayer: and if it be thy will, the submission of Christ unto his Father; the
Prayer is short but sweet: How many things needful to a Prayer do we find
concentred in this one instance? Here is Humility of Spirit, Lowliness of
Deportment, Importunity of Desire, a Fervent Heart, a Lawful Matter, and a
Resignation to the will of God. Some think this the most fervent prayer that
ever Christ made on earth; If it be possible, O! if it be possible, let this
Cup pass from me: And I think it was the greatest dereliction and submission to
the will of God, that ever was found upon the earth, for whether the Cup might
pass or not pass, he leaves it to his Father; nevertheless, not as I will, but
as thou will, q. d. Though in this Cup are many Ingredients, it is full red,
and has in it many dregs, and I know I must drink, and suck out the very
utmost dreg, yet whether it shall pass from me in that short time, or continue
with me a long long time, I leave it to thy will: I see in respect of my
humanity, there is in me flesh and blood, O! I am frail and weak; I cannot but
fear the wrath of God, and therefore I pray thus earnestly to my God; O, my
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou will.

But what was there in the Cup, that made Christ pray thus earnestly that it
might pass from him? I answer, --

1. The great pain that he must endure; the buffettings, whippings, bleedings,
crucifying; all the torments from first to last throughout all his body: why
all these now came into his mind, and all these were put into the Cup of which
he must drink.

2. The great shame that he must undergo, this was more than pain: as a good
name is better than precious Ointment, and loving favor better than silver and
Gold; so is shame a greater punishment to the mind, than any torture can be to
the flesh. Now came into his thoughts his apprehending, binding, judging,
scorning, reviling, condemning; and Oh what a bloody blush comes into the face
of Christ, whilst in the cup he sees these Ingredients!

3. The neglect of men, notwithstanding both his pain and shame: I look upon
this as a greater cut to the heart of Christ than both the former: when he
considered, that after all his sufferings and reproaches, few would regard, O
this was a bitter Ingredient! naturally men desire, if they cannot be
delivered, yet to be pitied; it is a kind of ease, even to find some regard
among the Sons of men; it shows that they wish us well, and that they would
give us ease if they could; but Oh when it comes to this, that a poor wretch is
under many sufferings, and great shame, and that he finds none so much as to
regard all this, now verily it is an heavy case; and hence was Christ's
Complaint: Have ye no regard, Lam. 1.12.
O all ye that pass by the way? Consider, and behold, if ever there were sorrow
like unto my sorrow, which was done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted
me in the days of his fierce anger. Christ complains not of the sharp pains he
endured, but he complains of this, Have ye no regard? He cries not out, Oh
deliver me and save me; but Oh consider and regard me; q. d. All that I suffer
I am contented with, I regard it not; only this troubles me, that you will not
regard: why, it is for you that I endure all this; and do you so look upon it,
as if it nothing at all concerned you? Suppose a Prince should pay some mighty
price to redeem a slave from death, and the slave should grow so desperate, as
after the price paid, to throw himself upon his death, yea, with all the
strength and might he has, to offer a death upon his very Redeemer, would not
this trouble? Why, thus it was; Christ is willing to redeem us with his own
precious blood, Heb. 10.29.
but he saw many to pass by without any regard, yea, ready to trample his
precious blood under their feet, and to account the blood of the Covenant as an
unholy thing: Oh this was another Spear in the heart of Christ, or a bitter
Ingredient in this Cup.

4. The Guilt of sin which he was now to undergo; upon him was laid the
iniquity of us all. Isa. 53.6.
All the sins of all Believers in the world, from the first Creation, to the
last Judgment, were laid on him: Oh what a weight was this! Surely one sin is
like a Talent of Lead; Oh then what were so many thousands of millions? The
very earth it self groans under the weight of sin until this day. David cried
out, that his iniquities were a burden too heavy for him to bear: Psalm. 38.4.
Amos. 2.13.
Nay, God himself complains, Behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is
pressed that is full of sheaves. Now then, no wonder if Christ bearing all the
sins of Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, cry out, My Soul is heavy; for sin
was heavy on his soul. -- In that I say, all the sins of all Believers were
laid on Christ, understand me soberly; my meaning is not that Believers sins
were so laid on Christ, as that they ceased to be Believers sins according to
their physical and real in-dwelling, but only that they were laid on Christ by
Law-imputation, or by legal-obligation to satisfactory punishment. I make a
difference betwixt sin, and the guilt of sin; for sin it self is macula, the
blot, the defilement, and blackness of sin, which I conceive, is nothing but
the absence and privation of that moral rectitude and righteousness which the
Law requires: but the guilt of Sin is somewhat issuing from this blot and
blackness, according to which the Person is liable and obnoxious to eternal
punishment. Some indeed give a distinction of the guilt of sin; there is reatus
culpae, the guilt of sin, as sin, and this is all one with sin, being the very
essence, soul, and formal being of sin; they call it a fundamental, or
potential guilt; and there is reatus poenae, reatus personae, reatus actualis,
the guilt or obligation to punishment, the actual guilt, or actual obligation
of the person who has thus sinned to punishment; and this guilt is a thing far
different from sin it self, and is separable from sin: yea, and is removed from
sin in our justification. Now this was the sin or guilt, which was laid on
Christ, in which sense the Apostle speaks, who his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the Tree; 1 Pet. 2.24. Isa. 53.6. 2 Cor. 5.21.
how bare our sins on the Tree, but by his sufferings? -- And he has laid on
him the iniquity of us all? -- how laid on him, but by imputation? -- And he
has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; how made sin for us? surely
there was in Christ no fundamental guilt; no, no, but he was made Sin by
imputation and Law-account: he was our surety, and so our sins were laid on him
in order to punishment, as if now in the Garden, he had said to his Father,
Thou have given me a Body, as I have taken the debts and sins of all believers
in the world upon me: Come now, and arrest me as the only Play Master; lo here I
am to do and suffer for their sins, whatsoever thou please, Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8.
Heb. 10.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Or, as if he had said to his Father thus, I am the
sinner, O Father! I am the surety, all my friends wants, and all their debts,
let them be laid on me; my life for their life, my soul for their souls, my
glory for their glory, my heaven for their heaven: Now this was no small
matter; little do we know or consider, what is the weight and guilt of sin. And
this was another ingredient, in Christ's Cup.

5. The Power and malice of Satan; the devil had a full leave and license; not
as it was with Job; Do what thou will, Satan, but save his life; no, no, he had
a commission without any such restriction or limitation; the whole power of
darkness was let loose to use all his violence, and to afflict him as far as
possibly he could; and this our Savior intimates, when he says; that the
Prince of this world comes: Now was it that the Word must be accomplished,
Thou shall bruise his heel; John 14.30. Genesis 3.15.
the Devil could go no higher than the heel of Christ; but whatever he could
do, he was sure to do; he had been nibling a great while at his heel; no sooner
he was born, but he would have killed him; and after he fell fiercely on him in
the Wilderness, but now all the Power and all the malice of hell conjoynes. If
we look on the Devil in respect of his evil nature, he is compared to a roaring
Lion: not only is he a Lion, but a roaring Lion; his disposition to do
mischief, is always wound up to the height: and if we look on the Devil in
respect of his Power, there is no part of our souls or bodies that he cannot
reach; the Apostle discribing his Power, he gives him names above the highest
comparisons; as Principalities, Powers, Rulers of the darkness of this World,
Spiritual wickedness above: Devils are not only called Princes, but
Principalities; not only mighty, but Powers; Ephesians. 6.12.
not only Rulers of a part, but of all the darkness of all this World; not only
wicked Spirits, but spiritual wickedness; not only about us, but above us: they
hang over our heads continually; you know what a disadvantage it is to have
your enemy get the hill, the upper ground; and this they have naturally, and
always. Oh then what a combat must this be when all the Power, and all the
malice of all the Devils in hell, should by the permission of God, arm
themselves against the Son of God. Surely this was a bitter Ingredient in
Christ's Cup.

6. The wrath of God himself; this, above all, was the most bitter Dreg; it lay
in the bottom, and Christ must drink it also: Oh the Lord has afflicted me in
the day of his fierce anger; God afflicts some in mercy, and some in anger,
this was in his anger; Lam. 1.12.
and yet in his anger God is not like to all; some he afflicts in his more
gentle and mild, others in his fierce anger; this was in the very fierceness of
his anger It is agreed upon by all Divines, that now Christ saw himself bearing
the sins of all Believers, and standing before the judgment seat of God; to
this end are those words, John 12.31.
Now is the judgment of this World, and the Prince of this World shall be cast
out. Now is the judgment of this World, q. d. Now I see God sitting in judgment
upon the World; and as a right Representative of all the World of Believers,
here I stand before his Tribunal ready to undergo all the punishments due to
them for their sins: why, there is no other way to save their souls, and to
satisfy justice, but that the fire of thy indignation should kindle against
me; Nahum 1.6.
q. d. O I know it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God:
Oh I know God is a consuming fire; who can stand before his indignation? and
who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire,
and the rocks are thrown down by him: But for this end came I into the world; O
my Father, I will drink this Cup; lo here an open Breast; come, prepare the
Armory of thy wrath, and herein shoot all the Arrows of revenge. -- And yet, O
my Father, let me not be oppressed, subverted, or swallowed, up by thy wrath,
let not thy displeasure continue longer than my patience or obedience can
endure; there is in me flesh and blood in respect of my humanity, and my flesh
trembles for fear of thee, I am afraid of thy judgments: Oh if it be possible,
if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me.

SECT. V. Of the Dolours and Agonies that Christ there suffered
2. CHrist's Passion in the Garden was either before, or at his apprehension;
his Passion before is declared, 1. By his Sorrow. 2. By his Sweat

Mat. 26.37. Mar. 14.33. Luke. 22.44. John 12.27.
1. For his sorrow; the Evangelists diversely relate it; He began to be
sorrowful, and very heavy, says Matthew: He began to be sore amazed, and to be
very heavy, says Mark: And being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly, says
Luke: Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this
hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour, says John. All avow this
sorrow to be great, and so it is confessed by Christ himself: Mat. 26.38.
Then says he unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death. Ah
Christians! who can speak out this sorrow? The Spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity, Prove. 18.14.
but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Christ's soul is sorrowful; or if that be
too flat, his soul is sorrowful, exceeding sorrowful; or if that language be
too low, his soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; not only
extensively, such as must continue for the space of seventeen or eighteen
hours, even until death it self should finish it; but also intensively, such,
and so great, as that which is used to be at the very point of death; and such
as were able to bring death it self, had not Christ been reserved to a greater
and an heavier punishment. Of this sorrow is that especially spoken, consider,
and behold, if ever there were sorrow like unto my sorrow: Many a sad and
sorrowful soul has no question been in the world; but the like sorrow to this
was never since the Creation: the very terms of the Evangelists speak no less;
he was sorrowful and heavy, says one: amazed and very heavy, says another: in
an Agony, says a third: in a soul trouble, says a fourth. Surely the bodily
torments of the Cross were inferior to this agony of his soul; the pain of the
body, is the body of pain: Oh but the very soul of sorrow, and pain, is the
soul's sorrow, and the Souls's pain. It was a sorrow unspeakable, and therefore
I must leave it, as not being able to utter it.

Luke 22.44.
2. For his Sweat; Luke only relates it: And his sweat was as it were, great
drops of blood falling down to the ground. In the words I observe a Clymax. 1.
His sweat was as it were blood. Ethymius, and Theophilact interpret those words
as only a similitude, or figurative Hyperbole; an usual kind of speech to call
a vehement sweat, a bloody sweat: as he that weeps bitterly, is said to weep
tears of blood. Augustine, Jerome, Epiphanius, Athanasius, Irenaeus, and
others, from the beginning of the Church, understand it in a litteral sense,
and believe it was truly, and properly a bloody sweat; nor is the Objection
considerable, that it was sicut guttae sanguinis, as it were drops of blood;
for if the Holy Ghost had only intended that sicut for a similitude or
Hyperbole, he would rather have expressed it, as it were drops of water, than
as it were drops of blood. We all know sweat is more like to water than to
blood: Besides, a sicut, in Scripture Phrase, does not always denote a
similitude, but sometimes the very thing it self, John 1.14. Luke 24.11.
according to the verity of it: thus we beheld his Glory, the Glory as it were,
of the only begotten Son of the Father. -- and their words seemed to them as it
were idle Tales, and they believed them not. The words in the Original, (...)
are the same; here is the first step of this Clymax, his sweat was a wonderful
sweat, not a sweat of water, but of red gore-blood.

2. Great drops of blood, (...). There is sudor diaphoreticus, a thin faint
sweat, and sudor grumosus, a thick, concrete, and clotted sweat; in this bloody
sweat of Christ, it came not from him in small dews, but in great drops; they
were drops, and great drops of Blood, crassie and thick drops; and hence it is
concluded as preternatural; for though much may be said for sweating blood in a
course of nature; Aristotle Arist. l. 3. de hist. anim. c. 29. Aug. l. 14. de
Civ. Dei, c. 24.
affirms it, and Augustine grants that he knew a man that could sweat blood
even when he pleased; in faint bodies a subtle thin blood, like sweat, may
pass through the pores of the Skin; but that through the same pores, crass,
thick, and great drops of blood should issue out, it was not, it could not be
without a Miracle: Some call them grumes, others globes of blood; certainly the
drops are great, so great, as if they had started through his skin to outrun
the streams and rivers of his Cross.

3. Here is yet another clymax, in that these great drops of blood did not only
distillare, drop out; but decurrere, run a stream down so fast, as if they had
issued out of most deadly wounds; they were great drops of blood falling down
to the ground; here is magnitude and multitude; great drops, and those so many,
so plenteous, as that they went through his apparel and all, streaming down to
the ground: now was it that his garments were died with crimson red: that of
the Prophet, though spoken in another sense, yet in some respect may be applied
to this: Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel? and thy garments like him
that treads the Wine-fat? Oh what a sight was here! Isa. 63.2.
His Head and Members are all on a bloody sweat, his sweat trickles down, and
bedecks his garments, which stood like a new firmament studded with stars,
portending an approaching storm: nor stays it there, but it falls down to the
ground: Oh happy Garden watered with such treas of blood! how much better are
these rivers than Abana and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus; yea, than all the
waters of Israel; yea, than all those Rivers that water the Garden of Eden? --

1. This may inform us of the weight and burden of sin, Use.
that thus presses Christ under it till he sweat and bleed: when the first
Adam had committed the first sin, this was the penalty, in the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat thy bread; Genesis 3.19.
but now the second Adam takes upon him all the Sins of all Believers in the
world; he sweats not only in his face, but in all his Body. O then, how was
that face disfigured, when it stood all on drops, and those drops, not of a
watery sweat, but of a gore blood? We see in other men, that when they are
disquieted with fear or grief, the blood usually runs to the heart; indeed that
is the principal member, and therefore, leaving the other parts, it goes
thither, as of choice, to comfort that; but our sweet Savior contrariwise
(because he would suffer without any manner of comfort) he denies to himself
this common relief of nature; all the Powers of our souls, and parts of our
bodies were stained with sin, and therefore he sweats blood from every part; we
sin, and our eyes will scarce drop a tear for sin; but his eyes, and ears, and
head, and hands, and feet, and heart, and all run rivers of tears of blood for
us, even for our sins. -- Let Jesuits and Friars in meditating of Christ's
sufferings, cry out against the Jews; in this bloody sweat of Christ I see
another use; alas! here is no Jew, no Judas, no Herod, no Pilate, no Scribe, no
Pharisees? here is no tormentors to whip him; no soldiers to crown his Head
with thrones, here is neither nails, nor spear to fetch his blood out of his
Body; how comes it then to pass? Is there any natural cause? ah, no: the night
is cold, which naturally draws blood inwards; in the open air he lies
grovelling on the ground, and there he sweats, and bleeds. O my heart, who has
done this deed? As the Lord lives, 2 Samuel 12.5.
the man that has done this thing, shall surely die. So said David* when
Nathan replied upon him, thou art the man. O my heart! my sinful heart! O my
sinful, V. 7.
deceitful, abominable heart! thou art the Murderer; thy sins sat upon the
heart of Christ, as heavy as a Mountain of Lead or Iron; when none was near,
but a few dull, heavy, sleepy Disciples; then all the sins of Believers (and
amongst them, thy sins) fell upon the soul of Christ, as so many murderers;
and squeezed blood, and made him cry out. My soul is heavy, heavy unto death.
Go thy ways now, and weep with Peter, and say with David, I have sinned
against thee, Lord. O how should these eyes of mine look upon Christ thus
sweating, bleeding, streaming out blood, clods of blood, V. 13.
great drops of blood, from all the parts and members of his Body, but I must
mourn over him; Zech. 12.10.
as one that mourns for his only son, but I must be in bitterness, as one
that is in bitterness for his firstborn?

2. This may inform us of the extraordinary love of Christ. It is said of the
pelican, that when her young ones are struck with the tail of some poisonous
Serpent, she presently strikes her breast with her Beak or Bill, and so lets
out her own blood, as a Medicine for them that they may suck and live; even so
Christ seeing us struck with the poison of sin, he is impatient of delay, he
would not stay till the Jews let him blood with their whips, Luke 12.50.
and thorns, and nayls; I have a Baptism to be baptized with (says Christ) and
how am I straightned till it be accomplished? He is big with love, and
therefore he opens all his pores of his own accord, he lets blood gush out from
every part, and thereof he makes a precious Balsom to cure our wounds. O the
Love of Christ! As Elihu could sometimes say, Job 32.19.
Behold my belly is as wine, which has no vent, it is ready to burst like new
Bottles; so the heart of Christ was full, even full of love, so full that it
could not hold, but it burst out through every part and member of his body in a
bloody sweat. I will not say but that every drop of Christ's blood was very
precious, and of sufficient value to save a world; but certainly, that blood
which was not forced by whips, or thorns, or spear, is to be had in singular
honor; as the myrrh, that by incision of the Tree, flows out, is very
precious; yet that which drops out of its own accord, is accounted as the first
and choice; and as the Balsome, which way soever it come, is sweet; yet that
which falls of its own accord, is held the most pure and odoriferous: to this
alludes that Apocryphal-saying in Ecclesiasticus, I gave a sweet smell like
Cinnamon, and I yielded a pleasant odor, Ecclus. 24.15.
like the best myrrh: the vulgar translates it thus; Quasi Libanus non incisus
vaporavi; as the myrrhe-tree that is not cut, I evaporated; as if Christ should
have said, without any lanching, cutting, pruning, out of mere love I poured
out my blood upon the earth; this is certain; at this time no manner of
violence was offered him in body, no man touched him, or came near him; in a
cold night (for they were fain to have a fire within doors) lying abroad in the
air, and upon cold earth he casts himself into a sweat of blood; surely love is
hot; he had a fire in his brea^ that melts him into this bloody sweat; O
wonderful Love!

3. This may inform us of the Design of Christ in these very sufferings: Christ
weeps (says Bernard Bern. Sermon. in Dom. palm.
) not only in his eyes, but in all his members, that with the tears of his
body, he might wash and purify his body, which is the Church: or Christ weeps
blood, that he might give us a sign of the enemies ruin; sweat in sickness, is
as a Crisis, or promising sign, that Nature with all her force has strove
against the peccant humor, and has now overcome it; so this bloody sweat is a
blessed Crisis, or argument of sin decaying, and that the Lamb has overthrown
the Lion As Christ sometimes said; Now is the Judgment of this World, Joh.
12.31, 32.
now shall the Prince of this World be cast out, and I, if I be lifted up from
the Earth, will draw all men unto me.

Thus far of Christ's passion before his apprehension. And now we may suppose
it about midnight, the very time which Christ called the hour, and power of
darkness: what followed from twelve till three at night, Luke 22.53.
we shall discover in the next Section. SECT. VI. Of Judas's Treason, Christ's
Apprehension, binding and leading unto Annas.
BY this time the Traitor Judas was arrived at Gethsemani, and being near the
Garden-door, Jesus goes to his Disciples, and calls them from their sleep; by
an Irony (as some think) he bids them sleep on now, and take their rest;
meaning if they could for danger, Mat. 26.45, 46.
that now was near; but withal he adds, Behold the hour is at hand, and the Son
of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners; rise, let us be going, behold he
is at hand that does betray me. That it might appear he undertook his
sufferings with choice and free election, he not only refused to fly, but he
calls his Apostles to rise, that they might meet his Murderers. And now they
come with Swords and Staves; or as John adds, Mat. 26.47. John 18.3. Ioh.
18.12, 13.
with Lanthorns and Torches, and (Judas going before them, and drawing near
unto Jesus to kiss him) they took him, and bound him, and led him away to Annas
first.

In this Period I shall observe, 1. Judas's Treason. 2. Christ's Apprehension.
3. Christ's binding. 4. Christ's leading to Annas, one of the Chief Priests, as
to his first station.

1. Judas's treason: And while he yet spoke, behold a multitude, and he that
was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus
to kiss him. Luke 22.47.
This Traitor is not a Disciple only, but an Apostle; not one of the seventy,
but one of the twelve. Augustine speaks of many offices of Love that Christ had
done to Judas in especial manner; he had called him to be an Apostle, made him
his Friend, his Familiar, caused him to eat of his Bread, sit at his Table, and
to dip his hand in the Dish with him; yea if his Tradition be true, Jesus had
delivered Judas often from death, Aug. Sermon 28. ad fratres.
and for his sake healed his Father of a Palsy, and cured his Mother of a
Leprosy: and next to Peter, honored him above all other his Apostles. Of this
we are sure, that he kissed him, and washed his feet, and made him his
treasurer, and his Almoner; and that now Judas should betray Christ; O how does
this add to the sufferings of Christ, and to the Sin of Judas? Behold, a
multitude, and Judas in the front: he went before them, tam pedibus quam
moribus; in his presence, and in his malice. The Evangelist gives the reason of
this, that he might have the better opportunity to kiss him, this was the sign
he gave the rout; whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him; he
begins war with a Kiss, and breaks the peace of his Lord by a Symbol of
kindness: Jesus takes this ill; What, Judas! betrayest thou the Son of man with
a kiss? q. d. What, Luke 22.48.
do thou make the seal of Love the sign of treachery? What! must a Kiss of
thy mouth be the Key of treason? O what a friendly reproof is here! By way of
use.

It were well for the world (says Chrysostom) especially for the Children of
God, that Judas were alone in this transgression that there were no more
perfidious, treacherous Persons in it besides himself. But Oh! how fu l is the
world of such miscreants? Use. Vtinam Judas solus sic peccasset. Chrysostom.
there was never yet an Abel, but he had a Cain to murder him; never yet a
Moses, but he had a Jannes and Jambres to resist him; never yet a Joseph, but
he had unkind Brothers to envy him; never yet a Samson, but he had a Dalilah to
betray him; never yet a David, but he had an Ahitophel to hurt him; never yet a
Paul, but there was an Alexander to do him much evil; nay it is well, if in
every assembly we meet not with a Judas: in civil affairs how many are there
that live, and make gain by lying, swearing, cheating, coz^ning, selling away
Christ and their own souls for a lesser matter than thirty pieces of Silver?
and in religious affairs, how many secure and drowsy professors have we
amongst us, that salute Christ both by hearing the Word, and receiving the
Seals, and yet in their lives and conversations they deny Christ? They honor
God with their lips, Mat. 26.50.
but their hearts are far away from him.

2. For Christ's apprehension; then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and
took him. They apprehended him whom the world cannot comprehend; and yet before
they took him, he himself begins the inquiry, and leads them into their errand;
he tells them that he was Jesus of Nazareth, whom they sought: this was but a
Breath, a meek and gentle word; yet had it greater strength in it than the
Eastern wind, or the voice of Thunder: for God was in that still voice, and it
struck them down to the ground. O the Power of Christ! they come to him with
clubs and staves, and swords, and he does no more but let a word fly out of his
mouth, and presently they stagger, run backward, John 18.6.
and fall to the ground. Oh if we cannot bear a soft answer of the merciful
God, how dare we so provoke, as we do, the wrath of the Almighty Judge? and yet
he suffers them to rise again, and they still persist in their inquiry after
him; he tells them once more, I am he; he offers himself, he is ready, and
desirous to be sacrificed; only he sets them their bounds, and therefore he
secures his Apostles to be witnesses of his sufferings,: In this work of
redemption, no man must have an active share besides himself; he alone was to
tread the Wine Press: If therefore ye seek me, John 18.8.
(says Christ) let these go their way; thus he permits himself to be taken,
but not his Disciples.

And now they have his leave, Oh with what fierce and cruel countenances, with
what menacing and threatening looks, with what malicious and spightful minds, do
they invade and assault our Savior? they encompass him round; then they lay
their wicked and violent hands upon him: in the Original, (...) signifies a
violent taking. One speaks the manner of his apprehension in these words Quidam
apprehendebant vestes ejus, alii mittebant manus in capillos capitis, etc
Homil. Joh. Carthag. Hispan.
Some of them lay hold on his Garments, others on the h^ir of his head; some
pluck him by the beard, others struck him with their impious fists, and being
enraged, that with a word he had thrown them backwards on the ground, they
therefore throw him on his back, and basely tread him under their dirty feet.
Another Author gives it thus; Sicut Leo rugiens and rapiens trahit praedam per
terram, and lacerat, and laniat, etc. Jacob de Valenti in Psalm. 21.
As a roaring, ramping Lion draws along the Earth his prey, and tears it, and
pulls it; so they haled Christ all along the Earth, spitting, buffetting,
pulling him by the hair. Another in like manner thus; Omnes impetum faciunt in
eum, etc. Psalm. 22.12, 13
they all rush violently upon him, they fling him to the ground, they kick him,
tear him, spurn him, pull off the hair, both off his Head and Beard. Of every
of these passages we find Scriptures full; Many Bulls have compassed me, strong
Bulls of Bashan have beset me round, they gaped upon me with their mouths, as a
ravening and roaring Lion.

Use.
We are apt to cry out on Judas and the Jews; and we think, Oh if we had been in
their stead, we should never have done thus; but lay aside a while those
Instruments, and look we at the principal cause; had we not an hand in all
these actings? did not we conspire his Death, and Apprehension in reference to
it? Oh my sins! my sins! these were the Band, the Captain, and the Officers;
these were the multitude, a multitude indeed, if I should tell them, I might
tell a thousand, and yet not tell one of a thousand; these were the Soldiers
that beset him round, the Bulls that compassed him about, the roaring Lions
that gaped upon him with their mouths; O my heart, why should thou rise up
against the Jews, when thou find the Traitor, and the whole rout of Officers
in thy self? Oh that thou would turn the edge of thy detestation into its
right stream and Channel! E^ek. 20.43.
Oh that thou would remember thy own ways, and all thy doings wherein thou
have been defiled; and that thou would loath thy self in thy own sight for
all the evils that thou have committed!

John 18.12.
3. For Christ's binding, the Evangelist tells us, that the Band, and the
Captain, and the Officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him, (...) they
bound his hands with cords; a Type of this was Samson, whom Dalilah bound with
ropes; so they bound him with ropes or cords, foreshewing hereby that he must
die, they never using to bind any with ropes or cords, but those whom
undoubtedly they purposed to crucify: Some add the Circumstances of this
binding, that they bound him with three cords, and that with such violence that
they caused blood to start out of his tender hands; certainly they wanted no
malice, and now they wanted no power, for the Lord had given himself into their
hands. Binding argues baseness: It is storied of Alexander, that when some
Arrow that was shot into him, was to be drawn out, his Physicians advised to
bind him; for that the least motion (as they said) would do him hurt; but he
answered Non decet vinciri regem, cum libera sit regis and semper salva
potestas. Bern. Sermon. de Pas. Mat. 26.55. Phil. 2.7.
Kings were not fit to be bound, the power of a King was ever free and safe;
And David in his Lamentation over Abner, said, Died Abner as a Fool dies? thy
hands were not bound, nor thy feet put in fetters, 2 Samuel 2.33, 34. Fools and
Slaves were accustomed to be bound, and so were Thieves; they that open their
hands to receive others goods, it is fit their hands should be bound, and tied
up; but is our Savior numbered amongst any of these? O yes! In that same hour
said Jesus to the multitude, are ye come out as against a Thief, with Swords
and Staves? he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant: O wonderful condescension of Christ! O admirable exinanition! he that
was eminently just, is reputed a thief; he that was equal with God, is become a
Servant; he that was stronger than Samson, and could have broken his cords from
off his arms like a thread, he is bound with cords, and as a poor Lamb, he
continues bound for the slaughter; and thus began our Liberty and Redemption,
from slavery, and sin, and death, and cursings.

But besides these cords, the word (...), signifies a binding with chains,
Make. 5.3, 4. And some are of opinion, that they shackled both his hands and
feet, pedicis and catenis vinctus, Mark 5.4. Mark 5.3, 4.
And others say that they put about his neck Quidam existimaverunt catena
ferrea collum ejus alligasse quod mihi certe incredible non est. Hom. Joh.
Carthag. Act. 21.33. Mat. 26.48. Mark 14.44.
a Chain of Iron; and it is not altogether improbable, but they might be as
cruel to the Master, as to his Servants: I cannot think they were so enraged
against Peter, as they were against Christ; and yet they laid on him two
Chains, Acts 12.6. Nor can I think they were so enraged against Paul, as they
were against Jesus; and yet the chief Captain took him, and commanded him to be
bound with two Chains. And that this might be their dealing with Christ, Judas,
by his counsel seems to speak; hold him fast -- take him, and lead him away
safely, q. d. make him sure, that he escape not out of your hands; he has
deceived you often, and therefore Chain him with an Iron Chain, that will be
sure to hold. I cannot pass this without some word to our selves.

Use.
Christ undergoes this restraint that all sorts of persecution might be
sanctified to us by his susception. Again, Christ was faster bound with his
cords of Love, than with Iron fetters; his love was strong as death; it
overcame him who is invincible, and bound him who is omnipotent; the Jews cords
were but the Symboles and Figures; but the dear love, the tender bowels of
Jesus Christ were the Morals, and things signified: Again, Christ was bound
that we might be free: the Cords of Christ were so full of virtue, that they
loosed the Chains of our sins, and tied the hands of Gods Justice, which were
stretched out against us for our sins. Again, he was bound for us, that so he
might bind us to himself. I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of Love.
Hos. 11.4.
A strange thing it was, to see the King bound for the Thieves offense; but
such was Christ's Love, that he might draw sinful mankind to the Love of him
again. Lastly, one good Lesson we may learn from wicked Judas; take him, and
lead him away safely: -- hold him fast. Come Christians! here is good counsel
from a Judas; like another Caiaphas; he Prophesies he knows not what; take him,
and lead him away, and hold him fast. It is of necessity that those which
spiritually seek after Christ, should take him by Faith, and hold him fast by
Love: I will rise now, (says the Spouse) I will seek him whom my soul loves;
and anon, I found him whom my soul loves, I held him, Cant. 3.2, 4.
and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my Mothers House, into
the Chambers of her that conceived me. We must arise out of the bed of sin, we
must seek Christ in the use of Ordinances, and there if we find him, we must
take him, lay hold on him by the hands of Faith, and not let him go; but lead
him safely until we have brought him into our Mothers House, into the
Assemblies of his people; or if you will, until we have brought him into our
souls, where he may sup with us, and we with him.

4. For his leading to Annas, John John 18.13.
records it, that they led him to Annas first, for he was Father-in-law to
Caiaphas, who was the high Priest that same year. 1. They led him away; (...)
it refers to the place whence they led him; the Garden was the terminus a quo;
there they apprehended him, and bound him, and thence they led him away; but
the word (...), is something more than merely abduco; sometimes it signifies
abigo, to drive away, whether by force, or fraud; sometimes rapio ad suplicium,
ad judicandum; to snatch away either to punishment, or to judgment: It is said,
Ecce trahebatur passis Prionidia virgo crinibus. Virg. Aen. 1.
they drew him away by the hairs of the head, and that they led him in uncouth
ways, and through the Brook Cedron, in which the ruder Soldiers plunged him,
and passed upon him all the affronts and rudeness which an insolent and cruel
multitude could think of. So that now again was the fulfilling of the
Prophecy, He shall drink of the Brook in the way, Psalm. 110.7. I dare not
deliver these things as certain truths; only this I affirm, that they led him,
snatched him, haled him from the Garden back again to Jerusalem, over the Brook
and Valley called Cedron, -- 2. They led him first to Annas; why thither; is a
question: the cognizance of the cause belonged not properly to Annas, but to
Caiaphas; all that can be said for Annas, is, that he was chief of the
Sanhedrim, and Father-in-law to Caiaphas, and to the High Priest the next year
following.

Oh when I think of Jesus thus led away to Annas first; when I think of him
partly going, and partly haled forwards, and forced to hasten his Grave-pace;
Use.
when I think of him thrown into, or plunged in the Waters of the Brook, and so
forced to drink of the Brook Cedron in the way: when I think of him presented
by a deal of Soldiers, and rude Catch-poles, to this mercenary Annas; and
withal, think that I had an hand as deep as any other in these acts; my heart
must either break, or I must proclaim it an heart of flint, and not of flesh.
Come Christians, let us lay our hands upon our hearts, and cry, Oh my Pride!
and Oh my Covetousness! and Oh my Malice and Revenge! Oh my Unbelief! and Oh my
Unthankfulness! and Oh my Incharitableness to the needy members of Christ
Jesus! why these were the rout, these were they that led, and dragged, and drew
Jesus (as it were) by the hair of his head; these were they that took hold of
the chain, and pulled him forwards, and showed him in triumph to this bloody
Annas; nay, these were the Judas, Jews, Annas, and all: Oh that ever I should
lodge within me such an heart, that should lodge in it such sins, such
betrayers, such murderers of Jesus Christ!

But I must remember my self; Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, Isa.
21.11, 12. Mat. 14.25. Exodus 14.24. Psalm. 130.6.
what of the night? if ye will enquire, enquire, return, come. We may now
suppose it about the third hour, or the last watch; in the Gospel it is called
the fourth watch of the night; elsewhere it is called the morning-watch, which
continues till the morning. And of the Acts done in this interval of time, we
are next to treat.

SECT. VII. Of Christ's Examination, and Condemnation, with their Appendices.
NOw it was that they led him from Annas to Caiphas; and presently a Council is
called of the High Priests, Scribes, and Elders; these were the greatest,
gravest, learned, wisest men amongst them, and they all conspire to judge
him, who is the great Judge both of quick and dead. -- In their proceedings, we
may observe, 1. The captious examination of the High Priest. 2. The
sacrilegious smiting of one of the Servants. 3. The impious accusations of the
Witnesses. 4. The Sentence of the Judges. 5. The perfidious denial of perjured
Peter. 6. The shameful delusion, and abuses of the base Attendants.

1. For the captious examination of the High Priest: The High Priest then asked
Jesus of his Disciples, John 18.19.
and of his Doctrine. 1. Of his Disciples; what the Questions were, it is not
expressed; but probably they might be such as these; How many Disciples he had?
and where they were? and what was become of them? why he should take upon him
to be better guarded than others of greater place and calling? whether it did
not savor of sedition and disturbance of the State, to lead about such a Crew
of Disciples and followers after him? and what was the reason of their flight?
whether it were not a token of their guiltiness of some disorder, or of riotous
practices? It is not for me to speak how many Queries the High Priest might
make to tempt Jesus; but certainly he was sifted to the Bran, examined to the
full of all such circumstances as either might trap Christ, or in the least
degree advance and help forward his Condemnation; to this question concerning
his Disciples, our Savior answered nothing; alas, he knew the frailty of his
followers, he might have said, For my Disciples, you see one has betrayed me,
and another will anon forswear me, he stays but for the crowing of the Cock,
and then you shall hear him curse and swear, that he never knew me; and for all
the rest, a pannick fear has seized upon their hearts, and they are fled, and
have left me alone to tread the Wine Press. Ah no, he will not speak evil of
the Teachers of his people; it was grief to him, and added to his sufferings,
John 6.67, 68, 69.
that all had forsaken him; once before this, many of his Disciples went back,
and walked no more with him; which occasioned Jesus to say to the twelve, will
ye also go? why no, said Peter then, Lord, whether shall we go? thou have the
words of Eternal Life; and we believe, and are sure, that thou art that Christ
the Son of the Living God. Oh Peter, what a strong Faith was that? We believe,
and we are sure; but how is it now that ye have no faith? or why are ye so
fearful, O ye of little Faith? I believe this sat upon the heart of Christ,
and yet he would not accuse them, who now stood in their places, and was
accused for them, and for us all; and therefore to that question of his
Disciples, he answered nothing.

2. He asked him of his Doctrine; what his questions were of that, are not set
down neither; but probably they might be such as these; Who was his Master, or
instructor in that new Doctrine he had lately broached? why he did seek to
innovate, and alter their long practiced and accustomed Rites? and what ground
had he to bring in his own devices in their steads? as Baptism for
Circumcision; the Lords Supper for the Passover; himself and his Apostles for
the high Priests and Levites, when neither he, nor most of them were of that
Tribe? why he was so bold and saucy (being but three and thirty years of age)
to declame so bitterly and satyrically against the Pharisees, and Sadduces, and
Scribes, and Priests, and Elders of the People? Much of this stuff he might
bring out in his Interrogatories; that so by his questioning him in many
things, he might trap him in something to his confusion and destruction. -- And
to this question our Savior answers; John 18.20, 21.
but Oh how wisely! I spoke openly to the World (says he) I ever taught in the
Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resorted; and in secret
have I said nothing; why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I said
unto them, behold they know what I said: q. d. I appeal to the testimony of the
very enemies themselves; thou suspectest me to be a seditious person, and one
that plots mischief against the State in secret; I tell thee truth, I speak
nothing in secret (i.e.) nothing in the least manner tending to sedition; my
Doctrine I brought with me from the bosom of my Father, it is the everlasting
Gospel, and not of yesterday; and it contains nothing in it of Sedition,
Faction, Rebellion, Treason; ask these mine Enemies, these who have apprehended
and bound me, and brought me hither; they know what I said, let them speak if
they can, wherein I have transgressed the Law.

2. For the stroke given Christ by that base servant; one of the Officers which
stood by, stroke Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, answerest thou the
High Priest so? John 18.22.
That holy face which was designed to be the object of Heaven, in the beholding
of which, much of the celestial glory does consist; that face which the Angels
stare upon with wonder, like Infants at a bright Sunbeam, was now smitten by a
base varlet in the presence of a Judge; and howsoever the Assembly was full,
yet not one amongst them all reproved the fact, or spoke a word for Christ:
nay, in this the injury was heightened, because the blow was said to be given by
Malchus an Idumean Slave; it was he, Chrysostom. hom. 82. in Joh.
whose ear was cut off by Peter, and cured by Christ, and thus he requites him
for his Miracle. -- Amongst all the sufferings of Christ, one would think this
were but little; and yet when I look into Scriptures, I find it much: Thus
Jeremy, He gives his cheeks to him that smites him, he is filled full with
reproach. Thus Micah Lam. 3.30. Mich. 5.1.
speaking of Christ, They shall smite the Judge of Israel with a Rod upon the
Cheek; there was in it a world of shame; 2 Cor. 11.30.
the Apostle lays it down as a sign of suffering and reproach, if a man smite
you on the face. Nothing more disgraceful (says Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 82. in
Joh. (...) and virgam and crepidam significat Lei. Crit. Sacr.
) than to be smitten on the Cheek; the diverse reading of the word, speaks it
out further; he stroke him with a Rod, or he stroke him with the palm of his
hand (...), the word (...), say some refers to his striking with a rod, or
club, or shoe, or pantoffle; or as others, it refers to his striking with the
palm of his hand; of the two, the palm of the hand is judged more disgraceful,
than either rod, or shoe; and therefore in the Text we translate it, with the
palm of the hand he struck at Jesus, (i.e.) with open hand, with his hand (...)
pugno, (...) palmi, Idem. Chrysostom. hom. 81. in Joh. c. 18.
stretched out.

The Ancients commenting on this Cuff; Let the Heavens be afraid (says one)
and let the Earth tremble at Christ's patience, and this Servant's impudence. O
ye Angels, how were ye silent? how could you contain your hands, when you saw
his hand striking at God? -- If we consider (says another) who took the blow,
was not he that struck him, Aug. in Tract. 113.
worthy to be consumed of fire, or to be swallowed up of earth, or to be given
up to Satan, and thrown down into Hell? If a Subject should but lift up his
hand against the Son of an earthly Sovereign, would he not be accounted worthy
of punishment? how much more in this case, when the hand is lifted up against
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? whom, not only men, but the Cherubims and
Seraphims, and all the Celestial powers above, adore and worship? Bernard Ber.
Sermon. de Pass.
tells us, that his hand that struck Christ, was armed with an Iron Glove: and
Vincentius Vinc. Sermon. de Pass.
affirms, that by the Blow Christ was felled to the earth: and Ludovicus Lud.
de vita Christi.
adds, that blood gushed out of his mouth, and that the impression of the
Varlet's fingers remained on Christ's Cheek, with a tumor and wan color. I
need say no more of this; only one word in reference to our selves.

Come, look upon this lively and lovely picture of patience; he was struck on
the face, but he was never moved in his heart; notwithstanding the abuse, Use.
he showed all mildness and gentleness toward his enemies: O what art thou
that can not brook a word, that can not bear a distastful speech, that
can not put up the least and smallest offense, without thy wrath and fury? O
proud man! O impudent wretch! how art thou so suddenly moved at the least
indignity, when thou see thy Savior quietly suffer great affronts? come
learn of Christ; if ever we mean to have a share and interest in his
sufferings, let us conform to him in meekness, and patience, in gentleness, and
lowliness of mind, and so we shall find rest unto our souls.

3. For the Accusation of the Witnesses; he is falsely accused and charged with
the things that he never knew: In his Accusation I observe these things. 1.
That they sought false witnesses; for true witnesses they could have none: Mat.
26.59.
Now the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Council sought false witnesses
against Jesus to put him to death. They were resolved in a former Council that
he should not live, but die; and now palliating their design with a Scheme of a
Tribunal, they seek out for witnesses. O wonder! who ever heard that Judges
went about to enquire for false witnesses, and suborned them to come in against
the Prisoner at the Bar? Ver. 60. Mark 14.56.
2. Though many false witnesses came into testify against him, yet they found
none; because their witness did not agree together. O the injustice of men in
bringing about the Decrees of God! the Judges seek out for witnesses, the
witnesses are to seek for proof, those proofs were to seek for unity and
consent, and nothing was ready for their purpose. 3. At last, after many
attempts came two false witnesses, and said, this fellow said, I am able to
destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three Days. They accuse him for
a figurative speech, a trope which they could not understand; which if he had
effected according to the Letter, it had been so far from a fault, that it
would have been an Argument of his power; but observe their false report of the
words he had spoken; John 2.19.
for he said not, I am able to destroy this Temple of God, and to build it in
three days; but, destroy ye this Temple, and in three days I will raise it
up: the allegation differs from the truth in these particulars. 1. I am able to
destroy, say they; ay but destroy ye, says Christ. 2. I am able to destroy
this Temple of God, say they; ay but destroy ye this Temple, says Christ;
simply this Temple, without addition. 3. I am able to destroy this Temple of
God, and to build it in three days, say they; ay but destroy ye this Temple,
and in three days I will raise it up, said Christ: he spoke not of building an
external Temple; but of raising up his own body, which he knew they would
destroy. These were the accusations of the false witnesses, to all which Jesus
answered nothing; he despised their accusations, as not worthy an answer; and
this vexed more. -- But, 4. Another accusation is brought in; Caiaphas had a
reserve, which he knew should do the business in that Assembly; he adjured him
by God, Mat. 26.63.
to tell him if he were the Christ: I adjure thee by the living God, that thou
tell us whether thou be the Christ the Son of God: The holy Jesus being adjured
by so sacred a Name, would not now refuse an answer; but he confessed himself
to be the Christ, the Son of the living God: and this the High Priest was
pleased (as the design was laid) to call Blasphemy; and in token thereof, he
rends is clothes, prophetically signifying that the Priesthood should be rent
from himself.

Use. Job 31.35, 36.
We are taught in all this quietly to suffer wrong: If my Adversary should write
a Book against me, surely I would take it upon my shoulder (says Job) and bind
it as a Crown to me; it is impossible, if we are Christ's servants, to live in
this world without false accusations: come, let us take heart, and in some
cases, say not a word; since he that was most innocent, was most silent, why
should we be too forward in our excuses? I know there is a time to speak, as a
time for silence; if it may tend to God's honor, and to the spreading of God's
truth, and that right circumstances do concur, it is then time to open our
mouths, though we let in death. So did our blessed Savior: O let us learn of
him, and follow his steps!

4. For the Doom or Sentence of these Judges; Caiaphas prejudging all the
Sanhedrim, in declaring Jesus to have spoken Blasphemy, and the fact to be
notorious, he then asked their Votes: Mat. 26.66.
What think ye? and they answered, and said, he is guilty of Death. They durst
not deny what Caiaphas had said; they knew his Faction was very potent, and his
malice great, and his heart was set upon the business, and therefore they all
conspire, and say as he would have them, He is guilty of Death. Oh here is
Jesus's sentence, which should have been mine, He is guilty of Death. But this
Sentence was but like strong dispositions to an enraged Fever; they had no
power at that time to inflict death, or such a death as that of the Cross, they
only declared him apt, and worthy, and guilty of Death.

In the multitude of Counselors there is safety, says Solomon; but we must
take this in; if it be of good men, Prove. 11.14.
and to good purposes: for otherwise, the Meetings, Assemblies, and Councils of
the wicked are dangerous and deadly; Psalm. 2.2.
the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed. Such Councils we had many in our
times. I know not whether we may call them Councils, or struma tantum
Civitatis, an ulcerous bunch, raised by the disorder and distemper of the City.

5. For Peter's denial and abjuration; while these things were thus acting
concerning Christ, a sad accident happened to his Servant Peter; at first a
Damosel comes to him, and tells him, Thou wast with Jesus of Galilee; and then
another Maid tells the bystanders, Mat. 26.69. Ver. 71. Ver. 73.
this fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth: and after a while, they that
stood by, spoke themselves, surely thou art one of them, for thy speech
bewrays thee, q. d. thy very Idiom declares thee to be a Galilean; thou art
as Christ is, of the same Country and Sect, and therefore thou art one of his
Disciples: Peter thus surprised, without any time to deliberate, he shamefully
denies his Lord: and, 1. He does it with a kind of subterfuge, Ver. 70.
I know not what thou say: he seems to elude the Accusation with this
Evasion, Ver. 72.
I know not thy meaning, I understand not thy words, I skill not what thou
say. 2. At the next turn, he goes on to a licentious boldness, denying
Christ with an Oath, I know not the man; and lastly, he aggravates his sin so
far, that he grows to impudence, and so denies his Lord with cursing and
swearing, I know not the man: here is a Lie, an Oath, and a Curse; the sin is
begun at the voice of a Woman, a silly Damosel; not any of the greatest Ladies,
she was only a poor serving-maid that kept the doors; but it grew to ripeness,
when the Menservants sell upon him; now he swears, and vows, and curses
himself if he knew the Man. O Peter, is the man so vile, Ver. 74.
that thou will not own him! Had thou not before confessed him to be the
Christ, the Son of the living God? and do thou not know him to be Man, as
well as God? say, is not this the Man-God, God-Man that called thee, and thy
brother Andrew, at the sea of Galilee, saying, follow me, and I will make you
fishers of men? Is not this he whom thou saw on Mount Tabor, shining more
gloriously than the Sun? Is not this he whom thou saw walking on the water,
and to whom thou said, Lord, if it be thou, Mat. 14.28.
bid me come unto thee on the water? How is it then that thou say, I know not
the man? Surely here is a sad example of humane infirmity; i^ Peter fell so
foully, how much more may lesser stars? And yet withal, here is a blessed
example of serious, through repentance; no sooner the Cock crew, and Christ
gave a look on Peter, but he goes out, Ver. 75.
and weeps bitterly. The Cock was the Preacher, and the look of Jesus was the
Grace that made the Sermon effectual: O the Mercy of Christ! he looked back on
him that had forgot himself; he revives his servant's memory, to think on his
Master's words; he sends him out to weep bitterly, that so he might restore him
mercifuly to his favor again.

Let us learn hence, to think modestly and soberly of our selves; yea, Use. 1
Cor. 10.12. Romans 11.20.
let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall! If Peter could
first dissemble, and then lie, and then forswear, and then blaspheme and curse,
O let not us be high-minded, but fear; -- And in case we fall indeed, as Peter
did, yet let us not despair, as Judas did; but still upon our repentance let us
trust in God. When Christ looked on Peter, he wept bitterly: notwithstanding
our sins are great, yet one look of Christ is full of virtue, and enough to
melt us into tears: O let us not sink in despair, but look up to him, that he
may look down on us. Pliny tells us of some Rocks in Phrygia, Plin. hist.
that when the Sun does but shine upon them, they send out drops of water, as
if they wept tears; Peter signifies a Rock, and whilst Peter persisted in his
sin of denying Christ, his heart was hard as the Rock; but when Christ the Sun
of Righteousness looked uqon him, his heart was softened, and he dropped tears
continually. Such is the virtue of Christ's look, it turns the Rock into a
standing Water, and the Flint into a Fountain of Waters. Psalm. 114.8.
-- Lastly let us not decry repentance, but rather be in the use, and practice,
and exercise of it: Is not here a Gospel precedent? Flevit quidem tanta
lachrymarum inundatione, ut in maxillis profundos sulcos haberet, per quos,
quasi per quosdam canales, aut aquae ductus lachrymae ejus defluebant. Clem
Quoties galli cantum audiebat, in lachrymas prorumpebat, per totum vitae tempus
negationis culpam frequenter adeo plauxit. Idem. Mat. 26.67, 68 Luke 22.65.
Hier. ut citat Guliel. statione tertia Christi patientis. Mallon. de
flagellatione Christi, c. 6.
Clement, an ancient Writer, of whom Paul makes mention, Phil. 4.3. expresses
Peter's repentance to have been so great, that in his Checks he made (as it
were) furrows, in which, as in certain Channels, his tears run down; the Text
tells us he wept bitterly; and Clement adds, that while he lived, as often as
he heard a Cock crow, he could not but weep, and bewail his denial. David is
another like example; All the Night, said he, I make my Bed to swim, I water my
Couch with my tears, Psalm. 6.6. David makes mention of his Bed and Couch,
because there most especially he had offended God: It was on his Bed that he
committed Adultery; and it was in his Couch, that he designed and subscribed
with his own hand, that Vriah must die; and hence is it that he waters his Bed
and Couch with his tears; the very sight of his Bed and Couch brings his sin
into his remembrance; as the very hearing of the crowing of the Cock, ever
after awakened Peter to his task of tears: that Repentance is a Gospel-Duty, we
have spoke elsewhere. O take heed of decrying it! as we are often sinning, so
let us often repent; it concerns us near to be frequent in this duty of
bewailing sin, and turning to God.

6. For the abuses and delusions of the base Attendants offered to Christ; the
Evangelist tells us, then did they spit in his face, and buffetted him, and
others smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophecy unto us, thou
Christ, who is he that smote thee? and as Lude adds, many other things
blasph^mously spoke they against him; what those many other things were, it is
not discovered; only some ancient writers say, that Christ in that night
suffered so many, and such hideous things, that the whole knowledge of them is
reserved only for the last day of Judgment. Mallonius writes thus, after
Caiaphas and the Priests had sentenced Christ worthy of death, they committed
him to their Ministers, warily to be kept till day; and they immediately threw
him into the dungeon in Caiaphas 's House, there they bound him to a stony
pillar, with his hands bound on his back, and then they fell upon him with
their palms and fists. Others add, that the Soldiers not yet content, they
threw him into a filthy dirty puddle, where he abode for the remainder of that
night; of which the Psalmist, Psalm. 86.6. Psalm. 69 2. Cant. 3.7.
Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, and in the deeps; and I sink
in the deep mire where there it no standing. Behold the Bed which is Solomon's,
or rather, which is Christ's; for a grater than Solomon is here: Behold the
flourishing Bed wherein the King of Saints does lie; surely a place most
fordid, full of stench; his other senses had their pain, and his smell felt a
loathsome savor, in this noysom puddle.

But we need not borrow light from Candles, or lesser stars; the Scripture it
self is plain: Observe we these Particulars.

1. They spit in his face; this was accounted among the Jews a matter of great
infamy and reproach: Numb. 12.14.
And the Lord said to Moses, if her Father had but spit in her face, should she
not be ashamed seven days? We our selves account this a great affront, and so
did Job; Job. 30.9, 10.
I am their song and their byword; they abhor me, they fly far from me, and
spare not to spit in my face. Oh that the sweet face of Christ, so much
honored and adored in Heaven, should be defiled and deformed by their
spitting! Oh that no place should be thought so fit for them to void their
Excrements and Drivel in, as the blessed face of Jesus Christ! Isa. 50.6.
I hid not my face (says Christ) from shame and spitting: I used no Mask to
keep me fair; though I was fairer than the Sons of Men, I preserved not my
Beauty from their nasty Phlegm, but I opened my face, and I set it as a Butt for
them to dart their frothy Spittle at.

2. They buffet him; we heard before that one of the Officers struck Jesus with
the palm of his hand; but now they buffet him: some observe this difference
betwixt (...); the one is given with the open hand, but the other with the fist
shut up; and thus they used him at this time, Colaphis illi tuber totum caput,
facies livida forto and excusse dentes.
they struck him with their fists, and so the stroke was greater and more
offensive: By this means they made his face to swell, and to become full of
Bunches all over. One gives it in thus; By these blows of their fists, his
whole head was swollen, his face became black and blew, and his teeth ready to
fall out of his Jaws. Very probable it is, that with the violence of their
strokes, they made him reel and stagger, they made his Mouth, and Nose, and
Face to bleed, and his Eyes to startle in his Head.

3. They covered his face, Mark. 14.65. Mark 14.65.
Several Reasons are rendered for it. As, 1. That they might smite him more
boldly, and without shame. 2. That they might not have that object of pity in
their view; it is supposed that the very sight of his admirable form, so
lamentably abused, would have mollified the hardest heart under heaven, and
therefore they veiled and hoodwinked that alluring, drawing countenance. 3.
That they might not see their own filth in his face, however his Beauty was
winning, yet they had so bedawbed it with their beastly spitting, that they
began to loath to look upon him: It was a nauseous sight (says one) and enough
to make one spew to look upon it. Nauseam ipsis spectatoribus saeditas illa
provocabat.
But whether his splendour, or his horror occasioned this veil over his face,
this is most certain, that it veiled not their cruelty, but rather revealed it,
and made it manifest to all the World.

4. They smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophecy unto us,
thou Christ, who is he that smote thee? To pass away that doleful, tedious
night, they interchangeably sport at him; first one, and then another gives him
a stroke (we usually call it a Box on the ear) and being hoodwinked, they bid
him a-read who it is that smote him. Some reckon these Taunts amongst the
bitterest passages of his Passion; nothing is more miserable, even to the
greatest misery, than to see it self scorned of Enemies. It was our Savior's
case; they used this despite for their desport; with a wanton and merry malice
they aggravate their injury with scorn; q. d. Come on, thou say thou art
Christ the Son of the living God, and therefore it is likely thou art
Omniscient, thou know all things; tell now, who is it that strikes thee? We
have blind-folded thee that thou can not see us with thy bodily eyes, let thy
Divinity aread, guess, tell, prophecy, who is it now that smote thee last? Who
gave thee that blow? O Impiety without example! Surely if his patience had been
less than infinite, these very injuries would have been greater than his
patience. In way of Application.

Use.
1. Consider Christians, whether we had not a hand in these abuses; for, 1. They
spit in the face of Christ, who defile his Image in their souls, who reject his
holy and heavenly motions in their hearts. -- 2. They buffet him with their
fists, who persecute Christ in his Members, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. 3. They cover his face,
Luke 10.16.
that do not readily and willingly confess their sins, that extenuate their
frailties and imperfections, with counterfeit pretexts. -- 4. They mock and
scoff at Christ, that scorn and contemn his Messengers and Ministers; He that
despises you, despises me, says Christ. O that we would lay these things to
our hearts, and see, and observe wherein we stand guilty of these sins, that we
may repent.

2. Consider Christians, and read Christ's Love in all these sufferings; O
un-heard of kindness, and truly paternal bowels of pity and compassion! who
ever heard before of any that would be content to be spit upon, to wipe their
filths who spit uppn him? that would be content to be beat, and buffetted, to
save them from buffets, who were the buffetters? that would be content to be
blind-folded, that he might neither take notice of, nor see the offenses of
them that blind-folded him? that would be content to be made a scorn, to save
them from scorn, that shall scorn him? Christians! you that take your name from
Christ, how should you admire at the infiniteness and immensity of this love of
Christ? was it a small thing that the wisdom of God should become the
foolishness of men, and scorn of men, and ignominy of men, and contempt of the
World for your sins sake: O think of this!

And now the dismal night is done; what remains, but that we follow Christ, and
observe him in his Sufferings the next day! the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 30.5.
Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning: only Christ can
find none of this joy neither morning nor evening; for after a dismal night, he
meets with as dark a day: what the passages of the day were, we shall observe
in their several hours. CHAP. II.
SECT. I. Of Christ's Indictment, and Judas's fearful end.
ABout six in the morning Jesus was brought unto Pilate's house; John 18.28.
Mat. 27.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
then led they Jesus from Caiphas unto the Judgment-Hall, and it was early. --
When the Morning was come, all the chief Priests and Elders of the People took
council against Jesus to put him to death; and when they had bound him, and led
him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the Governor. Then Judas which
had betrayed him, hanged himself. O the readiness of our nature to evil! When
the Israelites would sacrifice to the Golden-Calf, they rose up early in the
Morning; if God leave us to our selves, Exodus 32.6.
we are as ready to practice mischief, as the fire is to burn, without delay.
But on this Circumstance I shall not long stay; the transactions of this hour I
shall consider in these two passages, Christ's Indictment, and Judas's fearful
end.

In Christ's Indictment, we may observe, 1. His Accusation. 2. His Examination.

In his Accusation we may observe, 1. Who are his Accusers. 2. Where he was
accused. 3. What was the matter of which they do accuse him.

1. His Accusers were the chief Priests and Elders of the People; Mat. 27.12.
the very same that before had judged him guilty of Death, are now his Accusers
before the temporal Judge: but why must our Savior be twice Judged? was not
the Sanhedrim, or Ecclesiastical Court sufficient to condemn him? I answer, --
He is twice judged; 1. That his Innocence might more appear; true Gold often
tried in the fire, is not consumed, but rather perfected; so Christ's
Integrity, though examined again and again, by diverse Judges wholly corrupt;
yet thereby it was not hurt, but made rather more illustrious. 2. Because his
firster judgment was in the night, and a sentence pronounced then was not
reputed valid; it is said of Moses, that he judged the People from the morning
unto the evening; Exodus 18.13. John 18.31.
for until night no judgment was protracted. 3. Because, said the Jews, it is
not lawful for us to put any man to death. These words had need of exposition;
we know Moses's Law prescribed death to the Adulterers, Idolaters, Blasphemers,
Man-slayers, Sabbath Breakers: but now the Romans (say some) had come and
restrained the Jews from the execution of their Laws; others are of another
mind; and therefore the meaning of these words, It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death, may be understood (say they) in a double sense: 1. That it
was not Lawful for them to put any man to such a death as the Death of the
Cross: Moses's Law was Ignorant of such a death; and the words following seem
to favor this interpretation, John 18 32.
that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what
death he should die. We read only of four sorts of death that were used among
the Jews; as strangling, stoning, burning, and killing with the sword:
crucifying was the invention of Romans, and not of Jews. -- 2. That it was not
Lawful for them to put any man to death at such a time: on this day was
celebrated the Jews Passover, which was in memory of their deliverance out of
Egypt; so that now they had a custom to deliver some from death (the case of
Barabbas) but they could not now condemn any one to death; hence it was, that
after Herod the Jew had killed James, he proceeded further, to take Peter; also
yet during the days of unleavened Bread, he delivers him to be kept in Prison,
Acts. 12.14.
intending (says the Text) after Easter to bring him forth to the People.
Pilate, a Gentile, was not tied to these Laws, and therefore they led Jesus
from Caiaphas unto the Hall of judgment, or unto Pilate's House.

2. The place of the Accusation was at the door of the House; they would not go
into the Judgment-Hall lest they should be defiled, John 18.28.
but that they might eat the Passover. See what a piece of Superstition and
gross Hypocrisy is here! they are curious of a Ceremony, but make no strain to
shed innocent blood; they are precise about small matters, but for the
weightier matters of the Law, as Mercy, Judgment, Fidelity, and the Love of
God, they let them pass; they honor the figurative Passover, but the true
Passover they seize upon with bloody and sacrilegious hands.

3. The matter of which they accuse him. 1. That he seduced the People. 2. That
he forbade to pay Tribute to Caesar. 3. That he said he was a King. How great?
but withal, how false were these their accusations? For the first, Christ was
so far from stirring up Seditions, that he strove and endeavored to gather the
People into one. O Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a
Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? For the second;
instead of denying to pay tribute to Caesar, Mat. 17.27. Luke 20.25.
he paid it in his own particular; take twenty-pence out of the fishes mouth
(said he to Peter) and give unto them for me and thee; and give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesar's (said he to the People) and to God the things that are
God's. For the third; instead of making himself a King, he professes that his
Kingdom is not of this World; and when they would have made him a King, instead
of flattering them, John. 18.36. John 6.15.
he flies from them; and that into the Wilderness; or into a mountain himself
alone. -- Thus much of the Accusation,

2. For his Examination. Pilate was nothing moved with any of the Accusations,
save only the third: and therefore letting all the rest pass, he asked him
only, Art thou the King of the Jews? Joh. 18.33.36.
To whom Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this World, etc. He says not, my
Kingdom is not in this World; but my Kingdom is not of this World; by which
Pilate knew well that Christ was no enemy unto Caesar: Christ's Kingdom is
spiritual, his government is in the very hearts and Consciences of men, and
what is this to Caesar? -- Hence Pilate uses a policy to save Jesus Christ;
they tell him that Christ was of Galilee; and therefore he takes occasion to
send him to Herod who was Governor of Galilee. But of that anon.

Use.
How many Lessons may we learn from hence; 1. Christ was accused, who can be
free? The chief Priests and Elders of the Jews accused Christ; no wonder if
those that are chief and great amongst us, accuse poor Christians: O there is a
perpetual enmity between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent;
there is an everlasting, irreconcilable, implacable enmity, and antipathy
between Grace and Profaneness, light and darkness, Christ and Belial: As it is
reported of Tigers, that they rage when they smell the fragrancy of Spices; so
it is with the wicked, who rage at the spiritual Graces of them that are
sincere for God.

2. Christ's Accusers would not go into the Judment-Hall lest they should be
defiled; the very profane can learn to be superstitious in lesser matters; how
many amongst us will make conscience of outward Ceremonies (as of eating meats,
observing days) but as for the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment and
mercy, they leave them undone?

3. Christ is most falsely accused of Sedition, seduction, and usurpation; it
were indeed to be wished, that they who take upon them the name of
Christianity, were guiltless of such crimes; but let them look to it, who are
such: This, I am sure, was Christ's Rule and Practice; Be subject to every
constitution and authority of man, 1 Pet. 2.13. Romans 13.2.
for the Lord's sake. If any dare to resist the Power that is of God, they
shall receive to themselves damnation. Nor can we excuse our selves, because
our Governors are not Godly; for all the Governors to whom Christ, and his
Apostles submitted themselves, and to whom all those strict precepts of duty
and Obedience related in the New Testament, were no better (for ought I know)
than Tyrants, Persecuters, Idolaters, and Heathen-Princes.

4. Christ is examined only of his usurpation: Art thou the King of the Jews?
the men of this world mind only worldly things: the Apostles so describes them;
Phil. 3.19.
who mind earthly things. Pilate regards not Christ's Doctrine; but he is
afraid lest he should aspire the Kingdom; and concerning this, our Savior puts
him out of doubt; My Kingdom is not of this world. As Pilate and Christ, so
Worldlings and Christians are of different Principles, they mind earthly
things; but our Conversation (says the Apostle) is in heaven; our conversation
(i.e.) the aim and scope of our hearts, in every action, Ver. 20.
is only for heaven; whatsoever we do, it should some way or other fit us for
Heaven; we should still be laying in for heaven against the time that we shall
come and live there; we should have our thoughts and hearts set upon heaven: so
it is said of holy Mr. Ward, that being in the midst of a Dinner very
contemplative; and the People wondering what he was musing about; he presently
breaks out, for ever, for ever, for ever; and though they endeavored to still
him, yet he still cried out, for ever, for ever, for ever; Oh eternity! to be
for ever in heaven with God and Christ, how shall this swallow up all other
thoughts and aims? and especially all wordly, careful, sinful thoughts, aims,
or ends?

2. Pilate having dismissed Jesus, this hour is concluded with a sad disaster
of wicked Judas; then Judas which betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, Mat. 27.3.
repented himself, etc. Now his conscience thaws, and grows somewhat tender;
but it is like the tenderness of a Boil, which is nothing else but a new
disease; there is a repentance that comes too late; Esau wept bitterly, and
repented him, when the Blessing was gone; the five foolish Virgins lift up
their voices aloud, when the gates were shut; and in hell men shall repent to
all eternity; and such a repentance was this of Judas; about midnight he had
recieved his money in the house of Annas, and now betimes in the morning he
repents his bargain, and throws his money back again; the end of this Tragedy
was, that Judas died a miserable death; he perished by the most infamous hands
in the world (i. e) by his own hands: he went and hanged himself. And as Luke,
he fell headlong, and burst asunder in the midst, and all his Bowels gushed
out. Mat. 27.5.
In every passage of his death, we may take notice of God's Justice, and be
afraid of sin; it was just that he should hang in the air, who, for his sin,
was hated both of heaven and earth; and that he should fall down headlong, who
was fallen from such an height of honor; and that the Halter should strangle
that throat, through which the Voice of treason had founded; and that his
Bowels should be lost, who had lost the bowels of all pity, piety, and
compassion; and that his Ghost should have its passage out of his midst (he
burst asunder in the midst) and not out of his lips, because with a kiss of his
lips he had betrayed his Lord, our blessed Jesus.

Here Is a warning-piece to all the world; Use.
who would die such a death for the pleasure of a little sin? or who would now
suffer for millions of Gold, that which Judas suffered, and yet suffers in hell
for thirty pieces of silver? Now the Lord keep our souls from betraying Christ,
and from despairing in God's mercy through Christ. Amen, Amen.

I see one sand is run, I must turn the Glass; now was the seventh hour, and
what were the passages of that hour, I shall next relate, SECT. II. Of Christ's
Mission to Herod, and the Transactions there.
Luke 23.7.
ABout seven in the Morning, Jesus was sent to Herod, who himself also was at
Jerusalem at that time. The reason of this was, because Pilate had heard that
Christ was a Galilean; and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, he concludes that
Christ must be under his Jurisdiction: Ver. 8.
Herod was glad of the honor done to him; for he was desirous to see Christ of
a long season, because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped to have
seen some Miracle done by him. That which I shall observe in this passage, is

Ver. 9.
1. Herod's questioning of Jesus Christ. 2. Christ's silence to all his
questions. 3. Herod's derision; and Christ's dismission back again to Pilate.

Luke. 23.8.
1. Herod, questioned with him in many words; what those words were, are not
expressed; only we have some conjectures from Luke 23.8. q. d. What! art thou
he concerning whom my Father was so mocked of the Wise men? and for whose sake
my Father slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem? I have heard thou have
changed water into Wine, and have multiplied Loaves, whereon so many thousands
fed; come, do something at my request, which elsewhere thou have done without
request of any; come satisfy my desire, work now but one Miracle before me,
that I may be convinced of thy Divinity. I dare not deliver these words as
certain truths, because of that silence that is in Scripture; only we read that
he hoped to have seen some Miracle done by him. Herod could not abide to hear
his Word, and to bear his yoke: but he was well content to see the works and
miracles of Jesus Christ.

2. Whatever his questions were, he answered him nothing: many reasons are
given in for this; Ver. 9.
as, 1. Because he enquired only in curiosity, and with no true intent or end;
Prove. 26.4. Jam. 4.3.
concerning which, says the wise man, Answer not a fool according to his
folly: And, ye ask and receive not (says James) because ye ask amiss. 2.
Because Christ had no need of defense at all: let them go about to Apologize,
that are afraid, or guilty of death; as for Christ, he despises their
Accusations by his very silence. 3. Because Herod had the year before put John
the Baptist to death, who was that Voice crying in the Wilderness; now that
Voice being gone, Christ, the Word, will be silent; he will not give a Word. 4.
Because Herod had been sottishly careless of Jesus Christ; he lived in the
place where Jesus more especially had conversed, yet never had seen his Person,
or heard his Sermons. It gives us to learn thus much; that if we neglect the
opportunities of Grace, and refuse to hear the voice of Christ in the time of
Mercy, Christ may refuse to speak one word of comfort to us in our time of
need; if we, during our time stop our ears, God will, in his time, stop his
mouth, and shut up the springs of Grace, that we shall receive no refreshment,
no instruction, no pardon, no salvation. 5. Because Christ was resolved to be
Obedient to his Father's Ordinance, he was resolved to submit to the doom of
death with patience and silence; for this purpose he came into the world, that
he might suffer in our stead, and for our sins; and therefore he would not
plead his own cause, nor defend his own innocence in any kind; he knew that we
were guilty, though himself was not.

3. This silence they interpret for simplicity; and so, 1. They despised him.
And, 2. Luke. 23.11.
they dismissed him; And Herod with his men of war set him at naught, and mocked
him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate. They
arrayed him with a white, glittering, gorgeous raiment: the word (...),
signifies gorgeous, bright, resplendent, such as Nobles and Kings used to wear:
The Latins sometimes render it, splendidam vestem, and sometimes candidam, or
albam vestem, we translate it a gorgeous robe; and the Ancients call it a white
robe; in imatation whereof the Baptized were wont to put on a white raiment,
which they called (...); but whether it were white or no, I shall not
controvert: The Original yields thus far, that it was a bright and resplendent
garment, such as came newly from the fulling: many mysteries (if it be white)
are found out here; some say, this held forth the excellency or dignity of
Christ: White color is most agreeable to the highest God; he many times
appeared in white, but never in any other color; and the Saints in heaven are
said to be clothed in long white Robes: Rev. 4.4.
and Peers, Kings, and Coesars were usually clothed in white, says Jansenius:
Others say, this held forth the innocence of Christ, and that they were
directed herein by Divine providence, declaring plainly against themselves,
that Christ should rather have been absolved as an innocent, than condemned as
a malefactor. -- But to leave these mysteries, the meaning of Herod was not so
much to declare his excellency, or innocence, as his folly, or simplicity;
certainly he accounted him for no other than a very fool, and idiot, a passing
simple man. The Philosophers (says Tertullian) drew him in their Pictures,
attired by Herod, like a fool, with long Asses ears, his nails plucked off,
and a book in his hand, etc. O mavelous madness! Oh the strange mistakes of
men! Mat. 12.19. Mark 2.7. Mat. 12.24. John 8.48.
in his life time they account Jesus a glutton, a drinker of Wine, a Companion
of Sinners: a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, and one that cast out Devils through
Beelzebub, Prince of Devils: yea, and one that himself was possessed with a
Devil. And now toward his death he is bound as a thief, he is struck in the
house of Caiaphas as an arrogant and saucy fellow, he is accused before the
Sanhedrim of Blasphemy; he is brought before Pilate as a malefactor, a mover of
sedition, a Seducer, a Rebel, and as one that aspired to the Kingdom; he is
transmitted unto Herod as a jugler to show tricks; and now in the close of all,
he is accounted of Herod and his men of War, as a fool, an idiot, a bruit, not
having the understanding of a man. But soft Herod; is Christ therefore a fool,
because he is silent? and art thou wise, because of thy many words, and many
questions? Solomon a wiser man than Herod, is of another mind: In the multitude
of words there wants not sin, Prove. 10.19. Prove. 17.27, 28.
but he that refraineth his lips is wise. Again, he that has knowledge spares
his words, and a man of understanding is of a cool Spirit; even a fool when he
holds his peace is counted wise: and he that shuts his lips is esteemed a
man of understanding. Ah poor Herod, consult these texts, and then tell me who
is the fool? what? thou that speak many words, and questionest about many
things which in time will turn to thy greater condemnation, or Christ Jesus
that was deeply silent to the worlds eternal Salvation? Paul was of another
Spirit, and of another judgment concerning Christ, in him was knowledge; nor is
that all, in whom was wisdom and knowledge; nor is that all, in him were
treasures, and all treasures of wisdom and knowledge; Col. 2.3.
In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and yet that is not
all neither, not only is wisdom in him, but he is wisdom it self (for that is
his name and title in the book of Proverbs) and yet by Herod and his Courtiers
he is reckoned, arrayed, and derided as a mere simple man.

2. They dismissed him; in this posture they sent him away again to Pilate, to
all their former derision they added this, that now he was exposed in scorn to
the boys of the streets. Herod would not be content that he and his men of war
only should set him at naught, but he sends him away through the more public,
and eminent streets of Jerusalem, in his white garment, to be scorned by the
people; to be hooted at by idle persons; And now was fulfilled the Prophecy of
Christ, I was a derision to all my people, Lam. 3.14.
and their song all the day.

Of this let us make some use. Was the eternal Word of God, Use.
and the uncreated wisdom of the Father reputed a fool? no wonder if we suffer
thousands of reproaches; We are made a spectakle unto the World, and to Angels,
and to men; we are fools for Christ's sake, says the Apostle. -- We are made
as the filth of the world, 1 Cor. 4.2.10, 13.
and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. Christians must wear the
bage and livery of Jesus Christ; we cannot expect to fare better than our
Master, why then should we despond? I never knew Christians in better heart,
than when they were styled by the Name, of Puritans, Precisians, Hypocrites,
Formalists, or the like.

2. Let us not judge of men and their worth by their outside garments; wisdom
may be, and often is clad in the Coat of a fool. As beggarly bottles oft-times
hold Rich Wines; so poor robes contain sometimes many precious Souls; in right
judgment we should look only to the mind, and soul, and inside of a man, yea,
to the hidden man of the heart: and for our selves, we should look to the
inward, and not to the outward adorning: men, and women especially have rules
for this, Your adorning let it not be that outward adorning, of platting the
hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of apparel, but let it be in
the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
Oh what is it for a man to be clothed in Gold, whiles his soul is wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked?

3. Let us admire at the condescension of Christ, who for our sakes came down
from Heaven to teach us wisdom; and for us who were fools indeed, was content
to be accounted a fool himself; yea, and if need had been, would have been
ready to have said with David, I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be
base in my own sight. I know this Doctrine is an offense to many; 2 Samuel 6.22.
1 Cor. 1.23.
Christ Crucified is unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness. To tell natural men (such as Herod, and his men of war) that this
same Jesus whom they mock, and set at naught, is the Son of God, and Savior of
the World, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. Ver. 25.
they cannot believe; it is plainly evident, that not many Wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; but God has called the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise; why this is the fruit of
Christ's condescension, called the foolishness of God; wisdom it self was
content to be counted a fool, that those who are accounted the foolish things
of the world, might be wise to Salvation.

4. Let us search whether Herod and his men do not keep a rendezvous in our
hearts; do not we set Christ at naught? do not we mock him, and array him in a
gorgeous robe? whatsoever we do to one of the least of his Saints, he tells us
that we do it to himself, Matt. 25.40, 45. and have we not dealt thus with his
Saints? have we not dealt thus with his Ministers? 2 King. 2.23.
when Elisha was going up to Bethel, there came little Children out of the
City, and mocked him, and said unto him, go up thou bald-head, go up thou
bald-head. A reproach of bald-head, roundhead, given to a faithful Elisha, or
Minister of Christ, proclaims you as bad as those little Children, yea, as bad
as Herod, and his men of war; such Herod's were a little before the destruction
of Jerusalem, some there were then that mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36. and 16.
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no
remedy. O take heed of this sin, banish Herod out of your hearts, or Christ
will never lodge there: ruin without remedy will seize on those souls, that
Herod like mock the Messengers of God, what is it but to mock the Messenger,
the Angel of the Covenant, even Christ himself? as Herod sent Christ away, so
let us send Herod away, and give him a dismission out of our doors.

The hour strikes again, and summons Christ and us to another station: let us
follow him still, as Peter did when he went into the high Priest's Palace, and
sat with the servants to see the end. Mat. 26.58.
SECT. III. Of Christ and Barabbas compared; and of the question debated
betwixt Pilate and the Jews.
ABout eight in the morning our Savior Christ is returned to Pilate; who
propounded to the Jews, whether they would have Jesus, or Barabbas let lose
unto them. Ye have a custom (says he) that I should release unto you one at
the Passover, will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?
John 18.39, 40.
Then cried they all again. saying, not this man, but Barabbas; now Barabbas
was a Robber. It is supposed that in this passage Pilate endeavored Christ's
liberty, Mat. 27.18.
He knew that for envy they had delivered him, and he saw that Herod had sent
him back again uncondemned, and therefore now he propounds this medium to
rescue him from their malice, Mat. 27.17.
Whom will ye that I release unto you, Barabbas or Jesus, which is called
Christ? In the prosecution of this passage, I shall observe, 1. Who this
Barabbas was. 2. What is the difference betwixt him and Christ. 3. How they
vote. 4. Pilate's quaere upon the vote. 5. Their answer to his Quaere. 6. His
reply unto their answer. 7. Their reduplication upon his reply.

For the first, what was this Barabbas, but a notable Prisoner? Matthew. 27.16.
One that had made insurrection, and who had committed murder in the
insurrection? Mark 15.7. One that for a certain sedition made in the City, and
for murder was cast into prison? Luke 23.19. one that was a robber or an
highway thief? John 18.40. one that was the greatest malefactor of his time?
and must he be taken, and Jesus cast? must he be saved, and Christ condemned?

For the second, what the difference is betwixt him and Christ, let us weigh
them in the balance, and we may find; 1. Barabbas was a thief, and by violence
took away the bread of the needy, but Christ was a feeder and supplyer of their
needs. 2. Barabbas was an highway thief, wounding them that traveled by the
way; but Christ was the good Samaritan that healed such, binding up their
wounds, and pouring into them Wine and Oil. 3. Barabbas was a murderer, and
had slain the living; but Christ was the Savior, restoring life unto the dead.
4. Barabbas was a seditious tumult-raiser, he made a certain sedition in
Jerusalem; but Christ was a loyal tribute-payer, and his commands were, give
unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's. 5. Barabbas was a bloody revenger, a
man of blood, that hunted after blood; but Christ was a meek and quiet spirit,
and what with sweating, binding, buffetting, bleeding, was now become almost a
bloodless Redeemer: light and darkness have no less fellowship, Christ and
Belial no less discord; here is a competition indeed, the author of sedition
with the Prince of peace; a murtherous mutiniere, with a merciful mediator; a
son of Belial with the Son of God. --

3. For their votes, they give them in us; Not this man, but Barabbas, John
18.40. Aug. trac. 15. in Johan. Leo. Sermon. de pass.
q. d. let us have him crucified who raised the dead, and him released who
destroyed the living: let the Savior of the world be condemned to death, and
the slayer of men be released from Prison, and have his pardon. A strange vote,
to desire the Wolf before the Lamb, the noxious and violent before the
righteous and innocent: here was the Prophetic parable of Jotham fulfilled,
The trees of the forest have chosen the bramble, and refused the Vine; --

But there is something more observable in this vote; Jud. 9.14.
the Jews had a custom not to name what they held accursed; I will not make
mention of their names within my lips; and surely this speaks their spite,
Psalm. 16.5.
that they will not vouchsafe to speak the Name of Jesus; the cry is not thus,
Not Jesus but Barabbas; but thus, Not this man, not this fellow; but Barabbas;
as if they meant first to murder his Name, and then his Person.

4. For Pilate's quaere upon the vote, What shall I do then with Jesus, Mat.
27.22.
which is called Christ? Pilate gives him his name to the full, Jesus, who is
called Christ; his name is Jesus Christ. There is more pity in a gentle
Pilate, than in all the Jews; in some things Pilate did Justly, and very well;
as first, he would not condemn him before his accusations were brought in; nor
then neither before he was convicted of some capital crime; and because he
perceives that it was envy all along that drove on their design, he endeavors
to save his life by ballancing him with Barabbas; and now he sees that they
prefer Barabbas before Jesus, he puts forth the question, What shall I do then
with Jesus which is called Christ? q. d. I know not what to do with him, it is
against my light to condemn him to death, who is of innocent life: I could tell
what to do with Barabbas, for he is a thief, a mutiniere, a murderer, a
notable malefactor; but there is no such thing proved against Jesus, who is
called Christ, What then shall I do with him?

5. For their answer to this quaere, And they all said unto him, let him be
crucified. Mat. 27.22.
This was the first time that they speak openly their design; it had long
lurked within them that he must die a cursed death, and now their envy bursts,
and breaks out with unanimous consent, and cry, Let him be crucified. O wonder!
must no other death stint their malice but the Cross? other deaths they had in
practice, as the towel, stoning and beheading; more favorable, and suitable to
their Nation; and will they now pollute a Jew with a Roman death? Magna
crudelitas, etc. a great cruelty; Beda.
they sought not only to kill him, but to crucify him, that so he might dye a
lingering death. The cross was a gradual and slow death, it spun out pain into
a long thread, and therefore they make choice of it, as they made choice of
Jesus; let him dye, rather than Barabbas, and let him dye the death of the
Cross, rather than any other speedy, quick, dispatching death.

6. Eor Pilate's reply unto this answer, Why? what evil has he done? Mat.
27.23.
he was loath to satisfy their demands, and therefore he questions again, What
must he dye for; was it meet that he should condemn one to death, and
especially to such a death, and no crime committed? Come on (says Pilate) what
evil has he done? Augustine upon these words. Ask (says he) and let them
answer with whom he conversed most, Aug. tract. 15. super Job.
let the possessed who were freed, the sick and languishing who were healed;
the leaprous that were cleansed, the deaf that hear, the dumb that speak, the
dead that were raised, let them answer the question, what evil has he done?
Sometimes the Jews themselves could say, Mark 7.37.
He has done all things well, he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to
speak. Surely he has done all things well; he stilled the winds, and calmed
the seas; with the spittle of his mouth he cured the blind; he raised the dead,
he prayed all night; he gave grace, and he forgave sins; and by his death he
merited for his Saints everlasting life: why then should he dye, that has done
all things well? no wonder if Pilate object against these malicious ones, What
evil has he done?

Ibid.
7. For their reduplication on his reply, they cried out the more, saying, let
him be crucified. Instead of proving some evil against him, they cried out the
more; as Luke, They were instant with loud voices; Luke 23.23.
they made such a clamor, that the earth rang with it, the cry was doubled,
and redoubled, Crucify him, Crucify him; twice Crucify him, as if they
thought one Cross too little for him. O inconstant favor of men! their Anthems
of Hosanna, and Benedictus not long since joyfully spoken, are now turned into
jarring hideous notes, Let him be crucified. And now is Pilate threatened into
another opinion, Ver. 23. Mat. 27.24.
they require his judgment; and the voices of them, and of the Chief Priest
prevailed; so it follows, and when he saw he could prevail nothing, but that
rather a tumult was made, why then Barabbas is released unto them, and Jesus is
delivered to be scourged,

Use.
I would not dwell too long on Pilate, the high Priests, and Jews, the
application is the life of all. -- Now then --

1. Give me leave to look amongst our selves, is there not some or other
amongst us that prefer Barabbas before Jesus? O yes! those that listen to that
old mutinous Murderer in his seditious temptations; those that reject the
blessed motions of Gods own Spirit, in his tenders and offers of Grace; those
that embrace the world with its pleasures and profits, and make them their
portion; all these choose Barabbas, and reject Jesus Christ, little do we think
that every wilful act of sin, is a sedition, a mutiny against our souls,
another Judas Galileus that stirs up all the passions of our mind against our
Jesus. I cannot but think what drawing, and soliciting of our souls is made by
virtue and vice in our passage toward the other world: on the one hand stands
vice with all her false deceits, Wisd. 2.6, 7, 8, 9.
and flatteries, her tempatations are strong, Come let us enjoy the good things
that are present, and let us speedily use the creatures as in youth, let us
fill our selves with costly Wine and Ointments, and let no flower of the spring
pass by us, let us crown our selves with rose-buds before they be withered, let
none of us go without his part of jollity let us leave tokens of our joyfulness
in every place; for this is our portion, and our let is this. On the other hand
stands Virtue, or Grace with all the promises of future happiness, she points
at Jesus, Prove. 8.11, 18, 19.
and cries, O come unto Christ and live; Wisdom is better than rubies, her
fruit is better than Gold, yea than fine Gold, and her revenue than choice
Silver; they that love Christ shall inherit substance, and he will fill them
with treasures, even with durable riches. But Oh how many thousands, and ten
thousands that neglect this cry, and follow vice? what millions of men are
there in the world that prefer Barabbas before Jesus? if we proclaim it in our
pulpits that Christ is the chiefest of ten thousands, that he is fairer than
all the Children of men, that he is the Standard Bearer, and there is none like
to him: that if you will have but Jesus Christ, you need no more; yet do not
many of you say in your hearts, as Pilate here, What shall I do with Jesus that
is called Christ? or as the devils said elsewere, What have we to do with thee
Jesus thou Son of God? nay, has not many times the secret grudgings of your
reluctant souls accounted the gracious offers of speedy repentance to be but as
a coming of Christ to torment you before your time? Why alas, what is this now
but to prefer Barabbas before Jesus? you that swear as the Devil bids, and as
Christ forbids, you that profane Sabbaths, that revel, drink to excess, or it
may be to drunkenness, surely your vote goes along with the Jews, Not this Man,
but Barabbas.

2. Give me leave to look on the love and mercy of God in Christ; our Jesus was
not only content to take our nature upon him, but to be compared with the
greatest malefactor of those times; and by public sentence, yea votes and
voices of the People, to be pronounced a greater delinquent, and much more
worthy of death than wicked Barabbas. Levit. 14, 4, 5, 6, 7.
O the love of Christ! we read in Leviticus, that in the days of the cleansing
of the Leper, the Priest was to take two Birds (or two Sparrows) alive, and the
one of them must be killed, and the other being kept alive, must only be dipped
in the blood of the Bird that was slain, and so it must be let loose into the
open field. Barabbas say some; but all Believers say we, are that live Sparrow;
and Jesus Christ is the Sparrow that was slain; the lot sell upon him to dye
for us; all our sins were laid upon his soul: so that in this sense Jesus
Christ was the greatest sinner in the World, yea, a greater sinner than
Barabbas himself, and therefore he must dye, and we being dipped in the Blood of
Christ must be let loose, and set at liberty! was not this love? he dyed that
we might live; it was the voice of God as well as men, Release Barabbas, every
believing Barabbas, and crucify Jesus.

Another hour is gone, let us make stand for a while; and the next time we
meet, we shall see further sufferings. SECT. IV. Of Christ Stripped, Whipped,
Clothed in Purple, and Crowned with Thorns.
ABout nine (which the Jews call the third hour of the day) was Christ
stripped, whipped, clothed with purple, and crowned with thorns; in this hour
his sufferings came thick. I must divide them into parts, and speak of them
severally by themselves.

1. When Pilate saw how the Jews were set upon his death, he consented, and
delivered him first to be stripped. Mat. 27.27.
Then the Soldiers of the Governor took Jesus into the common Hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band of Soldiers, and they stripped him. They
pulled of his clothes, and made hm stand naked before them all; He that adorns
the Heaven with Stars, and the Earth with Flowers, Genesis 3.21.
and made coats of skins to cloth our first Parents in, is now himself
stripped stark naked; I cannot but look on this as a great shame: it appears so
by our first Parents Adam and Eve, who no sooner had sinned, and knew
themselves naked but they sowed fig leaves together, and made themselves
aprons. Genesis 3.7.
If Adam was so ashamed of his nakedness before his own Wife (who was naked
too, as well as he) what a shame, and blush was it in the face of Christ, when
in the common Hall in view of the whole band, or company of Soldiers, he
stands all naked? My confusion is continually before me, and the shame of my
face has covered me, Psalm. 44.15.
says David in the Person of Christ. It is reported, in the Ecclesiastical
story, that when two Martyrs, and holy Virgins (they call them Agnes, and
Barbara) were stripped stark naked for their execution, God pitying their great
shame and trouble, to have their nakedness discovered, made for them a veil of
light, and so he sent them to a modest, and desired death; but our Savior
Christ, who chose all sorts of shame and confusion, that by a fullness of
suffering he might expiate his Fathers wrath, and consecrate to us all kinds of
sufferings and affronts, he endured the shame of nakedness at the time of his
scourging; see here a naked Christ, and therein see the mercy of Christ to us;
he found us like the good Samaritan, when we were stripped, and wounded, and
left half dead, and that we might be covered, he quietly suffered himself to be
divested of his own robes; he took on him the state of sinning Adam, and became
naked, that we might first be clothed with righteousness, and then with
immortality; oh what a blessed use may we make of the very nakedness of Christ?

2. Pilate gave him to be scourged; this some think he did upon no other
account, but that the Jews being satiated and glutted with these tortures, they
might rest satisfied, and think themselves sufficiently avenged, and so desist
from taking away his life. That he was scourged is without controversy, for
so the Evangelist relates, Then Pilate took Jesus and scourged him: John 19.1.
and that Pilate might give him to be scourged on that account is very
probable, because that after the scourging, he brings him out to the Jews,
proclaming, I find no fault in him; and before his scourging, Ver. 6. Luke
23.15, 16.
he speaks it more expressly, He has done nothing worthy of death, I will
therefore chastise him, and release him. And it adds to this, that howsoever
the custom was, that those that were to be crucified must first be whipped,
yet if they were adjudged to dye, their stripes must be less, and if they were
to be set at liberty, they must be beaten with more stripes; Hier. in Mattheum
Tom. 9.
And Pilate endeavoring to preserve his life, they scourged him above measure,
even almost to death.

In this scourging of Christ I shall insist on these two things; 1. The shame.
2. The pain.

1. For the shame, it was of such infamy that the Romans Exempted all their
Citizens from it. Act. 22.25, 26.
Is it lawful for you (said Paul) to scourge a man that is a Roman? -- And when
the Centurion heard that, he went, and told the chief Captain, saying, take
heed what thou do, for this man is a Roman; the Romans looked upon it as a
most infamous punishment, fit only for thieves and slaves, and not for
freeborn or privileged Romans; and the Jews themselves would not suffer it
above so many stripes, lest a brother should seem vile unto them; Deuteronomy. 25.2, 3.
If a wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the Judge shall cause him to lie
down, -- forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed, lest if he should
exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should
seem vile unto thee. Whipping is so unworthy a punishment, that only children,
bondslaves, and rogues were used to be corrected therewith, especially if they
exceeded the number of forty stripes; 2 Cor. 11.24.
when Paul was thus used, he tells us, Of the Jews five times received I forty
stripes save one. Theophilact says they would not exceed that number, lest
Paul should have become infamous, and ever after incapable of public office,
and hoping they might have regained him, they would not brand him with that
note of infamy. O then if one stripe above forty was so infamous amongst the
Jews, what shame, what infamy was this, when so many scores, hundreds, and
thousands of stripes (as some reckon them) were laid on Jesus Christ? and yet
our Lord does not disdain to undergo them for our sakes, he bears in his body
those wounds and stripes that we had deserved by our sins.

2. For the pain; this kind of punishment was not only infamous, but terrible;
no sooner the Soldiers had their commission, but they charged, and discharged
upon him such bloody blows, as if he had been the greatest offender, and basest
slave in all the World. Nicep. l. 1. c. 3.
Nicephorus calls these whippers bloody Hang-men, by the fierceness of whose
whipping many had dyed under their hands. Bosq. de pass. Domini. page 840.
The manner of their whipping is described thus; After they had stripped him,
they bound him to a pillar, whither came six young and strong Executioners,
Scourgers, Varlets, Hang-men (says Jerome) to scourge him, and whip him while
they could; whereof two whipped him with rods of thorns; and when they had
wearied themselves, other two whipped him with ropes or whip-cords, tied and
knotted like a carters whip; and when they were tired, the other two scourged
off his very Skin with wires, or little chains of Iron; and thus they
continued, till by alternate and successive turns they had added stripe upon
stripe, and wound upon wound, latter upon former, and new upon old, that he was
all over in a gore blood. Isa. 53.5.
The Scripture tells us, that He was wounded for our transgressions, and
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed; he was wounded, bruised, chastised, whipped
with stripes; if you would know with how many stripes? some reckon them to the
number of the Soldiers, Six hundred and sixty, or a thousand stripes? others
reckon them according to the number of the bones, compacted in man's body, which
say Anatomists are two hundred and sixty, and Christ having received for every
bone three stripes according to the triple manner of his whipping, they
amounted in all to seven hundred and eighty stripes; others reckon them to five
thousand, above the forty which the Jews were commanded not to exceeed in. --
And the truth is, if the whole band of Soldiers were the whippers of Christ
(as some would have it) I cannot see but his stripes might be more than so;
when the Son of an Israelitish woman blasphemed God, the Lord said to Moses,
Levit. 24.14.
Bring forth him that has cursed without the camp, and let all that heard him
lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him; now
Christ had said before all the band, that he was the Son of God, which they
called Blasphemy; and therefore why might they not all (according to this Law)
lay their hands upon him, and fall upon him if not with stones (which now was
turned into whipping) yet with rods, whip-cords, and little chains?

I shall not contend about the number of his stripes; but this is certain, that
the soldiers, with violence and unrelenting hands, executed their commission;
they tore his tender flesh, till the pillar and pavement were purpled with a
shower of blood; and if we may believe Bernard, They plowed with their whips
upon his back, and made long furrows, and after that they turned his back upon
the pillar, and whipped his belly and his breast, till there was no part free
from his face unto his foot. A scourging able to kill any man, and would have
killed him, but that he was preserved by the Godhead to endure, and to suffer a
more shameful death.

We may read here a Lecture of the immense love of God in Christ to us poor
Gentiles; he is therefore whipped that he might marry us to himself, Use.
and never reject us, or cast us off: we read of a Law in Moses, that if a man
took a wife, and hated her, and gave occasions of speech against her, and
brought an evil name upon her undeservably; that then the Elders of the City
should take that man, and chastise him, Deuteronomy. 22.18, 19.
-- and she should be his wife, he might not put her away all his days. There
is a great mystery in this ceremony; for that man (say some) was Christ, who by
his incarnation betrothed unto himself the Gentile Church, but he seems to hate
her, and to give an occasion of a speech against her, and to bring an evil
report upon her, as Into the way of the Gentiles ye shall not go, and into the
City of the Samaritans ye shall not enter; Mat. 10.5. Mat. 15.26.
and it is not meet to take the Childrens bread, and to cast it unto dogs. And
now he is accused before the Elders, now he is whipped and chastised, and
commanded by his Father to take her to his wife, and not to put her away all
his days. I know there is much unlikeness in this mystery, for Christ was not
whipped for calling the Church adulterous, that indeed was chaste; but he was
whipped to present the Church as a chaft Virgin to his Father, that indeed was
adulterous, Oh he loved the Church, and gave himself for it; Ephesians. 5.25, 27.
-- that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish;
this was the meaning of Christ's whipping, Isa. 53.5.
The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we
healed. Come then, and let us learn to read this love-letter sent from Heaven
in bloody characters, Christ is stripped who clothed the Lillies of the Field;
Christ is bound hand and foot, his hands that multiplied the Loaves; and his
feet that were weary in seeking the straggling sheep; Christ is scourged all
over, because all over we were full of wounds, and bruises, Isa. 1.6.
and putrefying sores, and there was no way to cure our wounds, but by his
wounds, our bruises, but by his bruises, our sores, but by his sores; O read,
and read again, Christ is whipped, belly, back, side, from his shoulders to the
soles of his feet, the lashes eating into his flesh, and cutting his very
veins, so that (as some say with much confidence, though I know not with what
truth) the gashes were so wide that you might have seen his ribs, and bones,
and very inwards; what, was there ever love like unto this lov^? had he not
been God as well as man, he could never have had in his heart such a love as
this; O it was a divine love, it was the love of a Jesus, a love far surpassing
either the love of men, or women, or of Angels.

3. They put upon him a Purple Robe, or a Scarlet Robe. John calls it Purple,
John 19.2. Mat. 27.28.
and Matthew Scarlet; howsoever some difference may be, yet because of their
likeness, they are put sometimes one for another, They put upon him a Scarlet
robe, it is in the Original a Scarlet Cloa^^ it was a loose short garment, at
first used only by Kings or Emperors, (...).
and the color of it was suitable to Christ's condition, for he was now purple
all over, as well within it, as without it; his body and his garment were both
of a deep dyed sanguine color. Some out of Zachary, Zach. 3.3.
where it is said that Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, conclude the
old, ragged, threadbare filthiness of his robe; so that every thing shall have
its office and several share in his abuse; the color and the manner of the
garment flouts his Kingdom; the bareness, his outward estimation with the
people; the raggedness, his late scattered retinue; the fulledness, his
stained, spotted life, as they pretended, saying, He was a Friend of Publicans
and Sinners -- but out of this darkness the Lord can bring light, he has his
mysteries wrapped up in the malice of his enemies; for both on his garment, and
on his thigh was written a mystery; and in this sense, Rev. 19.16.
what other is his garment but the emblem of his humanity? and what is his
scarlet garment, but the emblem of his wounded body? that as he spoke of the
woman, She anointed him aforehand unto his burial; John 12.7.
so Pilate in the mystery clothes him aforehand unto his bloody death.

4. They platted a Crown of Thorns, and put it upon his head; Mat. 27.29.
a goodly Crown for the King of Kings, we read of many sorts of Crowns, as of
the Triumphal, Laurel, Naval, Mural, etc. but never till this did we read of a
Crown of Thorns; a Crown it was to delude him, and a Crown of Thorns to torment
him; in this we may read both his pain and shame: 1. For his pain, it boared
his head says Osorius with seventy and two wounds; Bernard speaks of many
more, mill puncturis, etc. Ber. Sermon. de pass. Dom.
I know not what ground they have to number them; but certainly many wounds
they made, and the rather may we say so; because that after they had put it
upon his head, Mat. 27.30.
they took a Reed and smote him on the head: (i.e.) they smote him on the head
to fasten the Crown of Thorns upon him surer, and to imprint it deeper, till as
some think it pierced his very Skull. 2. Nor was it only pain, but shame; when
Jotham put out his parable to the men of Sechem; Judge. 9.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15.
The Trees (said he) went out on a time to anoint a King over them, and they
said unto the Olive Tree, reign thou over us, but the Olive Tree said unto
them, should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honored God and Man, and
go to be promoted over the Trees? And the Trees said unto the Fig Tree, come
thou and reign over us, but the Fig Tree said unto them, should I forsake my
sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the Trees? Then said
the Trees unto the Vine, come thou and reign over us, and the Vine said unto
them, should I leave my Wine, which cheareth God and Man, and go to be promoted
over the Trees? Then said all the Trees unto the Bramble, come thou and reign
over us; and the Bramble said unto the Trees, if in truth ye anoint me King
over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow, and if not, let fire come
out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon. As Jotham put out this
parable in scorn of Abimilech, so the Soldiers in scorn put on Christ's head
this Bramble Crown: q. d. Come, thou say, thou art King of Jews, and
therefore we will make thee a Crown of Bramble, King of Trees; by which means
they protest against Christ as a feigned fabulous King, as if he were no fitter
to be King of Jews, than the Bramble was to be King of all the Trees in the
forest.

Use.
How many lessons might we draw from hence? they put upon his head a Crown of
Shame, of Death, of Torture; who came to give us a Crown of Victory, of life,
of glory. 2. Our sins caused the Earth to bring forth Thorns, and Briers, and
our Savior must wear them, both to take away our sins, and in the issue to
take away sins curse, Thorns, or Briars, or whatsoever. 3. From the crown of
the head to the sole of the foot, we were full of sin, and Christ accordingly
must shed his Blood from head to foot; their Whips did not reach his head,
their nails could not pierce it without an end of torture; Isa. 1.5.
but now they draw blood from it, with Thorns; the whole head is sick, says
the Prophet of us; and the whole head of Christ is bruised with Thorns to cure
our sickness. 4. Christ is not crowned with Thorns without a Prophecy, or a
Type; here he is a true Lilly among Thorns; Cant. 2.2. Genesis 33.13.
here he is as Isaac's Ram tied fast by the head in Thorns; he was ever
intended to be a sacrifice, and a ransom for our sins, and to that purpose he
was caught in a thicket, he was crowned with Thorns. 5. O what a shame is it
for any of us to crown our heads with Rose-buds, (as the wanton worldings could
say) afo^e they are withered, to spend our time in vanity, Folly, Sin, when
Christ our Lord had such a grove of Thorns, Mat. 10.24, 25.
growing on his sacred head? The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
Servant above his Lord, it is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master, and
the Servant as his Lord; if our Lord and Master was crowned with Thorns, surely
the Members of Christ should not be soft, delicate, and effeminate, wholly
sensual, or gi^^n up to pleasures. Baruch. 6.7.
6. As every bird sits upon the Thorns in the Orchard, so let us draw near,
and make our nests in these blessed Bushes; let us abandon all the colors of
other Captains, as the World, Flesh, and Devil; and let us keep close to the
royal Standard of our King; under these Throns we may find shelter against all
our enemies; from these Thorns we may undoubtedly gather Grapes, even a vintage
of spiritual joy and gladness.

Now the hour sounds again, and calls us to go forth, and to behold King Jesus
with the Crown wherewith he was Crowned in the Day of his espousals. And this
we shall do the next hour. SECT. V. Of Christ brought forth, and sentenced.
ABout ten Christ was brought forth and sentenced. 1. For his bringing forth, I
shall therein observe these particulars. As --

1. We find Pilate bringing forth Jesus out of the common Hall, and showing
this sad spectacle to all the People; John 19.5.
Then came Jesus forth, wearing the Crown of Thorns, and the purple Robe, and
Pilate says unto them, behold the Man: he thought the very sight of Christ
would have moved them to compassion; they had lashed him almost unto death,
they had most cruelly divided those azure channels of his guiltless Blood, they
had clothed him with Purple, crowned him with Thorns; and now they bring him
out by the hair of the head (say some) and expose him to the Public view of
the scornful company, Pilate crying unto them, Behold the man, q. d. Behold a
poor, silly, miserable, distressed man, behold I say, not your King, to provoke
you against him, nor yet the Son of God, which you say he makes himself to be;
but behold the man, a mean man, a worm, and no man; behold how he stands
disfigured with wounds, behold him weltring and panting, in a crimson river of
his own gore blood; and let this sufficient, yea, more than sufficient
punishment suffice to satisfy your rage, what would you have more? if it be
for malice that you are so violent against him, behold how miserable he is; if
for fear, behold how contemptible he is: As for any fault whereby he should
deserve his death, I find no fault in him; he is a Lamb without spot, a Dove
without gall; O come and behold this man, I can find no fault in him. Some
Doctors affirm that while Pilate cried out behold the man, his servants lifted
up the purple robe, that so all might see his torn, and bloody, and macerated
body; he supposed his words could not so move their hearts, as Christ's wounds,
and therefore said he, Behold the man; as if he had said again, Look on him and
view him well, is he not well paid for calling himself King of the Jews? now
see him stripped, and whipped, and crowned with thorns, and sceptered with a reed,
anointed with spittle, and clothed with purple; what would you more?

2. We find the Jews more enraged against Jesus, John 19.6.
When the chief Priests and Officers saw him; they cried out saying, crucify
him, crucify him. The more Pilate endeavors to appease them, the more were
the people enraged against him; and therefore they cry away with him, away with
him; crucify him, crucify him. Ver. 15. Jer. 12.8.
Now was fulfilled that prophecy of Jeremy, My heritage is unto me as a Lion
in the forest, it cries out against me. The Naturalists report of the Lion,
that when he is near to his prey, he gives out a mighty roar, whereby the poor
hunted beast is so amazed and terrified, that almost dead with fear he falls
flat on the ground, and so becomes the Lions prey indeed: And thus the Jews
(who were the heritage of the Lord) were unto Christ as a Lion in the forest,
they hunted and pursued him to his death, and being near it, they give out a
mighty shout, that the earth rung again, Away with him, away with him, crucify
him, crucify him. O ye Jews, children of Israel, seed of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, is not this he concerning whom your fathers cried, O that thou would
rent the heavens, Isa. 64.1.
that thou would come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy
presence? How is it that you should despise him present, whom they desired
absent? How is it that your cry and theirs should be so contrary? The Panther
(say they) is of so sweet a savor, that if he be but within the compass of
scent, all the beasts of the field run toward him, but when they see his ugly
visage they fly from him, and run away; so the Jews afar off feeling the sweet
savours of Christ's Ointments, they cried, Draw me, Cant. 1.2.
we will run after thee, come Lord Jesus, come quickly; but now in his passion,
looking on his form, they change their note, He has no form, or comeliness,
there is no beauty, Isa. 53.2.
that we should desire him, away with him, away with him.

3. We find Pilate and the Jews yet debating the business; Pilate is loath to
pronounce the sentence, and the chiefest of the Jews provoke him to it with a
threefold argument. As --

1. They had a law, and by their law he ought to dye, John 19.7. Ejus
absolvere, cujus est condere legem.
because he made himself the Son of God; thus the Doctors of the Law do accuse
the Author and Publisher of the Law, but they consider not the rule concerning
Laws, He may lawfully abolish, who has power to establish; nor did they
consider that this Law concerned not himself, who is indeed, and in truth the
Son of God: the Text tells us, that Pilate hearing this argument, was the more
afraid. Pilate (says Cyril) was an heathen idolater, and so worshipping many
Gods, he could not tell but that Christ might be one of them, and therefore in
condemning Christ, he might justly provoke all the Gods to be revenged of him.
This was the meaning of Pilate's question, Whence art thou? what is thy
Offspring? of what Progenitors art thou sprung? And from thence forth Pilate
sought to release him.

2. The Jews come with another Argument, they threaten Pilate, John 19.12.
If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesar's friend; a forcible reason, as
the case then stood; it was no small matter to be accused by so many audacious
impudent men of high treason against Caesar, and therefore under this obligation
Pilate seems to bend and bow; whom the fear of Christ's Divinity had
restrained, him the fear of Cesar's frown provoked to go on to sentence and
condemnation. Oh he was more afraid of man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
than of God himself, who made the heavens, and framed the world. Matthew. 27 24.
And yet before he gives sentence, he takes water; and washes his hands before
the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person, see ye
to it.

3. In reference to this they engage themselves for him, which was their last
argument, Matthew. 27.25.
His blood be upon us, and our children, q. d. act thou as Judge, let him be
condemned to dye, and if thou fear any thing, we will undergo for thee, let
the vengeance of his blood be on us, and on our children for ever. Thus far of
the first general.

John 19.13.
2. For the sentence it self, When Pilate heard that, -- he sat down in the
judgment seat, in a place that is called the pavement, because erected of
stones; but in the Hebrew Gabbatha; -- This word signifies an high place, and
raised above; it was so on purpose, that the Judges might be seen of men when
they pronounced sentence. And here Pilate sitting down, he gave the doom. What
was the form, or manner of the sentence is a great question amongst Divines.
Chrisost. 1 Cor. ser. ult. de Elecmos.
Chrysostom is of mind, that he pronounced no form at all, but only delivered
Jesus unto them to be crucified, Mark. 15.15. John 19.16. Others cannot yield
to this, for to what end (say they) should he then sit down upon the judgment
seat? and yet amongst themselves they cannot agree on a form; Ansel. de pass.
Anselme gives it thus, I adjudge Jesus of Nazareth to that ignominious and
shameful Death of the Cross. Vinc. de pass.
Vincentius thus, I condemn Jesus, seducing the people, blaspheming God, and
saying that he was Christ the King of the Jews, to be fastened to the Cross,
and there to hang till he dye. Many other forms are brought in by others, but
that of Luke is I am sure most authentic. Luke 23.24, 25.
And Pilate gave sentence, that it should be as they required: and then he
delivered Jesus to their will. Here Is a sentence indeed, a delivery of Jesus
not to his own, but to his enemies liberty; to the boundless bonds, and all the
possible Tortures of their own wills, and wishes. O unjust sentence! Give me
not over to the will of my adversaries, Psalm. 27.12.
cries David; the will of malice is an endless wheel, it cares not how long it
spins out pain, and therefore they cried, Crucify him, Crucify him, let him
be crucified. Amen, (says Pilate) do what you please, Crucify him, and
Crucify him as often as you will, it shall be as you require, Lo now I deliver
him to your own will.

We cannot shake this tree without some fruit; from this sight of Christ, and
sentence of Pilate, we may learn some good. --

Use.
1. From this sight of Christ, as he was presented by Pilate to the people, we
may learn remorse: not any of us who have crucified Christ by our sins, but we
are called on at this time, to behold the man; suppose we saw him with our
bodily eyes; suppose we had the same view of Christ as the Jews had, where he
was thus presented; suppose we saw him in the very midst of us, wearing the
crown of thorns, and the purple robe, and the cane or reed held in his right
hand; suppose we heard the voice of Pilate speaking to us, as he did to the
Jews, Behold the man; suppose we saw the purple robe lifted up, that we might
see all under, how his body was torn; and that same voice from Heaven should
come to us, Acts 2.37.
saying, This same is he whom ye have buffetted, scourged, crowned, crucified
by your sins: were not this enough to prick us in our hearts, and to make us
cry, Men and brethren what shall we do? Oh we look at the instruments, and we
cry, Fie on Pilate, fie on the Soldiers, fie on the Jews; but we look not on
our sins, saying, fie on them. Could we but reallize our sins as the principal
of these sufferings of Christ, methinks our hearts should break in very pieces:
consider, yesterday in the midst of our Markets so many lies were told, and so
many oaths were sworn; and this day so soon as the daylight sprang, so many
acts of profaning the Lords day were committed by us; little did we think that
all this while we had been stripping Christ naked, whipping Christ with rods,
or little chains, clothing Christ with a Purple-Scarlet Robe, platting a Crown
of Thorns, and putting it on his head, sceptring him with a reed, and saluting
him in scorn, Hail King of the Jews. Men, Brethren, and Fathers, be not
deceived, Christ is mocked, scorned, and thus abused by you when you sin; your
sins thus dealt with Christ, and in God's acceptance your sins thus deal with
Christ even to this very day. Never say, it was long since Christ was
crucified, and he is now in Heaven, for by your sins you crucify again the
Lord of glory, you put him again to open shame; you strip him, and whip him,
and torment him afresh. Oh look on him whom you have pierced! Pilate thought
that if the Jews would but see the man, Behold the man, their hearts would have
molified, and shall not I think as well of you? it is a blessed means to make
sin bitter, and to breed in our hearts remorse for sin, if we will but hearken
to this voice of Pilate, Behold the man.

2. From the sentence of Pilate, that Christ should be crucified, as the Jews
required, we may learn the deceitfulness of our hearts, in making self the end,
and aim of our particular callings. Pilate as Judge should have glorified God
in doing justice; but when he hears the Jews cry, If thou let him go, thou art
not Cesar's Friend, he then looks to himself, and his own interests. Judges can
have their ends in the very place of judicature: nay, is not this the very
common sin of Magistrates, Ministers, Tradesmen, of all sorts of callings;
come, what is it you aim at in your several places? is it not to be great, and
rich, and high, and honorable? say truly, is it in your hearts to say, that by
this calling my chief aim is to glorify God, and to serve my generation with
all faithfulness; and these two ends I prefer before all worldly advantages
whatsoever? O then what a blessed reformation would be amongst us? if it be not
thus, what are you but as so many Pilate's, that if you were but threatened into
a sentence, you would rather condemn Christ than your selves of enmity against
Caesar; such would be the cry, Let Christ be crucified, and self advanced.

Much more might be said, but the hour strikes again; Pilate is now risen, the
Court dissolved, and Jesus is delivered into the hands of the Jews for
execution. How that went on, the next hour will speak; only God prepare your
hearts to hear devoutly, and to consider seriously, what Jesus the great
Savior of the World has suffered for you. SECT. VI. Of Christ's crucifying,
with its appendices.
ABout Eleven, they prepare with all speed for the execution: in the revolution
of this hour we may observe these several passages. As 1 Their taking off the
robe, and clothing him again with his own raiment. 2. Their leading him away
from Gabbatha to Golgotha. 3. His bearing the Cross with Simon's help to bear
it after him. 4. His comforting the women who followed weeping after him as he
went. 5. Their giving him Vinegar to drink mingled with gall. 6. Their
crucifying, or fastening him on the Cross, whereon he dyed.

1. The Evangelist tells us, They took the robe off from him, Mat. 27.31.
and put his own raiment on him; Origin observes, They took off his robes, but
they took not off his Crown of Thorns; what served their interest, they pursued
still, but nothing of mitigation or mercy to the afflicted Son of Man. It is
supposed this small business could not be done without great pain; after his
sore whipping his blood congealed, and by that means stuck to his scarlet
mantle; so that in pulling off the robe, and putting on his own raiment, there
could not but be a renewing of his wounds.

2. They led him away. Some say they cast a Rope or Chain about his neck, Mat.
27.31.
by which they led him out of the City to Mount Calvary, and that all along the
way, multitudes attended him, and a Crier went before him, proclaming to all
hearers the cause of his death; namely, that Jesus Christ was a Seducer,
Blasphemer, Negromancer, a Teacher of false Doctrines, saying of himself that
he was the Messiah, King of Israel, and the Son of God.

3. He bore his Cross. So John relates; before it bears him, he must bear it;
John 19.17.
and thus they make good their double cry, Crucify him, Crucify him; first
Crucify him with it as a burden, and then crucify him with it as a Cross;
those shoulders which had been unmercifully battered with whips before, are now
again tormented with the weight of his Cross. As a true Isaac bears the wood
for the sacrifice of himself; or Vriah-like, he carries with him the very
Instrument of his own sad death. O the cruelty of this passage! they had scarce
left him so much blood or strength as to carry himself, and must ^e now bear
his heavy Cross? yes, till he faint and sink, so long he must bear it, and
longer too, did they not fear that he should dye with less shame and smart than
they intended him: Matthew. 27.32. Mark 15.21.
which to prevent they constrained one Simon a Cyraenean to bear his Cross
after him. How truly do they here again swallow the Cammel, and strain at a
Gnat? the Cross was a Roman death, and so one of their abominations, hence they
themselves would not touch the tree of infamy, lest they should have been
defiled, but to touch the Lords anointed, to Crucify the Lord of Glory, they
make no scruple at all; but why must another bear the Cross, but to consign
this duty unto man, that we must enter into a fellowship of Christ's
sufferings? Mat. 16.24. 1 Pet. 2.21.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross,
and follow me. -- And therefore Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps.

4. He comforted the woman, who followed weeping after him as he went along.
And there followed him a great company of people and of Women, Luke 23.27, 28.
which also bewailed and lamented him; but Jesus turning to them, said,
Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your
Children. In the midst of his misery he forgets not mercy; in the midst of all
their tortures and loudest outcries of contumely, of blasphemy, of scorn, he
can hear his following friends weeping behind him, and neglect all his own
sufferings to comfort them, Weep not for me. He has more compassion on the
Woman that follow him weeping, than of his own mangled self, that reels along,
fainting and bleeding unto death: he feels more the tears that drop from their
eyes, than all the blood that flows from his own veins: we heard before that
sometimes he would not vouchsafe a word to Pilate that threatened him, nor to
Herod that entreated him, and yet unaskt how graciously does he turn about his
blessed bleeding face to these weeping women, affording them looks, and words
too, both of compassion and of consolation, Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for
me, but for your selves. -- and yet observe, he did not turn his face to them
until he heard them weep; nor may we ever think to see his face in glory,
unless we first bathe our eyes in sorrow. It is a wonder to me that any in our
age should ever decry tears, remorse, contrition, compunction; how many Saints
do we find both in the Old and New Testament, confuting by their practices
these gross opinions? the Promise tells us, that They that sow in Tears shall
reap in Joy; he that follows Christ, Psalm. 126.5, 6.
or goes forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

But what is the meaning of this, Weep not for me? may we not weep for the death
of Christ? Deuteronomy. 34.8. Acts 8.2.
do we not find in Scripture that all the People wept at the death of Moses?
that all the Church wept at the death of Stephen? that the Woman lamented the
death of Dorcas? and if all Christ's actions be our instructions (I mean not
his miraculous, or meritorious, but his moral ones) did not Christ himself weep
for Lazarus, and for Jerusalem? nay, is he not here weeping showers of blood
all along the way? and may not we drop a tear for all those purple streams of
his? O what is the meaning of this, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves?

I answer, the words are not absolute, but comparative. Christ does not simply
forbid us to weep for our friends, but rather to turn our worldly grief into
godly sorrow for sin as sin. Christ herein pointed the women to the true cause
and subject of all their sorrow, which was their sins; and thus we have cause
to weep indeed. Oh! our sins were the cause of the sufferings of Christ, and in
that respect, Oh that our heads were fountains, and our eyes rivers of tears!
Oh that our tears were as our meat and drink! Oh that we could feed with David
on the Bread of tears, and that the Lord would give us plenteousness of tears
to drink! Oh that the Lord would strike (as he did at Rephidim) these rocky
hearts of ours, with the rod of true remorse, that water might gush out! Oh
that we could thus mourn over Jesus whom we have pierced, and be in bitterness
for him, Zach. 12.10.
as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn!

Mat. 27.34.
5. No sooner he was come to the place of Execution, but they gave him Vinegar
to drink mingled with Gall: in that they gave him drink it was an argument of
their humanity; this was a custom amongst Jews and Romans, that to the
condemned they ever gave wine to drink: Prove. 31.6.
Give strong wine unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be
of heavy heart. But in that they gave him Vinegar mingled with Gall, it was an
argument of their cruelty and envy. Theophil. in Mar.
Theophylact speaks plainly, that the Vinegar mingled with Gall was poisonous
and deadly, and therefore when Christ had tasted it, he would not drink,
choosing rather the death of the Cross, to which he was destinated by his
Father, than any poisonous death.

Use.
Ah brethren, are not we apt to think hardly of the Jews for giving Christ so
bitter a potion at his time of death? and yet little do we think that when we
sin we do as much. See but how God himself compares the sins of the wicked Jews
to very poison; Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33.
For their wine is of the wine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah, their
Grapes are Grapes of Gall, their clusters ar^ bitter, their Wine is the poison
of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes. In this respect we may think as
hardly of our selves as of the Jews, because so often as we sin against God we do
as much as mingle rank poison, and bring it to Jesus Christ to drink.

6. They crucified him, (i.e.) they fastened him on the Cross; and then lift
him up. Mat. 27.35.
A great question there is amongst the Learned, whether Christ was fastened on
the cross after it was erected, or whiles it was lying on the ground? I would
not rake too much into these niceties, only more probable it is that he was
fastened to it whiles it lay flat on the ground, and then as Moses lifted up
the Serpent in the Wilderness, so was the Son of man lifted up. We may express
the manner of their acting, and his sufferings now, John. 3.14.
as a learned Brother has done before us; Now come the Barbarous inhumane
hangmen, Herle contem. plat. on Christ's pass.
and begin to unloose his hands, but how? alas it is not to any liberty, but to
worse bonds of nails: then stripped they off his gore-glewed clothes, and with
them questionless not a little of his mangled skin and flesh, as if it were not
enough to crucify him as a thief, unless they flea him too as a beast; then
stretch they him out as another Isaac on his own burden, the Cross; that so
they might take measure of the holes, and though the print of his blood on it
gave them his true length, yet how strictly do they take it longer, than the
truth? thereby at once both to crucify and rack him? that he was thus stretched
and racked upon his cross, Psalm. 22.17. Ver. 14.
David gives more than probable intimation, I may tell all my bones; and again,
all my bones are out of joint; which otherwise how could it so well be as by
such a violent stretching and distortion? whereby it seems they had made him a
living anatomy; nor was it in the less sensible, fleshly parts of his body,
that they drive these their larger tenters, whereon his whole weight must hang;
but in the hands and feet, the most sinewy, and consequently the most sensible
fleshly parts of all other; wherein how rudely and painfully they handle him,
appears too by that of David, they dug my hands and my feet, they made wide
holes like that of a spade, as if they had been digging in some ditch: the
boystrous and unusual greatness of these nails we have from venerable
antiquity; Constantine the great is said to have made of them both an Helmet
and a Bridle -- How should I write on, but that my tears should blot out what I
write, Colos. 2.14.
when it is no other than he that is thus used who has blotted out that
handwriting of ordinances that was against me?

But the hour goes on, and this is the great business of the worlds redemption,
of which I would speak a little more; by this time we may imagine Christ nailed
to the cross, and his cross fixed in the ground, which with its fall into the
place of its station gave infinite torture by so violent a concussion of the
body of our Lord. That I mean to observe of this crucifying of Christ, I shall
reduce to these two heads. viz. the shame and pain.

1. For the shame, it was a cursed death, cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree. Gal. 3.13.
When it was in use, it was chiefly infflicted upon slaves that either falsely
accused, or treacherously conspired their Masters death: but on whomsoever it
was inflicted, this death in all Ages among the Jews has been branded with a
special kind of ignominy; and so the Apostle signifies when he says, He abased
himself to the death, Phil. 2.8. 2 Samuel 21.6. Deuteronomy. 21.23.
even to the death of the cross. It was a mighty shame that Readiness sons were
hanged on a tree, and the reason was more specially from the Law of God; For he
that is hanged is accursed of God: I know Moses's Law speaks nothing in
particular of crucifying, yet he does include the same under the general of
hanging on a tree; and some conceive that Moses in speaking that curse, foresaw
what manner of death the Redeemer should dye.

2. For the pain, it was a painful death; that appears several ways; As -- 1.
His legs and hands were violently racked, and pulled out to the places fitted
for his fastening, and then pierced through with nails. 2. By this means he
wanted the use both of his hands and feet, and so he was forced to hang
immovable upon the cross, as being unable to turn any way for his case. 3. The
longer he lived, the more he endured, for by the weight of his body his wounds
were opened and enlarged, his nerves and veins were rent and torn asunder, and
his blood gushed out more and more abundantly still. 4. He died by inch-meal
(as I may say) and not at once, the cross was a death long in dying, it kept
him a great while upon the rack, it was full three hours betwixt Christ's
affixion and expiration, and it would have been longer if he had not freely and
willingly given up the Ghost; it is reported that Andrew the Apostle was two
whole days on the Cross before he dyed, and so long might Christ have been, if
God had not heightened it to greater degrees of torment supernaturally.

I may add to this, as above all this, the pains of his soul whiles he hanged
on the cross, for there also Christ had his agonies, and soul conflicts, these
were those (...), those pains, or pangs of death, from which Peter tells us
Christ was loosed. Acts. 2.24.
The word (...) properly signifies the pains of a woman in travel; such were
the pains of Jesus Christ in death; Isa. 53.11. Psalm. 116.3.
the Prophet calls it, The travel of his Soul: and the Psalmist calls it the
pains of Hell, The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of Hell gate
hold upon me. The sorrows, or cords of death compassed his body, and the pains
of Hell gate hold upon his soul; And these were they that extorted from him
that passionate expostulation, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? he complains of that which was more
grievous to him, than ten thousand deaths, My God, my God, why have thou
withdrawn thy wonted presence, and left my soul (as it were) in pains of Hell?

Use.
And now reflect we on the shame and pain! O the curse and bitterness that our
sins have brought on Jesus Christ! when I but think on these bleeding veins,
bruised shoulders, scourged sides, furrowed back, harrowed temples, dug
hands and feet, and then consider that my sins were the cause of all; methinks
I should need no more arguments for self-abhorring! Christians! would not your
hearts rise aganst him, that should kill your Father, Mother, Brother, Wife,
Husband, dearest Relations in all the World? O then how should your hearts and
souls rise against sin? surely your sin it was that murdered Christ, that
killed him who is instead of all relations, who is a thousand, thousand times
dearer to you than Father, Mother, Husband, Child, or whomsoever; Job 42.6.
one thought of this should methinks be enough to make you say, as Job did, I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes; Oh what is that cross on the back
of Christ? My sins; Oh what is that Crown on the head of Christ? My sins; Oh
what is that nail in the right hand, and that other in the left hand of Christ?
My sins; Oh what is that spear in the side of Christ? My sins; Oh what are those
nails and wounds in the feet of Christ? My sins. With a spiritual eye I see no
other engine tormenting Christ; no other Pilate, Herod, Annas, Caiaphas
condemning Christ; no other Soldiers, Officers, Jews or Gentiles doing
execution on Christ, but only sin: Oh my sins, my sins, my sins!

John 3.14, 15.
2. Comfort we our selves in the end and aim of this death of Christ; As Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up;
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. The
end of Christ's crucifying is the material business: and therefore let the end
be observed as well as the meritorious cause; without this consideration the
contemplation of Christ's death, or the meditation of the story of Christ's
sufferings would be altogether unprofitable; now what was the end? surely this?
John 12.32. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Christ lifted up, that he might draw all men unto him; Christ hanged on a
Tree, that he might bear our sins on the Tree; this was the plot, which God by
ancient design had aimed at in the crucifying of Christ, and thus our faith
must take it up; indeed our comfort hangs on this; the intent, aim, and design
of Christ in his sufferings is that welcome news, and the very Spirit of the
Gospel: O remember this! Christ is crucified, and why so? that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.

We are now at the height of Christ's sufferings, and the Sun is now in his
meridian, or height of ascent, Mat. 27.45.
I shall no more count hour by hour; for from the sixth hour till the nineth
hour (that is from twelve, till three in the afternoon) there was darkness over
all the Land. But of that, and of the consequents after it, in the next
Section. SECT. VII. Of the consequents after Christ's crucifying.
THe particulars following I shall quickly dispatch. As thus. --

1. About twelve when the Sun is usually brightest, it began now to darken.
This darkness was so great that it spread over all the Land of Jewry; some
think, over all the World, Luke 23.44.
so we translate it in Luke, And there was a darkness over all the Earth; and
many Gentiles, besides Jews, observed the same as a great miracle. Dionisius
the Areopagite (as Suidas relates) could say at first sight of it, Suid. in
vita. Sa Dion.
Either the World is ending, or the God of Nature is suffering. This very
darkness was the occasion of that Altar erected in Athens, and dedicated unto
the unknown God. Of this prophesied Amos, And it shall come to pass in that day
that I will cause the Sun to go down at noon, Acts 17 23. Amos 8.9.
and I will darken the Earth in a clear day.

The cause of this darkness is diversely rendered by several Authors; some think
that the Sun by Divine power withdrew, and held back its beams. Others say,
Hier. in Mat. 17. Orig. tract. 35. in Matthew. Dionis. Epist. 7. ad Policarpum.
that the obscurity was caused by some thick clouds which were miraculously
produced in the air, and spread themselves over all the earth. Others say, that
this darkness was by a wonderful interpoposition of the Moon, which at that
time was at full, but by a miracle interposed it self betwixt the Earth and
Sun. Whatsoever was the cause, it continued for the space of three hours as
dark as the darkest winters night.

2. About three (which the Jews call the nineth hour) the Sun now beginning to
receive his light, Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani, my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? -- And then, that the Scriptures might
be fulfilled, Matthew. 27.46. John 19.28, 30. Luke. 23.46.
he said I thirst. -- And when he had received the vinegar, he said it is
finished. -- And at last crying with a loud voice, he said, Father into thy
hands I commend my Spirit, and having said thus, he gave up the ghost. I cannot
stay on these seven words of Christ which he uttered on the cross; his words
were ever gracious, but never more gracious than at this time; we cannot find
in all the Books and Writings of men, in all the Annals and Records of time,
either such sufferings, or such sayings, as were these last words and wounds,
sayings and sufferings of Jesus Christ. John 19.30.
-- And having said thus, he gave up the ghost. Or as John relates it, He bowed
his head, and gave up the ghost: He bowed, not because he was dead, but first
he bowed, and then dyed; the meaning is, he dyed willingly without constraint,
cheerfully without murmur; what a wonder is this? life it self gives up his
life, and death it self dies by his death; Jesus Christ who is the Author of
life, the God of life, lays down his life for us; and death it self lies for
ever nailed to that bloody cross in the stead of Jesus Christ. And now we may
suppose him at the gates of Paradise, calling with his last words to have them
opened, that the King of glory might come in.

3. About four in the afternoon he was pierced with a spear, and there issued
out of his side both blood and water. And one of the Soldiers with a spear
pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. How truly may
we say of the Soldiers, John 19.34.
that after all his sufferings they have added wounds? they find him dead, and
yet they will scarce believe it, until with a spear they have searched for life
at the wellhead it self, even at the heart of Christ: And forthwith there came
out blood and water; this was the Fountain of both Sacraments, the Fountain of
all our happiness, Zach. 13.1.
The Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem
for sin and for uncleanness. There are three that bear-witness on earth (says
John) the Spirit, and the Water, 1 John 5.8.
and the Blood. Out of the side of Christ being now dead; there issues water
and blood; signifying that he is both our justification, and sanctification.
Physicians tell us, that about the heart there is a film or skin like unto a
purse, wherein is contained clear water to cool the heat of the heart, and
therefore very probable it is, that, that very skin (or pericardium) was
pierced through with the heart, and thence came out those streams of blood and
water. -- O gates of Heaven! O windows of Paradise! O Palace of refuge! O Tower
of strength! O Sanctuary of the Just! O flourishing bed of the Spouse of
Solomon! methinks I see water and blood running out of his side more freshly,
than those golden streams which ran out of the garden of Eden, and watered the
whole world. Here if I could stay I might lengthen my Doctrine during my life;
oh it were good to be here; it were a large field, and a blessed subject.

4. About five (which the Jews call the eleventh, and the last hour of the day)
Christ was taken down, and buried by Joseph and Nicodemus. But enough, I must
not wear out your patience altogether.

Thus far we have propounded the blessed object of Christ's suffering and dying
for us: our next work is to direct you (as formerly) in the art or mystery, how
you are to look unto him in this respect. CHAP. III.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus as carrying on the great work of our salvation in
his death.
1. LEt us know Jesus, carrying on the great work of our Salvation during his
sufferings and death. This is the high point which Paul was ever studying on,
and preaching on, and pondering on; For I determined not to know any thing
among you, 1 Cor. 2.2.
save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Christ crucified is the rarest piece of
knowledge in the world; the person of Christ is a matter of high speculation,
but Christ further considered, as clothed with his garments of blood, is that
knowledge which especially Paul pursues; he esteems not, reckons not,
determines not to make any profession of any other science or doctrine than the
most necessary, and only saving knowledge of Christ crucified. O my soul, how
many days, and months, and years, have thou spent to attain some little
measure of knowledge in the Arts, and Tongues, and Sciences? and yet what a
poor skill have thou attained in respect of the many thousands of them that
knew nothing at all of Jesus Christ? and what if thou had reached out to a
greater proficiency? could thou have dived into the secrets of Nature,
could thou have excelled the wisdom of all the children of the East country,
and all the wisdom of Egypt, 1 Kings 4.33.
and the wisdom of Solomon, who spoke of beasts, of fowls, of fishes, of all
trees from the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even to the hyssop that springs
out of the wall, yet without the saving knowledge of Christ crucified (Christ
suffering, bleeding, and dying) all this had been nothing, see Eccles. 1.18.
only that knowledge is worth the having which refers to Christ; and above all
that is the rarest piece of Christ's humiliation, which holds him forth
suffering for us, and so freeing us from hell sufferings. Come then, and spend
thy time for the future more fruitfully in reading, learning, knowing, this one
necessary thing. Study Christ crucified in every piece and part; O the precious
truths, and precious discoveries that a studying head and heart would hammer
out here! much has been said, but a thousand-thousand times more might yet be
said; we have given but a little scantling of that which Christ endured;
Volumes might be written till they were piled as high as heaven; and yet all
would not serve to make out the full discoveries of Jesus's sufferings. Study
therefore, and study more, but be sure thy study and thy knowledge be rather
practical than speculative; do not merely beat thy brains to learn the history
of Christ's death, but the efficacy, virtue, and merit of it; know what thou
know in reference to thy self, as if Jesus had been all the while carrying
on the business of thy souls salvation; as if thou had stood by, and Christ
had spoke to thee, as sometimes to the women, Weep not for me, but for thy
self; thy sins caused my sufferings, and my sufferings were for the abolition
of thy sins.

SECT. II. Of considering Jesus in that respect.
2. LEt us consider Jesus, carrying on this great work of our salvation during
his sufferings and death. Zach. 12.10. Heb. 12.2.
They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, says the Prophet; (i.e.) they
shall consider me: and accordingly is the Apostle, looking unto Jesus, or
considering of Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy of
our salvation set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame. Then
indeed, and in that act is the duty brought in, it is good in all respects, and
under all considerations to look unto Jesus from first to last, but above all,
this Text relates firstly to the time of his sufferings; and hence it is that
Luke calls Christ's passion (...), a theory or sight; And all the people that
came together to that sight, Luke 23.48.
-- smote their breasts and returned. Not but that every passage of Christ is a
theory or sight, worthy our looking on, or considering of; Christ in his
Fathers purpose, and Christ in the promise, and Christ in performance, Christ
in his birth, and Christ in his life, O how sweet? what blessed objects are
these to look upon? but above all consider him (says the Apostle) that endured
such contradiction of sinners against himself. Heb. 12.3. Ver. 2.
-- Consider him who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, and
despised the shame; of all other parts, acts, or passages of Christ, the holy
Ghost has only honored Christ's passion (his sufferings and his death) with
this name of theory, and sight. Why surely this is the theory ever most
commended to our view, and consideration; O then let us look on this, consider
of this. As in this manner. --

1. Consider him passing over the Brook Cedron; it signifies the wrath of God,
and rage of men; the first step of his passion is sharp and sore; he cannot
enter the door, but first he must wade through cold waters on bare feet, nor
must he only wade through them, but drink of them; through many tribulations
must he go that will purchase souls, and through many tribulations must they go
that will follow after him to the Kingdom of Glory. -- Consider him entering
into the Garden of Gethsemane; in a garden Adam sinned, and in this garden
Christ must suffer, that the same place which was the nest where sin was
hatched, might now be the childbed of grace and mercy; into this garden no
sooner was he entered, but he began to be agonized; all his powers and passions
within him were in conflict. Consider O my soul how suddenly he is struck into
a strange fear; never was man so afraid of the torments of hell, as Christ
(standing in our room) is of his Fathers wrath; fear is still suitable to
apprehension, and never man could so perfectly apprehend the cause of fear as
Jesus Christ; nor was he only afraid, but very heavy; My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death. His sorrow was lethal and deadly, it melted his
soul gradually as wax is melted with heat; it continued with him till his last
gasp, his heart was like wax burning all the time of his passion, and at last
it melted in the midst of his bowels. Psalm. 22.19. Mark 14.33.
Nor was he only afraid and heavy, but he began to be sore amazed; this
signifies an universal cessation of all the faculties of the soul from their
several functions, we usually call it a consternation, it is like a Clock
stopped for the while from going, by some hand or other laid upon it; or if it
was not wholly a cessation, yet was it at least an expavefaction, such a motion
of the mind as whereby for the present he was disinabled to mind any thing
else, but the dreadful sense of the wrath of God. O what an agony was this? O
what a struggling passion of mixed grief was this? what afflicting and
conflicting affections under the sight and sense of eminent peril was in this
agony? Luke 22.44.
And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly; thrice had he prayed, but now
in his agony he prayed more earnestly; O my Father if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Though I feel
the soul of pain in the pain of my soul, yet there is divinity in me, which
tells me there is a wage for sin, and I will pay it all? O my Father since thou
have bent thy bow, lo here an open breast, fix herein all thy shafts of fury,
better I suffer for a while than that all believers should be damned for ever;
thy will is mine, lo I will bear the burden of sin, come and shoot here thy
arrows of revenge. And thus as he prayed he sweat, Luke 22.44.
And is sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.
Oh what man or Angel can conceive the agony, the fear, the sorrow, the
amazement of that heart, that without all outward violence, merely out of the
extremity of his own passion, bled through the flesh and skin, not some faint
dew, but solid drops of blood? now is he crucified without a cross, fear and
sorrow are the nails, our s^ns the thorns, his Fathers wrath the spear, and all
these together cause a bleeding shower to rain throughout all his pores; O my
soul, consider of this, and if thou will bring this consideration home, say,
thy sins were the cause of this bloody sweat; Jesus Christ is that true Adam,
that is come out of Paradise for thy sins, and thus labored on earth with his
bloody sweat to get the bread that thou must feed on.

2. Consider his apprehension; Judas is now at hand, with a troop following him
to apprehend his Master, see how without all shame he set himself in the van,
and coming to his Lord and Master, gives him a most Traitorous and deceitful
kiss, What Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? have thou sold the
Lord of life to such cruel merchants as covet greedily his blood and life? O
alas! at what price have thou set the Lord of all the creatures? at thirty
pence? what a vile and slender price is this for a Lord of such Glory and
Majesty? God was sold for thirty pieces of silver, but man could not be bought
without the dearest heart-blood of the Son of God. Luke 22.53.
At that time said Christ, Ye be come as it were against a thief with swords
and staves, I sat daily among you teaching in the Temple, and ye never laid
hands on me, but this is your hour, and the power of darkness. Now the Prince
of darkness exercised his power, now the hellish rout, and malicious rabble of
ravenous wolves, assaulted the most innocent Lamb in the world; now they most
furiously haled him this way and that way; O how ungently did they handle him?
how uncourteously spoke they unto him? how many blows and buffets did they give
him? what cries, and shouts, and clamours made they over him: now they lay hold
on his holy hands, and bind them hard with rough and knotty cords, so that they
gall the skin off his arms, and make the very blood spring out; now they bring
him back again over Cedron, and they make him once again to drink of the brook
in the way; now they lead him openly through the high streets of Jerusalem and
carry him to the house of Annas in great triumph. O my soul consider these
several passages, consider them leisurely, and with good attention, consider
them till thou feel some motions or alterations in thy affection; is not
this he that is the infinite virtue, the pattern of innocence, the everlasting
wisdom; the honor of earth, the glory of heaven, the very fountain of all
beauty) whether of men or Angels! how is it then that this virtue or power is
tied with bands, that innocence is apprehended, that wisdom is flouted and
laughed to scorn, that honor is contemned, that glory is tormented, that he
that is fairer than all the children of men, is besmeared with weeping, and
troubled with sorrow of heart? surely there is some thing O my soul in thee,
that caused all this: had not thou sinned, the Sun of Righteousness had never
been eclisped.

3. Consider the hurryings of Jesus from Annas to Caiphas; there a Council is
called, Mat. 26.63. Ver. 66.
and Caiphas the high Priest adjures our Lord to tell him if he was Christ the
Son of God: no sooner he affirms it, but he is doomed guilty of blasphemy, and
so guilty of death. Now again they assault him like mad dogs, and disgorge upon
him all their malice, fury, and revenge; each one to the utmost of his power
gives him buffets, and strokes; there they spit upon that Divine face with
their devilish mouths, there they hudwink his eyes, and strike him on the
cheek, scoffing, and jesting, and saying, Read, who is it that smote thee? O
beauty of Angels! was that a face to be spet upon? men usually when they are
provoked to spit, turn away their faces toward the foulest corner of the
house, and is there not in all that Palace a souler place to spit in than the
face of Jesus? O my soul, why do thou not humble thy self, at this so
wonderful example? how is it that there should remain in the world any token of
pride after this so great and mavelous an example of humility? surely I am at
my wits end, and very much astonished to consider, how this so great patience
overcomes not my anger, how this so great abasing asswageth not my pride, how
these so violent buffets beat not down my presumption: Is it not mavelous
that Jesus Christ by these means should overthrow the Kingdom of pride, and yet
that there should remain in me the relics of pride? consider all those
night-sufferings of Christ; O cruel night! O unquiet night! now was the season
that all creatures should take their rest, that the senses, and members wearied
with toils and labors, should be refreshed; but on the contrary Christ's
members and senses were then tormented, they struck his body, they afflicted
his soul, they bound his hands, they buffetted his cheeks, they spit in his
face; O my soul thou sinnest in the dark, in covert, in secret, when no eye is
upon thee, when the Sun, that eye of the world is set, or hid; and therefore
all the night long is Christ thus tormented by thy sins; not one jot of rest
has Christ, not a wink of sleep must seize on him, whom thou by the alarm of
thy sins disquieted, both at evening, at midnight, and at the Cock-Crow, and
at the dawning.

4. Consider the hurryings of Jesus from Caiphas to Pilate; now he stands
before Pilate, where he was accused of sedition, seduction, and usurpation. Not
only Jews, but Gentiles have their hands imbrewed in the blood of Christ;
Pilate was delegated from Caesar, Luke 18.31.
both of them Gentiles, yet not without a prophecy, Behold we go up to
Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the Prophets concerning the Son
of man shall be accomplished; for he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles: at
the Gentile-tribunal being questioned of his Kingdom, and he answers both the
Jews and Gentiles that they need not fear his usurpation, John 18.36.
My Kingdom is not of this world. He gives Kingdoms that are eternal, but he
will take away none that are temporal; Christ came not into the world to be
Cesar's, or Pilate's, or Herod's successor, but if they had believed, to have
been their Savior. Look through the Chronicles of his life, and we find him so
far from a King, that he was the meanest servant of all men; where was he born
but at Bethlehem a little City? where did the Shepherds find him but in a poor
cottage? who were his Disciples but a deal of Fishermen? who his Companions but
Publicans and sinners? is he hungry? where stands his table but on plain
ground? what are his dainties but bread and a few Fishes? where is his lodging
but at the stern of a Ship? Here Is a King without either presence chamber, or
bedchamber, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but the
Son of man has not whereon to lay his head. Come, fear not Pilate the loss of
thy diadem; it may be the people would sometimes have made him a King, but see
how he flies from it, My Kingdom is not of this World, says Jesus. Oh that I
could but contemn the World as Christ did! O that first and above all I could
seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness! Oh my soul, I feel it, I feel
it, unless I can be free from the affection of all creatures, I cannot with
freedom of mind aspire unto divine things; unless I be willing with Christ to
tread on Crowns and Scepters, to be despised and forsaken of all, and to be
esteemed nothing at all, I can have no inward peace, nor be spiritually
enlightened, nor be wholly united to the Lord Jesus Christ.

5. Consider the hurryings of Jesus from Pilate to Herod; there is he
questioned of many things, but justly is the Lamb of God dumb, and opened not
his mouth to him that not long before had taken away his voice; upon this he is
mocked, Luke 23.11.
and arrayed in a gorgeous robe; Wisdom is taken for Folly, Virtue for Vice,
Truth for Blasphemy, Temperance for Gluttony, the Peacemaker of all the World
for a seditious disturber of the World, the reformer of the Law for a breaker
of the Law, and the justifier of sinners for a sinner, and the follower of
sinners. See how he emptied himself, and made himself of no reputation that he
might fill thee with goodness, and make thee spiritually wise unto salvation.

6. Consider the hurryings of Jesus from Herod back again to Pilate; O my
Savior how art thou now abused! new accusations are forged; and when Pilate
sees that nothing will do, but Christ must dye, he delivers him to be stripped,
whipped, clothed in Purple, crowned with Thorns, and Sceptred with a Reed. He
that with spittle cured the eyes of the blind, is now blinded with their
spittle; who can number those stripes wherewith they flea and tare his body,
one wound eating into another, that there is no health in his bones by reason
of my sins? O Jesus! was that frothy spittle the Ointment, those Thorns thy
Crown, that Reed thy Scepter, that Purple-dyed and imbroidered with blood, thy
Royal Robes? or because Adam's sin brought forth Thorns, must it therefore be
thy penance to wear them? unthankful people thus watered with his blood, that
bring forth nothing but Thorns to crown him. But Oh that the Lord of Heaven,
the Creator of the World, the Glory of the Angels, the Wisdom of God, should,
for my sake, be punished with whips and scourges? O my heart, how can I think
on this without tears of blood? O joy of the Angels, and Glory of Saints, who
has thus disfigured thee? who has thus defiled thee with so many bloody
blows? certainly they were not thy sins, but mine; it was love and mercy that
compast thee about, and caused thee to take upon thee this so heavy a burden;
love was the cause why thou did bestow upon me all thy benefits, and mercy
moved thee to take upon thee all my miseries.

7. Consider that sad spectacle of Jesus, when he came forth wearing the Crown
of Thorns, and the Purple Robe, and Pilate saying unto them, behold the Man.
John 19.5.
O my soul fix thy eyes on the sad object! suppose thy self in the case of
Jesus; what if in so sensible and tender a part as thy head is, men should
fasten a number of Thorns, yea and those so sharp that they should pierce into
thy scull? why alas, thou can hardly abide the prick of a pin, much less the
piercing in of so many Thorns; O but thy Jesus was crowned with Thorns, and
Sceptred with a Reed, and that Reed was taken out of his hands, to beat the
Crown of Thorns into his head; and besides, thy Jesus was whipped with cords,
and rods, and little chains of iron, that from his shoulders to the soles of
his feet there was no part free; and being now in this plight, thou art called
on to behold the Man: do thou see him? is thy imagination strong: can thou
consider him at present, as if thou had a view of this very man? methinks it
should make thee break out, and say, O brightness of thy Fathers glory, who
has thus cruelly dealt with thee? O unspotted glass of the Majesty of God, who
has thus wholly disfigured thee? O river that flows out of the paradise of
delights, who has thus troubled thee? it is my sins O Lord that have so
troubled thee; my sins were the Thorns that pricked thee, the lashes that
whipped thee, the purple that clothed thee, it is I Lord that am thy
tormentor, and the very cause of these thy pains.

8. Consider Pilate's sentence, that Jesus should be Crucified as the Jews
required. Now they had him in their will, and they did to him what seemed them
good. Follow him from Gabbatha to Golgotha, see how they lay the heavy Cross
upon his tender shoulders, that were so pitifully rent and torn with whips;
accompany him all the way to the Execution, and help to carry his Cross to
Mount Calvary; And there, as if thou had been frozen hitherto, thaw into
tears; see him lifted up on that engine of torture, the bloody Cross; he hangs
on nails, and as he hangs, his own weight becomes his own affliction; O see how
his arms and legs were racked with voilent pulls, his hands and feet boared
with nails, his whole body torn with stripes, and gored with blood; And now, O
my soul, run with all thy might into his arms held out at their full length to
receive thee; Oh weigh the matter! because sin entered by the senses, therefore
the head, in which the senses flourish, is crowned with searching thorns;
because the hands and feet are more especially the instruments of sin,
therefore his hands and feet are nailed to the Cross for satisfaction. O
mavelous! what King is he, or of what Country, that wears a Crown of Thorns?
what man is he, or where lives he, whose hands and feet are not only bored, but
dug into, as if they had been digging with Spades in a ditch? surely here is
matter for a serious meditation, be enlarged O my thoughts, and dwell upon it!
consider it, and consider it again!

9. Consider the darkness that spread over all the Earth; now was the Sun
ashamed to show his brightness; considering that the Father of lights was
darkened with such disgrace; the Heavens discolored their beauty, and are in
mourning robes; the Lamp of Heaven is immantled with a miraculous Eclipse; the
Sun in the firmament, will simpathize with the Sun of Righteousness; it will
not appear in glory, though it be midday, because the Lord of Glory is thus
disgraced. And now hear the voice that comes from the Son of God, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Christ in the Garden tasted the bitter cup of
God's fierce wrath, but now he drunk the dregs of it; he then sipped off the
top, but now he drunk all off, top, and bottom, and all. O but what is the
meaning of this; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Surely, 1. This was
not a total, but a partial dereliction, this was not a perpetual, but a
temporary forsaking of him; the Godhead was not took away from the manhood, but
the union remained still, even now when the Manhood was forsaken. 2. This was
not a forsaking on Christ's part, but only on the Father's part; the Father
forsook Christ, but Christ went after him; God took away the sense of his love,
but the Son of God laid hold upon him, crying, and saying, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? 3. This forsaking was not in respect of his being, but
in respect of the feeling of God's favor, love, and mercy; certainly God loved
him still, Oh but his sense of comfort was now quite gone, so as it never was
before: In his agony there was some inklings of God's mercy, now and then at
least there was some starlight, some little flash of lightning to cheer him
up, but now all the sense and feeling of God's love was gone, and not so much
as any little starlight of the same appeared. Christ now took the place of
sinners, and God the Father shut him out (as it were) amongst the sinners; he
drew his mercy out of sight, and out of hearing, and therefore he cried out in
a kind of wonderment, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? After this he
speaks but a few words more, and he gives up the Ghost. He dies that we might
live, he is dissolved in himself, that we might be united to his Father; O my
soul, see him now if thou can for weeping, his eyes are dim, his cheeks are
wan, his face is pale, his head is bowing, his heart is panting, himself is
dying; come, come, and dye with him by a most exact mortification; look pale
like him with grief, and sorrow, and trouble for thy sins.

10. Consider the piercing of his side with a spear, whence came out a stream
of blood and water; O Fountain of everlasting waters! methinks I see the blood
running out of his side more freshly than those golden streams which ran out of
the Garden of Eden, and watered the whole World. Consider the taking of his
body down by Joseph; the burying of it by Joseph and Nicodemus; O here is
excellent matter for our meditation! O my spirit, go with me a little! Christ
being dead, it is pity but he should have a funeral; according to the letter
let Joseph and Nicodemus bear his corpse; let the blessed Virgin go after it
sighing and weeping, and at every other place looking up to Heaven; let Mary
Magdalen follow after with a box of precious Ointment in her hand, and with her
hair hanging, ready (if need were) to wipe his feet again; or that in this
meditation I may be more spiritual, let the Usurer come first with Judas's bag,
and distribute to the poor as he goes along; let the Drunkard follow after with
the sponge that was filled with gall, and vinegar, and check his wanton thirst;
let the young Gallant or voluptuous man come like his Master with bare foot,
and with the cown of thorns set also upon his head; let the wanton person bear
the rods, and whips, and wiers wherewith Christ was scourged, and fright his
own flesh; let the ambitious man be cladin the purple robe, the angry Person in
the seamless coat; my meaning is, let every sinner according to the nature of
his sin, draw something or other from the passion of Christ to the mortifying
of his sin, yea let all turn mourners, let all bow their heads, and be ready to
give up the Ghost for the Name of Christ, and let not Christ be buried without
a Sermon neither, and let the Text be this, John 10.11.
The good shepherd gives his life for the sheep, and in the end of the Sermon
(whether it be in use or no) let the Preacher take occasion to speak a word or
two in the praise of Christ, let him say with the Spouse, that he was the
chiefest among ten thousands, that he was altogether lovely; Cant. 5.10, 16.
that being God above all Gods, he became man beneath all men; that when he
spoke he began ordinarily with verily, verily, I say unto you: that he was an
holy man, that he never sinned in all his life neither in thought, word, or
deed; that being endowed with the Power of Miracles, he lovingly employed it in
curing the lame, and blind, and deaf, and dumb, in casting out devils, in
healing the sick, in restoring the dead to life; that as he lived, so he dyed,
for being unjustly condemned, mocked, stripped, whipped, crucified, he took all
patiently, praying for his persecutors, and leaving to them, when he had no
temporal thing to give them, a legacy of love, of life, of mercy, of pardon, of
Salvation: When the Sermon is done, and the Burial is finished, let every
Mourner go home, and begin a new life in imitation of Jesus Christ. O my soul
that thou would thus meditate, and thus imitate, that so thy meditation might
be fruitful, and thy imitation real; I mean that thy life and death might be
conformable to the life and death of Jesus Christ. But of that hereafter.

SECT. III. Of desiring Jesus in that Respect.
3. LEt us desire after Jesus, carrying on the work of our salvation in his
death; Jesus Christ to a fallen sinner is the chief object of desire, but Jesus
Christ as crucified is the chief piece of that object. Humbled souls look after
the remedy, and they find chiefly in Christ crucified; and hence are so many
cries after bathings in Christ's blood, and hiding in Christ's righteousness,
active, and passive. Indeed nothing does so cool and refresh a parched, dry,
and thirsty soul as the blood of Jesus; which made the poor woman cry out so
earnestly, I have an husband, and Children, and many other comforts, but I
would give them all, and all the good that ever I shall see in this world, or
in the world to come, to have my poor thirsty soul refreshed with that precious
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.

But what is there in Christ's blood or death that is so desirable? I answer,
--

1. There is in it the person of Christ, he that is God-man, man-God, Heb. 1.3.
The brightness of his father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person, it
is he that dyed; every drop of his blood was not only the blood of an innocent
man, but of one that was God as well as man, God with his own blood purchased
the Church; Acts 20.28.
now surely every thing of God is most desirable.

2. There is in it a worth, or price; Christ considered under the notion of a
sacrifice is of infinite worth; now this sacrifice (says the Apostle) he
offered up, Heb. 9.28. Heb. 9.28.
He offered up, not in Heaven, as the Socinians would have it, in presenting
himself before God his Father, but upon earth, viz. in his Passion upon the
Cross. No wealth in heaven or earth besides this, could redeem one soul, and
therefore the Apostle sets this against all corruptible things, as silver and
gold, the things so much set by amongst the men of this world; Ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver, 1 Pet. 1.18.
and gold, -- but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot.

3. There is in it a merit and satisfaction; the Scripture indeed does not
expressly use these words, but it has the sense and meaning of them; As in that
text, Ephesians. 6.7.
He has made us accepted in the beloved; to whom we have redemption through
his blood. I know there is a different notion in these words; for merit does
properly respect the good that is to be procured, but satisfaction the evil
that is repelled; but in Christ we stand not on these distinctions, because in
his merit was satisfaction, and in his satisfaction was merit. A great
controversy is of late risen up, Whether Christ's death be a satisfaction to
Divine justice? But the very words redeeming and buying, do plainly
demonstrate; that a satisfaction was given to God by the death of Jesus; Tit. 2
14. 1 Cor. 6.20. Rev. 5.9.
He gave himself for us that he might redeem us, ye are bought with a price;
and what price was that? why his own blood. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood; (i.e.) by thy death and Passion. Mat. 20.28. 1 Tit. 2.6.
This was the (...), that ransom which Christ gave for his Elect; The Son of
man came to give his life a ransom for many; or as the Apostle, He gave
himself a ransom for all, the word is here (...), which signifies an adequate
price, or a counterprice; as when one does, or undergoeth something in the room
of another; as when one yields himself a Captive for the redeeming of another
out of Captivity, or gives up his own life for the saving of another man's
life; so Christ gave himself (...), a ransom, or counterprice, submitting
himself to the like punishment that his redeemed ones should have undergone.

The Socinians tell us that Christ's sufferings and death were not for
satisfaction to God, but in reference to us, that we might believe the truth of
his Doctrine confirmed and sealed (as they say) by his death, and that we might
yield obedience to God according to the pattern that he has set before us, and
that so believing and obeying, we might obtain the remission of Sins and
eternal Life.

But the Scripture goes higher; in that mutual compact and agreement betwixt
God and Christ, we find God the Father imposing, and Christ submitting to this
satisfaction. Isa. 53.6.
1. The Father imposes it by charging the sins of his Elect upon Jesus Christ.
The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all; not the sins themselves, not
the evil in them, or fault of them, but the guilt and penalty belonging to
them; this God laid upon his Son, and charged it upon him; he charged it as a
Creditor charge the debt upon the Surety, requiring satisfaction. 2. Christ
undertook it. He was oppressed, Ver. 7.
and he was afflicted, or as some translate, It was exacted, and he answered;
(i.e.) God the Father required satisfaction for sin, and Jesus Christ was our
Surety answered in our behalf; Ver. 12.
He bear the Sins of many, he bear them as a porter that bears the burden for
another which himself is not able to stand under; he bear them by undergoing
the punishment which was due for them, he bear them as our Surety, submitting
himself unto the penalty which we had deserved; and by that means he made
satisfaction to the justice of God. Surely Christ's death was not only for
confirmation of his Doctrine, but for satisfaction to God.

4. There is in it not only a true, but a copious, and full satisfaction;
Christ's death and blood is superabundant to our sins; The grace of our Lord
was exceeding abundant 1. Tim. 1.14. (...) it was over-full, redundant, more
than enough. Many an humble soul is apt enough to complain, Oh if I had not
been so great a sinner, if I had not committed such and such transgressions,
there might have been hope; This is to undervalue Christ's redemption, this is
to think there is more in sin to damn, than in Christ's sufferings to save;
whereas all thy Sins to Christ are but as a little cloud to the glorious Sun;
yea, all the Sins of all the men in the world, are but to Christ's merits as a
drop to the Ocean. I speak not this to encourage the presumptuous sinner; for
alas, he has no part in this satisfaction; but to comfort the humble sinner,
who is laden with the sense of his Sins; what though they were a burden
greater than he can bear? yet they are not a burden greater than Christ can
bear; there is in Christ's blood an infinite treasure, able to sanctify thee,
and all the World, there is in Christ's death a ransom, a counterprice
sufficient to redeem all the sinners, that ever were, or ever shall be; the
price is of that nature, that it is not diminished, though it be extended to
never so many; as the Sun has fullness of light to enlighten all the world; and
if the blind do not see by it, it is no any scarcity of light in the Sun, but
by reason of his own indisposition; so if all men are not acquitted by Christ's
death, it is not because that was insufficient, as if it had not virtue enough
to reach them as well as others, but because they by their unbelief do reject
this remedy. Oh what large room has says to expatiate in! sit down, and dive,
and dive, yet thou can not come to the bottom of Christ's blood; but as the
Prophet Ezekiel saw still more and greater abominations, so may thou in the
sufferings of Christ observe more and more fullness. See what a notable
opposition the Apostle makes, Romans 5.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. between the
first and second Adam; proving at large that Christ does super-abound in the
fruits of his grace, above the first Adam in the fruits of his sin; he calls it
grace, and the abundance of grace, and this abundance of grace reigns to
life; Ver. 17.
so that these Texts should be like so much oil poured into the wounds of every
brokenhearted sinner. Oh is there any thing that can be desired more than this?

5. There is in it remission of sins; so says Christ, Mat. 26.28.
This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins, Remission of sins is attributed to Christ's death as a
cause; it is not thy tears, or prayers, or rendings of heart that could pay the
least farthing, Heb. 9.22.
Without shedding of blood (says the Apostle) there is no remission. God will
have tears and blood also, though not for the same purpose; for all thy tears
thou must fly to Christ only as the cause; it is true, thou must mourn, and
pray, and humble thy self, but it is Christ's blood only that can wash us clean;
Oh remember this! God will not pardon without satisfaction by the blood of
Christ. And surely this makes Christ's death so desirable; Oh my sins afflict
me, (cries many a one) Oh I am loathsome in mine own eyes, much more in Gods,
surely God is offended with my dullness, slothfulness, and my thousand
imperfections; I am all the day long entangled with this sin, and that sin, and
the other sin; but let this contrite spirit look on Christ's death, and therein
he may find all sin is pardoned: see here what an Argument is put into thy
mouth from these sufferings of Christ, well may thou say, O Lord I am
unworthy, but it is just and right that Christ obtain what he died for; Ephesians.
2.13, 14.
O pardon my sins for his death's sake, and for his precious blood sake.

6. There is in it reconciliation and peace with God, In Christ Jesus ye who
sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, for he is our
peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.16. Col. 1.20.
-- When we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son
-- that he might reconcile both (viz. Jews and Gentiles) unto God in one body
by the Cross. -- And having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him
^o reconcile all things to himself. This certainly should admirably support the
drooping soul; it may be thou cryest, My sins have made a breach betwixt God
and my soul; I have warred against heaven, and now God wars against me; and oh
what odds? if the Lord be angry, yea, but a little; what will become of my poor
soul? is a little stubble able to contend with the consuming fire? how then
should I contend with God? but come now, and look on Christ's death as the
means and meritorious cause of reconciliation, and thou can not but say, O
this death is desirable! When God the Father looks at a sinner in the bloody
glass of Christ, then says God, Oh now fury and wrath is not in me; I have no
more quarrel or controversy with this soul: seeing Christ has suffered, it is
enough, I have as much as my justice can demand, my frowns are now turned into
smiles, and my rod of iron into a Scepter of grace. Why this is it that makes
Christ's death and blood so desirable to the soul; what shall Jacob so rejoice
in seeing Esau's face altered to him? shall he say to Esau, I have seen thy
face, as the face of God? how much rather may the humble and believing sinner
be filled with gladness, when through Christ's blood shall be thus appeased and
reconciled with him?

7. There is in it immunity and safety from all the judgments and dangers
threatened against our sins. Surely if there were such force in the blood of the
type, that by the effusion of it the Israelites lay safe, and untouched of the
revenging Angel, how much more in the blood of Christ? Rev. 12.11.
Satan himself is said to be overcome by the blood of the Lamb; and God's
revenge due to our sins is said to be removed by the blood of Jesus, therefore
it is called The blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than the blood
of Abel; Heb. 12.24.
the blood of sprinkling was for safety, and Christ's blood is for safety; it
cries not for revenge, as Abel's blood cried, but for mercy and for deliverance
from all misery.

8. There is in it a blessed virtue to open Heaven, and to make passage thither
for our souls, Having boldness or liberty to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus: Heb. 10.19.
it is the blood of Christ that rents the Vail, and makes a way into the Holy
of Holies, that is, into the Kingdom of Heaven; without this blood there is no
access to God; it is only by the blood of Christ that heaven is open to our
prayers, and that Heaven is open to our persons; this blood is the key that
unlocks Heaven, and lets in the souls of his Redeemed ones: And I looked (says
John) and behold a door was open in Heaven, and the first voice I heard, was as
it were of a trumpet talking with me, which said, come up hither; Rev. 4.1.
and no sooner was he in the Spirit, and entered in, but he heard the new song
of the four beasts, Rev. 5.9.
and four and twenty Elders, saying to Christ, Thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us
to God by thy blood.

Come now, and gather in all these several particulars, there is in Christ's
blood inclusively the person of Christ, the price of souls, a merit and
satisfaction, a copious and full satisfaction, remission of sins,
reconciliation with God, immunity from dangers, a passage into glory; I might
add all other privileges, benefits, dignities of the soul, for they all flow
from the blood of Jesus, and they are all contained either expressly, or
vertually in the blood of Jesus; and is not all this worth the looking after? O
my soul, where is thy languor, and fainting toward this blessed object? Shall
Ahab eagerly desire after Naboth's vineyard, yea, so eagerly desire it, that
his desire shall cast him upon his bed? and is not Christ's blood better than
Naboth's vineyard? how is it O my soul, that thou art not sick on thy bed in
thy desires after Jesus? when David desired strongly after God's Law, he
expressed his longings by the breaking and fainting of his soul, Psalm. 119.20,
81.
My soul breaks for the longing that it has to thy judgment at all times; --
and my soul faints for thy Salvation: Oh where be these breakings and
faintings? 2 Cor. 5.2.
strength of desire is expressed by the Apostle by groaning, which is the
language of sickness; Oh where be these groanings after Christ's death? when I
call to mind that Christ's death is my ransom, that Christ's wounds are my
salves, that Christ's stripes are my cures, that Christ's blood is my fountain
to wash in, and to be clean; how should I but pray in this sense, His blood be
upon us, and on our children? Oh I am undone except I have a share in this
blood; why it is only this blood that can heal my soul, it is only this
Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
that can quench my thirst; and now I have seen the Fountain opened, how should
I but thirst, and cry out with the woman of Samaria, O give me this water that
I thirst no more? John 4.15.
But alas, I say it, I only say it. Oh that I could feel it! Oh my Jesus that
thou would breed in me ardent desires, vehement longings, unutterable groans,
mighty gaspings; O that I were like the dry and thirsty ground, that gapes, and
cleaves, and opens for drops of rain! when my spirit is in right frame I feel
some desires after Christ's blood, but how short are these desires, how
unworthy of the things desired? come Lord, kindle in me hot burning desires,
and then give me the desirable Object.

SECT. IV. Of hoping in Jesus in that respect.
4. LEt us hope in Jesus, carrying on the great work of our Salvation in his
sufferings and death. Heb. 6.11.
By this hope I intend only that which the Apostle calls full assurance of
hope. The main question is, Whether I have any part in Christ's sufferings?
they are of excellent use, and of great value to believers, but what am I the
better for them, if I have no part in them? or if I say I hope well? Oh but
what grounds of that hope? it is not every hope that is a well grounded hope;
full assurance of hope is an high pitch of hope, and every Christian should
strive and endeavor after it; now that we may do it, and that we may discern
it, that our hope is not base, but right-born, that the grounds of our hope in
Christ's death are not false, but of the right stamp; I shall lay down these
signs. --

1. If Christ's death be mine, then is Christ's life mine; and converse, if
Christ's death be mine, then is Christ's life mine. Christ's active and passive
obedience cannot be severed; Christ is not divided: we must not seek one part
of our righteousness in his birth, another in his habitual holiness, another in
the integrity of his life, another in his obedience of death. They that
endeavor to separate Christ's active and passive obedience, they do
exceedingly derogate from Christ, and make him but half a Savior; Heb. 7.22.
was not Christ our Surety? Heb. 7.22. and thereupon was he not bound to fulfill
all righteousness for us? (i.e.) as to suffer in our stead, so to obey in our
stead? oh take heed of opposing or separating Christ's death, and Christ's
life; either we have all Christ, or we have no part in Christ; now if these two
be concomitants, well may the one be as the sign of the other; search then, and
try, O my soul, have thou any share in Christ's life? can thou make out
Christ's active obedience unto thy own soul? if herein thou art at a stand,
peruse those Characters laid down in the life of Christ; the many glorious
effects flowing out of Christ's life into a Believer's soul we have discovered
before.

2. If Christ's death be mine, then is that great end of his death accomplished
in me, viz. By the sacrifice of himself he has put away sin, even my sin. --
and, Heb. 9.26. Ephesians. 1.7. Dan. 9.24.
in him I have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. As
on this account he suffered, to finish the transgression, to make an end of
sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity; so if his death be mine, I may
assuredly say, my sins are pardoned, and mine iniquities are done away. Come
then, and try by this sign, can thou assure thy self that thy sins are
forgiven thee? have thou heard the whispers of Gods Spirit, Son, or Daughter,
be of good comfort, thy sins are remitted? there is no question then, but thou
art redeemed by his blood, thou have part in his sufferings. Indeed this very
Character may seem obscure, assurance of pardon is the hidden Manna, the white
Stone which no man knows, saving he which receives it and feels it; and yet
if thou diligently observest the Spirit's actings, even this may be known;
remission of sin and repentance for sin are twins of a birth; those two God in
Scripture has joined together: If we confess our sins, 1 John 1.9. Acts 8.22.
Acts 5.31. Luke 24.46, 47
he is faithful and just to forgive our sins. -- And, repent and pray, if the
thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. -- And, Christ is a Prince and a
Savior to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. -- And, thus it
is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer. -- That repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his Name. In this way David assured
himself; I said I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, Psalm. 32.5.
and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Selah. It is no more, than to ask
thy Soul, what, are thy repentings kindled together? have thou seriously and
sincerely repented thee of sin as sin? have thou turned from all sin unto God
with constancy and delight? Surely this is peculiar and proper to the Child of
God by virtue of Christ's Death.

3. If Christ's death be mine, then am I engraffed into the likeness of
Christ's death; then am I made conformable to Christ in his death, that I may
know him and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his
death. Phil. 3.10.
The same that was done to Christ in a natural way, is done and performed in
the Believer in a spiritual way; (i.e.) as Christ died, so the Believer dies;
as Christ died for sin, so the Believer dies to sin; In that he died, he died
unto sin, -- likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin.
Observe here the Analogy, and proportion, Romans 6.10, 11.
and resemblance betwixt Christ and us: both die unto sin, Christ by way of
expiation, suffering, and satisfying for the sins of others; we by way of
mortification, killing, and slaying, and crucifying our own sins. I look upon
this sign as the very touchstone of a Christian, and therefore I shall insist
upon it.

Two questions I suppose needful, to resolve the grounds of our Hope concerning
our interest in the death of Christ.

1. Whether indeed and in truth our sins are mortified? 2. Whether we increase
or grow in our mortification?
For the first; whether indeed and in truth our sins are mortified? It is a
skill worth our learning, because of the many deceits that are within us; sin
may seem to be mortified when the occasion is removed; or sin may seem to be
mortified, when it is not violent, but quiet; or sin may seem to be mortified,
when it is but removed from one sin unto another; or sin may seem to be
mortified, when the sap and strength of sin is dead; as the Lamp goes out, when
either the Oil is not supplied, or taken away. Now that in this scrutiny we may
search to the bottoom, and know the truth and certainty of our mortification,
it will appear by these Rules.

1. True mortification springs from a root of Faith. Every thing in the world
proceeds from some cause or other; and if the cause be good, the effect must
needs be good; but if the cause be evil, the effect must needs be evil: A good
Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, and an evil Tree cannot bring forth good
Fruit. Mat. 7.18.
In this case therefore let us examine the cause; if we can make out this
truth, that we belive in Christ, that we roll our selves on the Lord Jesus
Christ for life and for salvation, and that now we begin to feel in us the
decay of sin, we may conclude from the cause or rise, that this decay of sin is
true mortification; surely it has received the deadly wound: it is a blessed
effect arising from a good, and right, and genuine cause.

2. True mortification is general; not only one sin, but all sins are mortified
in a true Believer. As death is unto the Members of the body, so is
mortification unto the members of sin; now death seized upon every member, it
leaves not life in any one member of the body; so neither does mortification
leave life in any one member of sin; my meaning is, it takes away the
commanding power of sin in every member: Mortify your members which are upon
the earth (says the Apostle) your members, Col. 3.5.
not one member; and then he instanceth, Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate
Affections, Evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry. Christians
that have their interest in Christ's death, must not only leave Pride, but
Lust; not only Uncleanness, but Covetousness; Sin must not only be slain in the
understanding, but in the will and affections: mortification is general.

You will say this is an hard saying; does any man, any Believer, leave all
sin? yes, in respect of ruling power he leaves all sin; all gross sins, and all
other sins: only with this difference, all gross sins in practice and actions,
and all frailties and infirmities in allowance and affection. It is good to
observe the degrees of mortification: the first is to forbear the practice of
gross and scandalous sins in word and deed: Jam. 3.2.
If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man; and this perfection
by the help of Grace, a godly man may reach to in this life. The second is to
deny consent and will to all frailties and infirmities: Romans 7.19.
The evil which I would not, that do I, Romans 7.19. I may do evil, and yet I
would not do evil; there is a denial of it in the will. The third is to be free
from any settled liking of any evil motion: not only to deny consent and will,
but also to deny the very thought or imagination setledly and deliberately to
delight in sin. I know, to be void of all evil motions arising from the flesh,
or of all sudden passions within, or of all suduen delights in sin, or of all
deadness or backwardness to good things by reason of sin, it is an higher pitch
than any man can touch in this present world: for whilst we live, the Law of
the members will be working, and we shall find cause enough to complain of a
body of death; only, if when these motions first arise, we presently endeavor
to quench them, to reject them, to detest them, and to cast them away from us,
therein is true mortification: and thus far we must look to it, to leave all
sin.

3. True mortification is not without its present combats, though at last it
conquer; many a time corruption may break out, and lust may be strong and
violent; but th^s violent lust is only for the present, whereas a lust
unmortified ever reigns. It is with sin in a Believer, as it is with a man
that has received his deadly wound from his enemy; he will not presently fly
away, but rather he will run more violently upon him that has wounded him;
yet, be he never so violent, in the middle of his action he sinks down, because
he has received his deadly wound; so it is with a Believer's sin, and with a
mortified lust; it may rage in the heart, and seem to bear sway for a time; but
the power and strength of sin is mortified, it sinks down, and wants ability to
prevail; by this sign may we know whether the corruptions and stirrings of our
hearts proceed from a mortified, or from an unmortified lust; a lust, though
mortified, may rage for a time, but it cannot rule; it may strive, but it
cannot totally prevail; it may be in the heart, as a thief in the house, not to
reside or dwell, but to lodge for a night, and be gone: And (that which is ever
to be observed) after its swinge and breaking out, the heart that lodged it,
abhors its self in dust and ashes, cries mightily unto God for mercy and
pardon, repairs the breach with stronger resolution, and more invincible
watchfulness against future assaults; but a Lust unmortified possesses it
self, and rules and reigns in the heart and soul; it abides there, and will not
away: I shall not deny, but there may be a cessation of its actings for a time;
but that is not any want of good will, as they say, but only of matter, means,
opportunity, enticement, company, provocation, or the like; and after such
cessation or forbearance, the heart usually entertains it again with more
greediness; it lies and delights in it as much as ever, it hardens it self most
obstinately in it, as if it were impossible to leave it, or live without it
with any kind of comfort.

4. True mortification is a painful work. The very word imports no less; to
kill a man, or to mortify a member, will not be without pain; hence it is
called a crucifying of the flesh, Gal. 5.24. Mat. 5.29, 30.
and a cutting off the right hand, a plucking out the right eye: they that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh; if thy hand offend thee, cut it off; and if
thy eye offend thee, pluck it out: in this respect this death unto sin carries
with it a likeness to the death of Christ; it is attended with agonies, and
soul-conflicts, both before, and after our conversion.

1. Before conversion, before the first wound be given it, why then ordinarily
there is some compunction of Spirit, some pricking of heart; what a case do we
find the Jews in, when after Peter's Sermon, they were pricked at their hearts?
and what an agony do we find the Jailor in, when he came trembling in, and
falling down at the Apostles feet, and crying out, Sirs, What shall I do to be
saved? With such agonies as these, Acts 2.7. Acts 16.30.
is the beginning of mortification usually attended; I do not say that they are
alike in all, whether for degree or continuance; but in ordinary, true and
sound conversion is not without some of these soul-conflicts.

2. After conversion, after the first round there are some agonies still; for
though a Believer be delivered of sin in respect of the guilt, and reigning
power; yet he has still some remainders of sinful Corruption left within him,
which draw many a groan, and many a sign from his trembling heart; Romans 8.23.
we also have the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan within
our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our bodies:
such are the groans of mortifying Saints, Saints dying unto sin like the groans
of dying men, whose souls being weary of their bodies, do earnestly desire a
dissolution: and thus Paul groaned, when he said, O wretched man that I am,
Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body this death?

Oh what a Touchstone is this? how will ihis discover true mortification from
that which was counterfeit? Some may think they are dead unto sin, when in deed
and in truth they are not dead, but asleep unto sin; and it appears by this,
because there were no pangs in their death, you know this is a difference
betwixt death and sleep; there are pangs in the one, but not in the other: O my
soul, examine, what pangs were there in thy death unto sin? what agonies, what
soul-conflicts have thou felt? what compunction of heart, what affliction of
Spirit, have thou endured for sin? what trouble have thou had to find such a
law in thy members rebelling against the law in thy mind, Romans 7.23.
and bringing thee into captivity to the Law of sin? why surely thou art not so
mortified, as to be freed wholly from the power of sin; it may be, it does not
rule in thee as a Prince, yet certainly it tyrannizeth over thee, it oft-times
carries thee contrary to the bent of thy regenerate mind, to the omittting of
what thou would do, and to the committing of what thou would not do; and is
not this an affliction of Spirit? does not this cause frequent conflicts in thy
spirit? if not, thou may well suspect that sin is not dead, but asleep; or
if it be dead to thee, yet thou art not dead to it, I confess, death-pangs are
not all alike in all; some have a more gentle, and others a more painful death;
so it is in this Spiritual death unto sin; and that herein there may be no
mistake, I shall propound this question: What is the least measure of these
pangs, these soul-agonies, and conflicts, that are necessarily required to true
mortification? I answer, --

1. There must be a sense of sin, and of Gods wrath due unto sin; such a sense
we find in Jesus Christ; he was very sensible of the weight and burden of those
sins, and of the wrath of God that lay upon him; which made him cry out, My
God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? thus souls in the act of Mortification,
sometimes cry out, O my sins! and Oh God's wrath!

2 There must be sorrow for Sin. Such an affection we find also in Jesus
Christ: My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; (...), 2 Cor. 7.10.
he was beset and surrounded with sorrows; so every mortified sinner, at one
time or other, he feels an inward sorrow and grief; even that Godly sorrow
which the Apostle speaks of, a sorrow according to God; (i. e,) coming from
God, well-pleasing to God, and bringing to God back again.

3. There must be a desire of being freed and delivered from sin: Luke 12.50.
such a desire we find also in Jesus Christ; I have a Baptism to be Baptized
with, and how am I straightened until it be accomplished? A regenerate soul
earnestly desires to be freed, not only from the guilt, but also from the power
of sin, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me? etc,

4. There must be answerable endeavors in effectual strivings against sin;
Heb. 12.4.
Ye have not resisted unto blood, striving against sin. How did our Savior
wrestle in the Garden, offering up prayers and supplications with strong crying
and tears? Heb. 5.7.
so will a regenerate soul wrestle with God about t^^ death of sin, praying,
watching, going out in the strength of God, and engaging in a continual war, a
deadly fewd against it, and these are the least of those soul-conflicts,
wherewith this mortification, or death unto sin is attended.

Now try we the truth of our Mortification by these signs: Does it spring from
a right root of Faith? is it general and universal in respect of all sins? is
it accompanied with combats? does the flesh lust against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh? and in this combat, does the spirit at last prevail,
and triumph over the flesh? do we find it a painful work both before and after
conversion? why, then may I say with the Apostle, now I know Christ, and the
fellowship of his sufferings; now by the Grace of Christ I am made conformable
to his death. As he died for sin, so I die to sin; and here is the ground of my
hope, that Christ's death is mine.

For the second, whether we increase and grow in our mortification? this
question is needful as the former, to satisfy our souls interest in the death
of Christ. As true Grace is growing Grace, so true mortification is that which
grows: Now that we may be resolved in this point also, the growth of our
mortification will appear by these following signs. --

1. Growing Mortification has its chiefest conflicts in spiritual lusts. At
first we mortify grosser evils, such as Oaths, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
worldly-mindedness, or the like; but when we grow in this Blessed duty, we then
set our selves against spiritual wickednesses; as Pride, Presumption,
Self-carnal confidence in a man's own graces, or the like: 2 Cor. 7.1.
this Method the Apostle sets down; let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit: first from all filthiness of the flesh or body,
and then from all filthiness of the spirit or soul; as the children of Israel
in their entrance into the land of Promise, first they sat upon the frontiers
and skirts of the Land, and then they sought it out, and prevailed in the heart
of the Country; so Christians in their mortification they first set upon
worldly lusts, gross evils, outward sins; and when they have encountered them at
the frontiers, they then conflict with such corruptions as lie more inwardly,
in the very heart, spiritual wickednesses that are within. Now if this be our
case, here is one sign of our growth,

2. Growing mortification is more, even, constant, lasting, durable, when there
is in the heart a sudden flowing and reflowing; it comes from those vast Seas
of Corruptions that are within us; many souls have their Ague-fits, sometimes
hot, and sometimes cold; it may be, now they are in a very good frame, and
within an hour or two, a mighty Tide comes in and they are born down by sin and
corruption, in this case mortification is very weak: But on the contrary, if we
find our standing more firm and sure, if for the main, we walk evenly, and keep
closely to the Lord, it carries with it an evidence that our mortification
grows.

3. Growing mortification feels Lust more weak, and the Spirit more strong in
its ordinary actings. If we would know the truth of growth, let us look to our
usual fits of sinning; for then a man's strength or weakness is discerned most:
as a man's weakness to good is discerned when he comes to act it, Romans 7.18.
to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not:
so a man's weakness to sin is best discerned, when he comes to act it: Mark
then the ordinary fits (as we call them) of sinning; sometimes God is pleased
to appoint some more frequent assaults, as if he would on purpose suffer the
law of the members to war, and to muster up all their forces, that so we might
the rather know what is in our hearts; at such a time, if we find that
resistance against sin grows stronger, that sin cannot advance and carry on his
Army so as formerly, that sin is encount^ed at first, or met withal at the
frontiers, and there overthrown, this is a good sign that now our mortification
grows; as, suppose it be a Lust of Fancy, it cannot boil up to such gross
fancies as it was wont; or suppose it be a Lust of Pride, it boyls not up to
such a spirit of Pride as formerly; in stead of bringing forth fruit, it now
brings forth blossoms; or instead of bringing forth blossoms, it now brings
forth nothing but Leaves; why this is a sure sign that this Lust is withering
more and more; when the inordinate thirst is not so great in the time of the
Fit, when the inward lusts pitch upon lower acts than they had wont, when the
waters abate, and fall short, and lessen, and overflow less ground; we may
conclude certainly, that mortification grows.

4. Growing mortification has more ability to abstain from the very occasions
and beginnings of lust. Io^. 31.1.
Thus Job (whom we look on as a man much mortified) made a Covenant with his
eyes, that he would not think upon a Maid, and no question, as he made a
covenant, so he kept his Covenant: Oh! when a man cannot endure to come where
such a one is that he loves not, when he cannot endure the fight of him, or any
thing that puts him in mind of him, not so much as to parlie, or speak with
him; this is a sign of a strong hatred; and so when a man hates the very
garment spotted with the flesh, here is a good sign: I know this height is not
easy to attain to, and therefore some in imitation of Job and David, have
bound themselves with vows and promises, as much as might be, to abstain from
the appearance of evil, to crush the Cockatrice Egg before the Serpent could
creep out of it, to avoid sin in its first rise; but alas, how have they broken
their vows from time to time? For all this, I dare not speak against vows,
provided that, 1. They be of things lawful. 2. That we esteem them not as
duties of absolute necessity. And, 3. That we bind not our selves perpetually,
left our vows should become burdens unto us; but only for some short time, and
so renew them as occasion requires; in this way our vows might much help us in
our mortification: and if once, through the help of vows or prayer, or looking
unto Jesus, or going to the Cross of Jesus Christ, or by any other means we
feel our selves more able to resist sin, to hate sin, in its first rise, first
motions, first onset, we may assuredly hope that now our mortification grows.

O my Soul, try now the growth of thy mortification by these signs; have thou
overcome grosser sins, and is now thy chiefest co^fl^t with spiritual
wickednesses? is thy standing and walking with God more close, and even and
constant than sometimes it has been; is thy lusts more weak, and thy Grace
more strong in ordinary actings? I say, in ordinary actings; for the estimate
of thy growth must not be taken for a turn or two, but by a constanst course:
have thou now more ability to quench the flame of sin in the very spark, to
dash Babylon's Brats against the stones, even whilst they are little, to
abstain from sin in its first motion or beginning? why, then is the promise
accomplished, he will subdue our iniquities: Surely thou art a growing
Christian; Micah 7.19.
thou have fellowship with Christ in his sufferings; thy ground is solid, firm,
and stable; thy hope has a rock-foundation, and thou may build upon it,
that Christ's death, and blood, and sufferings are thine, even thine; he loved
thee, and gave himself for thee.

SECT. V. Of Believing in Jesus in that Respect.
5. LEt us believe in Jesus, carrying on the great work of our Salvation for
us, during his Sufferings and Death. Every one looks upon this as an easy
duty; only the humble Soul, the scrupulous Conscience cries out, What! Is it
possible that Christ should die, suffer, shed his blood for me? His incarnation
was wonderful, his life on earth was to astonishment; but that the Son of God
should become man, live amongst men, and die such a death, even the death of
the Cross, for such a one as I am, I cannot believe it; it is an abys^ past
fadoming; the more I consider it, the more I am amazed at it: suppose I had an
enemy in my power, man or Devil, one that provokes me every day, 1 Samuel 24.19.
one that hunts my soul to take it away; should I not say with Saul, if a man
find his enemy, will he let him go well away? It may be an ingenuous spirit
(such as David) would do thus much; but would David, or any breathing soul, not
only spare his enemy, but spill himself to save his enemy? would a man become a
Devil, to save Devils? would a man endure hell pains to free all the Devils in
hell from their eternal pains? and yet what were this in comparison of what
Christ has done or suffered for us? It is not so much for us to suffer for
Devils (for we are fellow creatures) as it is for Christ, God-man, man-God to
suffer for us: Oh what an hard thing is it, considering my enmity against
Christ, to believe that Christ died for me, that he gave himself to the death,
even to the death of the Cross for my soul!

Trembling soul! throw not away thy self in a way of unbelief. It may thou
would not die for an enemy, an irreconcilable enemy; but are not the mercies
of God above all the mercies of men? O believe! And that I may persuade
effectually, I shall say down first some Directions; and secondly, some
Encouragements of Faith.

1. For the Directions of Faith in reference to Christ's death, observe these
particulars.

2. Faith must directly go to Christ; not first to the promise, and then to
Christ; but first to Christ, and then to the promise; the Person ever goes
before the Prerogative.

2. Faith must go to Christ as God in the flesh; this was the difference
betwixt the New Testament, and old-Testament-Believers; their Faith directs
only to God, but our Faith looks more immediately to Jesus Christ; Believe in
the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.

3. Faith must directly go to Christ, as God in the flesh, made under the Law.
He continued in all things written in the book of the Law to do them; and so
our Faith must look upon him. But of these before: I shall say nothing more to
these particulars.

4. Faith must go to Christ not only as made under the directive part of the
Law by his life, but under the penal part of the Law by his death; in both
these respects Christ was made under the law. The one half of the Law he
satisfied by the holiness of his life; he fulfilled the law in every jot and
every tittle; the other half of the Law he satisfied by his enduring the death,
even the death of the Cross; he paid both the Principal and the Forfeiture; and
though men do not so, yet Christ did so, that the whole Law might be satisfied
fully, by his being under both these parts of the Law, pay and penalty: Come
then, and look upon Christ as dying; it was the Serpent, as lifted up, and so
looked at, that healed the Israelites of their fiery stings. Alas! we are
diseased, in a spiritual sense, as they were, and Christ Jesus was lifted up as
a remedy to us, as the Serpent was unto them; it remains therefore that as they
looked up to the Brazen Serpent, so we look up to Jesus, believe in Jesus, as
lifted up for life, and for salvation: As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, John 14.15.
so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have eternal life. Indeed some difference there is betwixt the
Serpent and Christ. --

As, 1. The Brazen Serpent had not power in if self to cure, as Christ has. 2.
The Serpent cured the Israelites but for a time, John 11.26.
to die again; but whomsoever Jesus cures in a Spiritual sense, he cures for
ever; they shall never die. 3. The serpent also had its time of curing; it did
not always retain its virtue, but during the time they were in the Wilderness;
only Jesus Christ, our Brazen Serpent, does ever retain his power and virtue to
the end of the world; and hence it is, that in the Ministry, Christ is still
held forth as lifted up, that all that will but look on him by faith, may live.
4. The Serpent, sometimes a remedy against poison, was after turned even to
poison the Israelites, which made Hezekiah to crush it, and brake it, and stamp
it to powder; but Jesus Christ ever remains the sovereign and healing God; he
is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. He is unchangeable in his
goodness, as he is in holy and divine nature; he can never be defaced, nor
destroyed, but he abides the savior of sinners to all eternity; why then let
us rather look unto Christ, and believe in Christ as lifted up, (i.e.) as he
was crucified, and died on the Cross. In this respect he is made a fit object
for a sinner's faith to trust upon, and rest upon, Christ as crucified, as made
sin, and a curse for us, it the object of our pardon. O this is it that makes
Christ's death so desirable; why therein is virtually and meritoriously pardon
of sin, Justification, redemption, reconciliation, and what not? Oh! cries a
sinner, where may I set my foot? how should I regain my God? my sin has undone
me, which way should I cast for pardon? why now remember that in seeking
pardon, Romans 8.34.
Christ was crucified; Christ as dying, is principally to be eyed and looked
at: Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, Romans 8.34. No Question
Christ's active Obedience, during his Life, was most exact, and perfect, and
meritorious; yet that was not the expiation of sin: only his passive obedience
(Christ only in his sufferings) took away sin, the guilt of sin, and punishment
for sin; We have redemption through the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7.
even the forgiveness of sins. If any humble soul would have recourse to that
Christ, who is now in heaven, let him first in the actings of his Faith,
consider him as crucified, as lifted up, as made sin for us, as through whom
(under that consideration) he is to receive pardon of sin, Justification,
redemption, reconciliation, sanctification, salvation.

5. Faith in going to Christ, as lifted up, it is principally and mainly to
look unto the (...) meaning, intent, and design of Christ in his sufferings, as
he was lifted up; we are not barely to consider the History of Christ's death,
but the aim of Christ in his death: Many read the History, and they are
affected with it; there is a principle of humanity in men, which will stir up
compassion, and love, and pity toward all in misery: whilst Christ was
suffering, the women followed after him weeping; but this weeping, not being
spiritual, or raised enough, he said to them, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
for me, but for your selves. The way of Faith drawing virtue out of Christ's
death, it is especially to look to the scope and drift of Christ in his
sufferings. As God looks principally to the meaning of the Spirit by Prayer, so
does faith look principally to the meaning of Christ in his sufferings: mistake
not, my meaning is not that we should be ignorant of the History of Christ's
death, or of the manner of Christ's sufferings; you see we have opened it
largely, and followed it close from first to last; but we must not stick there;
we should above all, look to the mind and heart of Christ in all this: some
observe, that both in the Old, and New Testament we find this Method; first,
the History, and then the Mystery; first, the Manner, and then the Meaning of
Christ's sufferings; as in the Old Testament. We have first, the History, in
Psalm. 22. written by David; and then the Mystery, in Isa. 52. written by
Isaiah. And in the New Testament we have first the manner of his sufferings
written at large by all the Evangelists; and then the meaning, written by the
Apostles in all their Epistles. Now accordingly are the acts of Faith; we must
first look on Jesus as lifted up, and then look at the end and meaning; why was
this Jesus thus lifted up? Well, but you may demand, what was the end, the
plot, the great design of Christ in this respect?

I answer, some ends were remote, and others were more immediate: but omitting
all those ends that are remote, his Glory, our Salvation, etc. I shall only
answer in these Particulars.

1. One design of Christ's death was to redeem us from the slavery of Death and
Hell: He has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us;
Gal. 3.
as it is written; Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree: Hence it is,
that we say, that by his sufferings Christ has redeemed us from Hell, and by
his doings Christ has given us a right to heaven: he was made under the Law,
Gal. 3.4, 5.
that he might redeem them that were under the Law. Alas! we were carnal, sold
under sin; whereupon the Law seized on us, locked us up, as it were, in a
dungeon; yea, the sentence passed, and we but waited for execution; now to get
us rid from this dismal, damnable estate, Christ himself is made under the Law,
that he might redeem us. Redeem us! how? not by way of entreaty, to step in,
and beg our pardon; that would not serve the turn: sold we were, and bought we
must be; a price must be laid down for us, it was a matter of Redemption; but
with what must we be redeemed? surely with no easy price: ah no, it cost him
dear, and very dear: Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver
and Gold, 1 Pet. 1.18.
but with the precious blood of Christ: his precious blood was the price we
stood him in; which he paid when he gave his life a ransom for many: Mat.
20.28.
the case stood thus betwixt Christ and us in this point of Redemption; we all
like a crew or company of Malefactors, were ready to suffer, and to be
executed: now, what said Christ to this? Why, I will come under the Law, said
Christ, I will suffer that which they should suffer; I will take upon me their
execution, upon condition I may redeem them: now this he did at his death; and
this was the end why he died, that by his death we might be redeemed from the
slavery of Death and Hell.

2. Another Design of Christ's death, was to free us from sin: not only would
he remove the effect, but he would take away the cause also: Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation -- for the remission of sin. Romans 3.25. John 1.29. 2
Cor. 5.21. Heb. 9.26. 1 John 1.7.
-- Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. -- He has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. -- Once has he appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. -- And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin. This was the plot, which God by an ancient design aimed at in the
suffering of Jesus Christ; that he would take away sin: And thus Faith must
take it up, and look upon it. When Peter had set forth the hainousness of the
Jews sin, in killing Christ, he tells them at last of that design of old; All
this was done, said he, Acts 2.2,
by the determinate counsel of God. His meaning was first to humble them, and
then to raise them up; q. d. It was not so much they that wrought his death, as
the Decree of God, and the agreement of God and Christ: there was an ancient
contrivement that Jesus Christ should die for sin, and that all our sins should
be laid on the back of Jesus Christ: and therefore he seems to speak comfort to
them in this; that howsoever they designed it, yet God and Christ designed a
further end in it than they imagined, even to remission of sins: Who was
delivered to death for our sins, Romans 4.25.
and rose again for our justification. The death of Christ (as one observes)
was the greatest and strangest design that ever God undertook, and therefore
sure he had an end proportionable to it; God that wills not the death of a
sinner, would not for any inferior end, will the death of his Son, whom he
loved more than all the world besides; it must needs be some great matter for
which God should contrive the death of his Son; and indeed it could be no less
than to remove that which he most hated, and that was sin. Here then is another
end of Christ's death, it was for the remission of sin one main part of our
justification.

3. Another design of Christ's death was to mortify our members which are upon
the earth. Not only would he remit sin, but he would destroy it, kill it,
crucify it; he would not have it reign in our mortal bodies, Romans 6.11. 1 Pet.
2.24.
that we should obey it in the lusts thereof. This Design the Apostle sets out
in these words, he bare our sins in his own body upon the Tree, that we being
dead unto sin, should live unto righteousness: Christ by his death had not only
a design to deliver us from the guilt of sin, but also from the power of sin:
God forbid that I should glory, Gal. 6.14.
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world. Paul was a mortified man, dead to the world, and
dead to sin: But how came he so to be? why this he attributes to the Cross of
Christ, to the death of Christ; the death of Jesus was the cause of this death
in Paul: How much more shall the blood of Christ -- purge our Consciences from
dead works to serve the living God? Heb. 9.14.
There is in the death of Christ first a value, and secondly, a virtue; the
former is available to our justification, the latter to our sanctification; now
sanctification has two parts, mortification and vivification: Christ's death,
or passive obedience is more properly conducible to the one; his life, or
active obedience to the other. Romans 6.5.
Hence Believers are said to be engraffed with Christ in the likeness of his
death; there is a kind of likeness betwixt Christ and Christians: Christ died,
and the Christian dies; Christ died a natural death, and a Christian dies a
spiritual death; Christ died for sin, and the Christian dies for sin; this was
another end of the death of Christ; there issues from his death a mortifying
virtue, causing the death of sin in a Believer's soul, one main part of our
sanctification.

O my soul look to this; herein lies the pith and marrow of the death of
Christ; and if now thou will but act and exercise thy faith in this respect,
how might thou draw the virtue and efficacy of his death into thy soul? But
here is the question, how should I manage my Faith? or how should I act my
faith, to draw down the virtue of Christ's death, and so to feel the virtue of
Christ's death in my soul, mortifying, crucifying, and killing sin?

I answer, 1. In prayer, meditation, self-examination, receiving of the Lord's
Supper, etc. I must propound to my self and soul the Lord Jesus Christ, as
having undertaken and performed that bitter and painful work of suffering even
unto death; yea, that of the Cross, as it is held out in the History and
Narrative of the Gospel. 2. I must really and steadfastly believe, and firmly
assent that those sufferings of Christ so revealed and discovered, were real
and true, undoubted, and every way unquestionable as in themselves. 3. I must
look upon those grievous, bitter, cruel, painful, and with all opprobrious,
execrable, shameful sufferings of Christ, as very strange and wonderful; but
especially considering the spiritual part of his sufferings, viz. the sense and
apprehension of God's forsaking and afflicting him in the day of his fierce
anger, I should even be astonished and amazed thereat: what! that the Son of
God should lay his head on the block, under the blow of divine Justice? that he
should put himself under the wrath of his heavenly Father? that he should enter
into the combat of Gods heavy displeasure, and be deprived of the sense and
feeling of his love, and mercy, and wonted comfort? how should I but stand
aghast at these so wonderful sufferings of Jesus Christ? 4. I must weigh and
consider what it was that occasioned and caused all this, viz. Sin, yea, my
Sin, yea, this and that Sin particularly. This comes nearer home, and from this
I must now gather in these several Conclusions: As, --

1. It was the Design of Christ by his sufferings to give satisfaction to the
infinite Justice of God for sin. 2. It was intended and meant (at least in a
second place) to give out to the world a most notable and eminent instance and
demonstration of the horridness, odiousness, and execrableness of sin; since no
less than all this, yea, nothing else but this would serve the turn to expiate
it, and atone for it. 3. It holds forth again, as sin is horrid in its self, so
it cannot but be exceeding grievous and offensive to Christ: Oh it cost him
dear, it put him to all this pain and Torture; it made him cry out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? how then should it but offend him above all,
above any thing in the world? 4. If therefore there be in me any spark of love
toward Christ, or any likeness to Christ; or if I would have Christ to bear
any affection, love, regard, or respect unto me, it will absolutely behoove me
by all means to loath sin, and cast it away from me; to root it up, to quit my
hands, and to rid my heart of it. The truth is, I cannot possibly give forth a
more pregnant proof of my sincere love, entire affection, respect, conformity,
resemblance, sympathy to, and with Christ, than by offering all violence,
usually all holy severity against sin for his very sake.

Now when the heart is thus exercised, God by his Spirit will not fail to meet
us; our desire and endeavor of our soul to weaken and kill sin in the soul is
not without its reward; but especially when sin has in this way, and by this
means, lost the affection of the soul, and is brought in hatred, and disesteem,
it decays, and dies of it self; for it only lives and flourishes by the warm
affections, good thoughts, and opinion that the soul has of it. So that
matters going thus in the heart, the influence that should nourish and maintain
sin, is cut off, and it withers by degrees till it be finally, and fully
destroyed.

Thus for directions; now for the encouragements of our faith to believe in
Christ's death, consider --

1. The fullness of this object, Christ crucified; there is a transcendent
all sufficiency in the death of Christ: in a safe sense it contains in it
universal redemption: it is sufficient for the redemption of every man in the
world, yea, and effectual for all that have been, are, or shall be called into
the state of grace, whether Jews, or Gentiles, bound or free. I know some hold,
that Christ dyed for all, and every man with a purpose to save; only thus they
explicate. 1. That Christ dyed for all men considered in the common lapse or
fall, but not as obstinate, impenitent, or unbelievers; he dyed not for such,
as such. 2. That Christ dyed for all men in respect of the request or
impetration of salvation, but the application thereof is proper to believers.
3. That Christ dyed not to bring all or any man actually to salvation, but to
purchase salvability, and reconciliation so far, as that God might and would
(salva justitia) deal with them on terms of a better covenant. 4. That Christ
has purchased salvability for all men, but faith and regeneration he has
merited for none; because God is bound to give that which Christ has merited
of him, although it be not desired, or craved. I cannot assent to these
positions: but thus far I grant, that Christ's death in it self is a sufficient
price and satisfaction to God for all the world; and that also it is effectual
in many particulars to all men respectively in all the world; every man in one
way or other has the fruit of Christ's death conferred upon him; but this
fruit is not of one kind; for, 1. Some fruit is common to every man, as the
earthly blessings which Infidels enjoy, may be termed the fruits of Christ's
death. 2. Other fruit is common to all the members of the visible Church, as,
to be called by the Word, to enjoy the Ordinances, to live under the Covenant,
to partake of some graces that come from Christ. 2. Other fruit is indeed
peculiar to the Saints of God, as, faith unfeigned, regeneration, pardon of
sin, adoption, etc. And yet this fruit is universal to all the Saints, whether
Jews or Gentiles: in which sense speaks the Apostle, Romans 11.32. 1 Timothy 2.6.
Romans 11.32. Romans 5.18. Heb. 2.9.
He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. -- And he gave
himself a ransom for all, -- and God has concluded them all in unbelief, that
he might have mercy upon all, -- And by the righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon all men unto justification of life; -- He tasted of death for all
men, or distributively for every man. All which texts are rightly interpreted
by Caiphas, He prophesied that Jesus should dye for that Nation; John 11.51, 52.
and not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together in one
the children of God, that were scattered abroad. And thus John brings in the
four beasts, and four and twenty Elders, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
book, Rev. 5.9.
and to open the seals thereof for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and
thus Paul rightly argues, Is he the God of the Jews only? Romans 3.29.
is he not of the Gentiles also? yes, of the Gentiles also. O the fullness of
Christ's death! -- many are apt to complain, Would Christ dye for me? why alas,
I am an alien, I am not of the commonwealth of Israel, I am a dog, I am a
sinner, a grievous sinner, Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 16.
a sinner of the Gentiles: And what then? Ye who sometimes were afar off, are
now made nigh by the blood of Christ, for he is our peace, who has made both
one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us; that he
might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross. Oh what encouragement
is this for thee to believe thy part in the death of Christ?

2. Consider the worth, the excellency of this glorious object, Christ
crucified. There is an infinite of worth in the death of Christ; and this
arises, first from the dignity of his person, he was God-man; the death of
Angels and men if put together, could not have amounted to the excellency of
Christ's death; stand amazed at thy happiness; O believer, thou have gained by
thy loss, thou have lost the righteousness of a creature, but the righteousness
of an infinite person is now made thine; Romans 10.3. 2 Cor. 5.21.
hence it is many times called the Righteousness of God: both because Christ is
God: and because it is such a righteousness as God is satisfied with; he looks
for no better, yea, there can be no better. 2. This worth is not only in
respect of the dignity of the person, but also in respect of the price offered;
O it was the blood of Christ, one drop whereof is of more worth than thousands
of gold and silver. Acts 20.28.
It was this blood that purchased the whole Church of God, which a thousand
worlds of wealth could never have done. 3. This worth is not only in respect of
the person and price neither, but also in respect of the manner of the
oblation; 2 Pet. 1 18.
Christ must dye on the Cross as it was determined; the price in it self, is
not enough, unless it be ordered and proportioned according to the will of him,
who is to be satisfied; if a man should give for a captive prisoner an infinite
sum of money, sufficient in it self to redeem a thousand, yet if not according
to such a way as the conqueror prescribes, if not according to the condition,
it could not be called a satisfaction; now this was the condition that Christ
must die, and dye that death of the Cross, and accordingly he undertook, and
performed, which set a luster, and glory, and excellency, and worth upon his
death. O the worth, O the excellency of this death of Christ! -- many are apt
to complain, O the filth of my sins! Oh the injuries and unkindness that have
been in mine iniquities! it is not my misery, my destruction that so much
troubles me, as that God is displeased. Sweet soul! turn thine eyes hither;
surely this death of Christ is more satisfactory to God, than all thy sins
possibly can be displeasing to God; there was more sweet savor in Christ's
sacrifice, than there could be offense in all thy sins; the excellency of
Christ's death in making righteous, does super-abound the filthiness of sin in
making a sinner. Come on then, and close with Christ upon this encouragement;
there is a dignity, an excellency, in this object of faith, Christ crucified.

3. Consider the suitableness of this blessed object, The death of Christ.
There is in it a sutableness to our sinful condition, whatsoever the sin is; it
is the cry of some, They dare not believe, they dare not touch Christ
crucified, they dare not approach to that precious blood, because of this sin,
and that sin, and the other sin. Whereas in the death and blood of Christ (if
they could but take a full view of it) they might find something suitable to
their estate: As for instance, suppose thy sin the greatest sin imaginable,
except that against the holy Ghost; art thou a murderer? have thou had thy
hands imbrued in the blood of Saints? why see now how Christ for thy sake was
esteemed of the Jews, a murderer, and worse than a murderer; Barabbas is
preferred before Jesus, Barabbas is released, and Jesus is murdered; yea, his
blood is shed, to wash away thy bloodshed: art thou a Sorcerer, a Negromancer?
is thy sin the sin of Manasseh, of whom it is said, 2 Chronicles. 33.6
that that he used enchantments, and witchcraft; and dealt with a familiar
spirit, and with wizards; why, see now how Jesus Christ for thy sake was
esteemed of the Jews as an impostor, an inchanter; for so some say, that he got
the Name of God, and sowed it in his thigh, and by virtue thereof he wrought
all his miracles, and they commonly reported of him that he had a devil, and
that he cast out devils through Beelzebub Prince of devils. Art thou a
blasphemer? have thou joined with those in these sad times, who have opened
their mouths against the God of Heaven, enough to make a Christian rend his
heart, and weep in blood? why see now how Jesus for thy sake was judged of
Caiaphas, and all the Sanhedrim, for a blasphemer of God, and that in the
highest kind of blasphemy, Mat. 26.65.
as making himself equal with God; yea, see how the high Priest rends his
clothes, saying, he has spoken blasphemy; Surely all this he endured, that
very blasphemers may find mercy, if they will but come in, and believe in
Jesus. I might instance in other sins; art thou a Traitor, a glutton, a
drunkard, a wine-bibber, a thief, a seducer, a companion of sinners? why, see
now how Jesus Christ was for thy sake, thus called, reputed, accounted;
whatever the sin is, there is something in Christ that answers that very
sinfulness; thou art a sinner, and he is made sin, to satisfy the wrath of God
even for thy sin; thou art such, and such a sinner, and he is accounted such
and such a sinner for thy sake, that thou might find in him something
suitable to thy condition, and so the rather be encouraged to believe, that in
him, and through him all thy sins shall be done away. Away, away unbelief,
distrust, despair! you see now the brazen serpent lifted up, you see what a
blessed object is before you; O believe! O look up unto Jesus! O believe in him
thus carrying on the work of thy salvation in his death.

SECT. VI. Of loving Jesus in that respect.
6. LEt us love Jesus as carrying on the great work of our Salvation for us
during his sufferings and death. What! did he suffer and dye? Romans 5.8.
Greater love than this has no man, that a man should give his life for his
friends; -- but God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ dyed for us. Why here is an argument of love indeed, how should
we but love him, who has thus loved us? in prosecution of this I have no more
to do, but first to show Christ's love to us, and then to exercise our love to
him again.

1. For his love to us; had not God said it, and the Scriptures recorded it,
who would have believed our reports? yet Christ has done it, and it is worth
our while to weigh it, and consider it in an holy meditation. -- Indeed with
what less than ravishment of Spirit can I behold the Lord Jesus who from
everlasting was clothed with Glory and Majesty, now wrapped in rags, cradled
in a manger, exposed to hunger, thirst, weariness, danger, contempt, poverty,
revilings, scourgings, persecution? but to let them pass: into what ecstasies
may I be cast to see the Judge of all the world accused, judged, condemned? to
see the Lord of life dying upon the tree of shame and curse? to see the eternal
Son of God struggling with his Fathers wrath? to see him who had said, I and my
Father are one, sweating drops of blood in his agony, and crying out on his
cross, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh whither has his love to
mankind carried him? had he only sent his creatures to serve us, had he only
sent his Prophets to advise us in the way to Heaven, had he only sent his
Angels from his chamber of presence to attend upon us, and to minister to us,
it had been a great deal of mercy; or if it must be so, had Christ come down
from Heaven hnmself, but only to visit us, or had he come only and wept over
us, saying, Oh that you had known, even you in this your day the things
belonging to your peace! Oh that you had more considered of my goodness! Oh
that you had never sinned! this would have been such a mercy as that all the
world would have wondered at it: but that Christ himself should come, and lay
down his blood, and life, and all for his people; and yet I am not at the
lowest, that he should not only part with life, but part with the sense, and
sweetness of God's love, which is a thousand times better than life, Psalm. 63.3.
Thy loving kindness is better than life; that he should be content to be
accursed, that we might be blessed; that he should be content to be forsaken,
that we might not be forsaken; that he should be content to be condemned that
we might be acquitted; O what raptures of Spirit can be sufficient for the
admiration of this so infinite mercy? be thou swallowed up O my soul in this
depth of Divine love; and hate to spend thy thoughts any more upon the base
objects of this wretched world, when thou have such a Savior to take them up.
-- Come look on thy Jesus, who dyed temporally, that thou might live
eternally: who out of his singular tenderness would not suffer thee to burn in
hell, for ten, twenty, thirty, forty, an hundred years, and then recover thee,
by which notwithstanding he might better and deeper have imprinted in thee the
blessed memory of a dear Redeemer; no, no, this was the Article betwixt him and
his Father, That thou should never come there; see but, observe but Christ's
love in that mutual agreement betwixt God and Christ, Oh I am pressed (says
God) with the sins of the world as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves,
come my Son, either thou must suffer, or I must damn the world: Accordingly I
may imagine the Attributes of God to speak to God, Mercy cries, I am abused,
and Patience cries, I am despised; and goodness cries, I am wronged; and
Holiness cries, I am contradicted; and all these come to the Father for
Justice, crying to him, that all the world were opposers of his Grace and
Spirit, and if any be saved Christ must be punished. In this case we must
imagine Christ stepped in, nay rather than so, (says Christ) I will bear all,
and undertake the satisfying of all. And now look upon him! he hangs on the
cross all naked, all torn, all bloody; betwixt Heaven and Earth, as if he were
cast out of Heaven, and also rejected by Earth; he has a Crown indeed, but
such a one as few men will touch, none will take from him; and if any rash man
will have it, he must tear hair, skin, and all, or it will not come; his hair
is all clodded with blood, his face all clouded with black and blew, he is all
over so pitifully rent, outward, inwards, body and soul. -- I will think the
rest; alas, when I have spoken all I can, I shall speak under it, had I the
tongues of men and Angels, I could not express it; Oh love more deep than hell!
Oh love more high than heaven! the brightest Seraphims that burn in love, are
but as sparkles to that mighty flame of love in the heart of Jesus.

2. If this be Christ's love to us, what is that love we owe to Christ? Oh now
for an heart that might be some ways answerable to these mercies! Oh for a
soul sick of love, yea sick unto death! how should I be otherwise, or any less
affected, this only sickness is our health, this death our life, and not to be
thus sick is to be dead in sins and trespasses; why, surely I have heard
enough, for which to love Christ for ever. The depths of God's grace are
bottomless, they pass our understandings, yet they recreate our hearts; they
give matter of admiration, yet they are not devoid of consolation: O God raise
up our souls to thee, and if our Spirits be too weak to know thee, make our
affections ardent and sincere to love thee.

Surely the death of Christ requires this, and calls for this: many other
motives we may draw from Christ, and many other motives are laid down in the
Gospel, and indeed the whole Gospel is no other thing than a motive to draw man
to God by the force of God's love to man; in this sense the holy Scriptures may
be called the book of true love, seeing therein God both unfolds his love to
us, and also binds our love to him; but of all the motives we may draw from
Christ, and of all the arguments we may find in the Gospel of Christ, there is
none to this, the death of Christ, the blood of Jesus: is not this such a
love-letter, as never, never was the like? read the words, For his great love
wherewith he loved us, Ephesians. 2.4. or if you cannot read, observe the
Hyeroglyphicks, every stripe is a letter, every nail is a capital letter, every
bruise is a black letter, his bleeding wounds are as so many rubricks to show
upon record: Oh consider it, is not this a great love? are not all mercies
wrapped up in the blood of Christ? it may be thou have riches, honors, friends,
means, Oh but thank the blood of Christ for all thou have; it may be thou have
grace, and that is better than corn, or wine, or oil? Oh but for this thank the
blood of Jesus, surely it was the blood of Christ that did this for thee; thou
wast a rebellious soul, thou have an hard and filthy heart, but Christ's blood
was the fountain opened, and it took away all sin, and all uncleanness; Christ
in all, and Christ above all, and will thou not love him? Oh that all our words
were words of love, and all our labor, labor of love, and all our thoughts,
thoughts of love; that we might speak of love, and muse of love, and love this
Christ, who has first loved us, with all our heart, and soul, and might! what?
will thou not love Jesus Christ? let me ask thee then, whom will thou love? or
rather whom can thou love, if thou love not him? if thou say, I love my
Friends, Parents, Wife, Children; Oh but love Christ more than these; a friend
would be an enemy, but that the blood of Christ does frame his heart; a Wife
would be a trouble, but that the blood of Christ does frame her heart; all
mercies are conveyed to us through this channel; Oh who would not love the
Fountain? -- consider of it again and again, our Jesus thought nothing too good
for us, he parts with his life and blood, he parts with the sense and feeling
of the love of God, and all this for us, and for our sakes; Ah my soul, how
should thou but love him in all things, and by all means?

It is reported of Ignatius, that he so continually meditated on the great
things Christ suffered for him, that he was brought entirely to love him: and
when he was demanded, why he would not forsake Christ, rather than suffer
himself to be torn and devoured of wild beasts? he answered, that he could not
forget him because of his sufferings; Oh his sufferings (said he) are not
transcient words, or removable objects, but they are indelible characters, so
engraven in my heart, that all the torments of earth can never raze them out.
And being commanded by that bloody Tyrant Trajane to be ripped and unbowelled,
they found Jesus Christ written upon his heart in Characters of Gold. Here was
an heart worth Gold; Oh that it might be thus with us! If my hands were all of
love, that I could work nothing but love; if my eyes were all of love, that I
could see nothing but love; if my mind were all of love, that I could think of
nothing but love; all were too little to love that Christ, who has thus
immeasurably loved me; if I had a thousand hearts to bestow on Christ, and they
most enlarged and scrued up to the highest pitch of affection, all these were
infinitely short of what I owe to my dread Lord, and dearest Savior. Come
let us join hands, He loved us, and therefore let us love him: if we dispute the
former, I argue from the Jews, when he shed but a few tears out of his eyes at
Lazarus's grave, then said the Jews, John 11.36
behold how he loved him, John 11.36. how much more truly may it be said of us
for whom he shed both water and blood, and that from his heart, Behold how he
loved us; why then, if our hearts be not Iron, yea if they be Iron, how should
they choose but feel the magnetical force of this Loadstone of love; for to a
Loadstone does Christ resemble himself, when he says of himself; And I, if I
be lifted up from the earth, John 12.32.
will draw all men unto me.

SECT. VII. Of joying in Jesus in that Respect.
7. LEt us joy in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of Salvation, in his
sufferings and death: what? has Christ suffered for us? has he drunk off all
the cup of God's wrath, and left none for us? how should we be but cheered?
Precious souls! why are you afraid; there is no death, no hell, Romans 8.1.
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. There is no divine justice
for them to undergo, that have their share in this death of Christ; Oh the
Grace and Mercy that is purchased by this means of Christ! Oh the waters of
comfort that flow from the sufferings, and obedience of Christ! Christ was
amazed, that we might be cheered: Christ was imprisoned, that we might be
delivered; Christ was accused, that we might be acquitted; Christ was
condemned, that we might be redeemed; Christ suffered his Fathers wrath, and
came under it, that the victory might be ours, and that in the end we might see
him face to face in glory: is not here matter of Joy? It may be the Law, and
sin, and justice, and conscience, and death, and hell, may appear as enemies,
and disturb thy comforts; but is there not enough in the blood of Christ to
chase them away? Give me Leave but to frame the objections of some doubting
souls; and see whether Christ's death will not sufficiently answer, and solve
them all.

1. One cries thus, Oh I know not what will become of me, my sins are ever
before me; against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight. Psalm. 51.3, 4.
I have sinned against a most dear, and gracious, and merciful God and Father
in our Lord Jesus; O the aggravations of my sins! are they not sins above
measure sinful.

It may be so, but the blood of Christ is a fountain opened for sins and for
uncleanness; in him we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins. Zach. 13.1. Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 1.3. Heb. 9.26. Ver. 28. Levit. 16.21, 22.
-- He by himself purged our sins. -- And now once in the end of the world has
he appeared, put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. -- And Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many. (...), to bear away the sins of many. As the
Scape-coat under the Law had upon his head all the iniquities of the Children
of Israel, and so was sent away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness;
so the Lord Jesus (of whom that Goat was a type) had all the iniquities of his
Elect laid upon him by God his Father, and bearing them, he took them away,
Behold the Lamb of God, John 1.29.
that takes away the sins of the world; he bore them, and bore them away; he
went away with them into the wilderness, or into the land of forgetfulness. See
what comfort is here.

2. Another cries thus, Oh I know not what will become of me, the Law is mine
enemy, I have transgressed the Law, and it speaks terribly, Gal. 3.10.
cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them: Oh I have offended the Law, and I am under the
curse.

Say not so, for by the death of Christ, though the Law be broken, yet the
curse is removed; the Apostle is clear, Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
being made a curse for us; he was made a curse for us, (i.e.) the fruits and
effects of God's curse, the punishment due to sinners, the penal curse which
justice required, was laid upon Christ, and by this means we are freed from the
curse of the Law. It is true, that without Christ thou art under this Law, Do,
or Die, end if thou offendest in the least kind thou shall perish for ever, the
curse of the Law is upon thee to the uttermost; but on the other side, if thy
claim be right to the blood of Christ, thou art freed from penalty; not but
that we may be corrected and chastised, but what is that to the eternal curse
which the Law pronounces against every sin? we are freed from the curse, or
damnatory sentence of the Law, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; the Law is
satisfied, and the bond is cancelled by our Surety Christ. O what comfort is
this?

3. Another cries thus? Oh I know not what will become of me, I have offended
justice; and what shall appeal from the seat of justice, to the throne of
grace? my sins are gone before, and they are knocking at heaven gates, and
crying, justice Lord on this sinner; I know not what will be the issue, but
either free Grace must save me, or I am gone.

Say not so, for by this death of Christ, free grace, and justice are both thy
friends. How e're some do, yet certainly thou needs not to appeal from the
court of justice to the Mercy-seat; in this mystery of Godliness there may be
as much comfort in standing before the Bar of justice, as at the Mercy-seat,
(i.e.) by standing therein, and through the Lord Jesus Christ, yea, this is the
Gospel-way, to go to God the Father, and to tender up to him the active and
passive righteousness of Christ his Son for an atonement, and satisfaction for
our sins, in this way is the comfort of justification brought; if we go to God
in any other way than this, it is but in a natural way, and not in a true
Evangelical way. A man by nature may know thus much, that when he has sinned,
he must seek unto God for mercy, but to seek unto God for pardon with a price
in our hands, to tender up the merits of Jesus Christ for a satisfaction to
Divine justice, here is the mystery of Faith; and yet I speak not against
relying on God's mercy for pardon, but what need we to appeal from justice to
mercy, when by faith we may tender the death of Christ, and so find acceptance
with the justice of God it self? come soul, and let me tell thee for thy
comfort, if thou have any share in the death of Christ, thou have two tenures
to hold thy pardon and salvation by, Mercy, and justice; free grace, and
righteousness; mercy in respect of thee, and justice in respect of Christ; not
only is free grace ready to acquit thee, but a full price is laid down to
discharge thee of all thy sins: so that now when the Prince of this World comes
against thee, thou may say in some sense as Christ did. He can find nothing
in me, for how can he accuse me, seeing Christ is my Surety? seeing the bond
has been sued, and Christ Jesus would not leave one farthing unpaid? as Paul
said to Philemon concerning Onesimus, if he have wronged thee, or owe thee any
thing, put it on my account; so does Christ say to God, if these have wronged
thy Majesty, or owe thee any thing, put it on me. Paul indeed added, I Paul
have written it with mine own hand, but Christ speaks thus, Genesis 2.17.
I Jesus have ratified and confirmed it with my own blood.

4. Another cries thus, Oh I know not what will become of me, the first threat
that ever was (in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die) now
sits on my spirit; methinks I see the grizly form of death standing before me;
Oh this is he that is the King of fears, the chief of terrors, the inlet to all
those Plagues in another world; and die I must, there is no remedy; Romans 8.94.
Oh I startle, and am afraid of it.

And why so? it is Christ that dyed, and by his death he has took away the
sting of death, that now the drone may hiss, but cannot hurt: come, meditate
much upon the death of Christ, and thou shall find matter enough in his death,
for the subduing of thy slavish fears of death, both in the merit of it, in the
effect of it, and in the end of it. 1. In the merit of it; Christ's death is
meritorious, and in that respect the writ of mortallity is but to the Saints a
writ of ease, a passage into Glory. 2. In the effect of it, Christ's death is
the conquest of death; Christ went down into the grave to make a backdoor,
that the grave which was before a prison, might now be a thorough-fare; so that
all his Saints may with ease pass through, and sing, O death where is thy
sting? Heb. 2.14, 15.
Oh hell where is thy victory? 3. In the end of it, Chri'sts death amongst
other ends aims at the ruin of him that had the Power of death; that is, the
Devil; and to deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time
in bondage. Christ pursued this end in dying, to deliver thee from the fear of
death; and if now thou fear, thy fearing is a kind of making Christ 's death
of none effect. O come, and with joy draw water out of this well of Salvation!
Isa. 12.3.


5. Another cries thus, Oh I know not what will become of me; the very thoughts
of hell seem to astonish my heart; methinks I see a little peep-hole down into
hell and the devil roaring there, being reserved in chains under darkness,
until the judgment of the great day; and methinks I see the damned flaming,
and Judas, and all the wicked in the world, and they of Sodom, and Gomorrah
there lying, and roaing, and gnashing their teeth: now, I have sinned, and why
should not I be damned? Oh why should not the wrath of God be executed on me,
yea even upon me?

I answer, the death of Christ acquits thee of all. Romans 20.6.
Blessed is he that has a part in the first resurrection, on such the second
death has no power. Christ's death has took away the pains of the second
death, yea, pains and power too, for it shall never oppress such as belong to
Christ. If Hell and Devils could speak a word of truth, they would say, Comfort
your selves ye believing souls, we have no power over you, for the Lord Jesus
has conquered us, and we have quite lost the cause. Paul was very confident of
this, and therefore he throws down the Gauntlet, and challenges a dispute with
all comers, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Romans 8.33, 34.
it is God that justifies; who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed:
let sin, and the law, and justice, and death, and hell, yea, and all the Devils
in Hell unite their forces, this one argument of Christ's death (it is Christ
that dyed) will be enough to confute and confound them all.

Come then, and comfort your selves all believers in this death of Christ;
what? do you believe? and are you confident that you do believe? why then do
you sit drooping? What manner of communications are these that you have, as ye
walk, and are sad? Luke 24.17.
Away, away dumpishness, despair, disquietness of spirit? Christ is dead, that
you might live, and be blessed, in this respect every thing speaks comfort, if
you could but see it; God and men, heaven and earth, Angels and devils; the
very justice of God it self, is now your friend, and bids you go away
comforted, for it is satisfied to the full; Heaven it self waits on you, and
keeps the doors open that your souls may enter; We have boldness (says the
Apostle) to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.20.
by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us through the veil,
that is to say, his flesh. Christ's death has set open all the golden gates
and doors of glory; and therefore go away chearily, and get you to heaven, and
when you come there, be discouraged, or discomforted if you can. O my soul, I
see thou art pouring on sin, on thy crimson sins, and scarlet sins, but I would
have thee dwell on that crimson scarlet blood of Christ; Oh it is the blood of
sprinkling, it speaks better things than the blood of Abel, it cries for mercy,
and pardon, and refreshing, and salvation; thy sins cry, Lord do me justice
against such a soul; but the blood of Christ has another cry, I am abased, and
humbled, and I have answered all. Methinks this should make thy heart leap for
joy; Oh the honey, the sweet that we may suck out of this blood of Christ! come
lay to thy mouth, and drink an hearty draught, it is this spiritual wine that
makes merry the heart of man; and it is the voice of Christ to all his guests,
Eat O friends, Cant. 5.1
drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.

SECT. VIII. Of calling on Jesus in that respect.
8. LEt us call on Jesus, or on God the Father in and through Jesus.

1. We must pray that all these Transactions of Christ in his sufferings and
death may be ours; if we direct our prayers immediately to Jesus Christ, let us
tell him what anguish and pains he has suffered for our sakes; and let us
complain against our selves, Oh what shall we do, who by our sins have so
tormented our dearest Lord? what contrition can be great enough, what tears
sufficiently expressive, what hatred and detestation equal, and commensurate to
those sad and heavy sufferings of our Jesus? And then let us pray, that he
would pity us, and forgive us those sins wherewith we crucified him, that he
would bestow on us the virtue of his sufferings and death, that his wounds
might heal us, his death might quicken us, and his blood might cleanse us from
all our spiritual filth of sin; and lastly, that he would assure us that his
death is ours; that he would persuade us, That neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor principalities nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature should be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. We must praise the Lord for all these sufferings of Christ. Has he indeed
suffered all these punishments for us? Oh then what shall we render unto the
Lord for all his benefits upon us? what shall we do for him, who has done and
suffered all these things? but especially, if we believe our part in the death
of Christ; in all the virtues, benefits, victories, purchases, and privileges
of his precious death, oh then what manifold cause of thankfulness and praise
is here? be enlarged O my soul, sound forth the praises of thy Christ, tell all
the world of that warmest love of Christ, which flowed with his blood out of
all his wounds into thy spirit; tune thy heart strings aright, and keep consort
with all the Angels of Heaven, and all his Saints on earth; sing that Psalm of
John the Divine, Rev. 1.5, 6.
Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has
made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father, to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

SECT. IX. Of conforming to Jesus in that respect.
9. LEt us conform to Jesus in respect of his sufferings and death, looking
unto Jesus is effective of this; objects have an attractive power, that do
assimulate, or make like unto them. I have read of a woman, that by fixing the
strength of her imagination upon a Blackamore on the wall, she brought forth a
black and swarthy child. And no question but there is a kind of
spiritual-imaginative of power in faith to be like to Christ by looking on
Christ; come then, and let us look on Christ, and conform to Christ in this
respect.

In this particular I shall examine these Queries: 1. Wherein we must conform?
2. What is the cause of this conformity? 3. What are the means of this
conformity as on our parts?

For the first, wherein we must conform? I answer; we must conform to Christ in
his graces, sufferings, death.

1. In the graces that most eminently shined in his bitter passion; his life
indeed was a gracious life, John 1.16.
he was full of grace, And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for
grace, but his graces shined most clearly and brightly at his death; as a Lilly
amongst the Thorns seems most beautiful, so his graces in his sufferings show
most excellent; I shall instance in some of them: As --

1. His humility was profound; what? that the most high God, that the only
begotten, and eternal Son of God, should vouchsafe so far as to be contemned,
and less esteemed than Barabbas a murderer? that Christ should be crucified
upon a cross betwixt two thieves, as if he had been the ringleader of all
malefactors? O what humility was this?

2. His patience was wonderful; in respect of this, the Apostle Peter sets
Christ as a blessed example before our eyes; If when ye do well, and suffer for
it, ye take it patiently, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, 23.
this is acceptable with God, for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps. --
Who when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened
not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. O the patience of
Christ!

1 John 4.10.
3. His love was fervent; Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. This love is an
examplar of all love; it is the fire that should kindle all our sparks; Be ye
followers of God (says the Apostle) as dear children: Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
and walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us
an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Some observe,
that in the Temple there were two Altars, the brazen, and the golden; the
brazen Altar was for bloody Sacrifices, the golden Altar was for the offering
of Incense; now the former was a type of Christ's bloody offering upon the
cross, the latter of Christ's sweet intercession for us in his glory; in regard
of both, the Apostle tells that Christ gave himself both for an offering and
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God. O what love was this!

4. His mercy was abundant; he took upon him all the miseries and debts of the
world, and he made satisfaction for them all; he acted our redemption
immediately in his own person, he would not entrust it to Angels, but he would
come himself and suffer; nor would he give a low and base price for our souls,
he saw the misery was great, and his mercy should be more great; he would buy
us with so great a ransom, as that he might over-buy us, and none might
out-bid him in the market of our souls; O we under-bid, and under-value the
mercy of God, who over-valued us; we will not sell all to buy him, but he sold
all he had, and himself too to buy us; indeed if he had not done it, we had
been damned; and to save our souls, he cared not what he did or suffered. O the
mercy of Christ!

5. His meekness was passing great; in all the process of his passion, he
showed not the least passion of wrath or anger; he suffered himself gently and
quietly to be carried like a sheep to the Butchery, and as a Lamb before
shearer is dumb, so opened he not his mouth: a Lamb is a most meek and innocent
creature, John 1.29.
and therefore is Christ called the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of
the world. -- And, he was a brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; why, a Lamb
goes as quietly to the shambles, Isa. 53.7.
as if it were going to the fold, or to the pasture-field where its Dam
seedeth; and so went Christ to his Cross. O the meekness of Christ!

6. His contempt of the world was to admiration; he tells them, John 18.36.
John 6.15.
his Kingdom was not of this world. When a Crown was offered him, and forced
upon him, he refused it; but above all, behold the Bed where the Bridegroom
lies and sleeps at noonday; here is but an hard flock, and narrow room; O
blessed head of a dear Redeemer! how is it that thou have not a pillow where to
rest thy self? He hangs on the Cross all naked; few Kings do so: he has no
Crown for his head, but one of thorns; he has no delicates, but Gall and
Vinegar; he is leaving the world, and he has no other Legacies to give his
friends, but spiritual things; Peace I leave with you, John 14.27.
my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you. He had so
contemned the world, that he had not a Legacy in all the world to give: Not as
the world gives, give I unto you.

7. His obedience was constant: He became obedient unto death, Phil. 2.8. John
5.30.
even the death of the Cross -- He sought not his own will, but the will of him
that sent him. There was a command that the Father laid on Christ from all
eternity: O my Son, my only begotten Son, thou must go down, and leave Heaven,
and empty thy self, and die the death, even the death of the Cross, and go and
bring up the fallen sons of Adam out of Hell. Mankind, like a precious Ring
Glory, fell off the Finger of Almighty God, and was broken all in pieces; and
thereupon was the command of God, that his Son must stoop down, though it pain
his back; he must lift up again the broken Jewel, he must restore it, and mend
it, and set it as a Seal on the heart of God; all which the Lord Jesus did in
time; he was obedient till death, and obedient to death, even to the death of
the Cross. Son, thou must die, said God; why Father, I will do it, said Christ:
and accordingly he freely made his Soul an Offering for sin.

Now in all these Graces we must conform to Christ. Learn of me, Mat. 11.29.
Ephesians. 5.2.
for I am meek and lowly. -- And, walk in love, as Christ also has loved us:
It is as if Christ had said, mark the steps where I have trod, and follow me
in humility, in patience, in love, in mercy, in meekness, in contempt of the
world, in obedience unto death; in these, and the like Graces you must conform
unto Christ.

2. We must conform to Christ in his sufferings, if he call us to them, Phil.
3.10.
this was the Apostle's Prayer, that I may know him, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings; it was his desire that he
might experimentally know what exceeding joy and comfort it was to suffer for
Christ, and with Christ. Concerning this, the other Apostle speaks also, Christ
suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2.21.
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. But the Text that seems
so pertinent, and yet so difficult, is that of Paul, I now rejoice in my
sufferings for you, Col. 1.24.
and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for
his bodies sake, which is the Church: One would wonder how Paul should fill up
that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ; were Christ's suffeings
imperfect? and much Paul add to them? no surely? for by one offering Christ
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. I shall not insist on many
Commentaries; Heb. 10.14.
I suppose this is the genuine sense and meaning of the Spirit. Now rejoice I
in my sufferings for you, whereby I fulfill the measure of those tribulations
which remain yet to be endured of Christ in his mystical body, which I do for
the bodies sake, not to satisfy for it, but to confirm it, or strengthen it by
my example in the Gospel of Christ. The sufferings of Christ are either
personal or general; his personal sufferings were those he endured in his own
body, as Mediator; which once for ever he finished: his general sufferings are
those which he endures in his mystical body, which is, the Church; as he is a
Member with the rest; and these are the sufferings Paul speaks of, and which
Paul fills up.

But wherein is the conformity betwixt our sufferings, and the sufferings of
Christ? I answer, 1. Negatively, 2. Positively.

1. Negatively, our sufferings have no conformity with Christ in these two
things: 1. Not in the Office of Christ's sufferings; for his were meritorious
and satisfactory, ours only ministerial, and for edification. 2. Not in the
weight and measure of Christ's sufferings; for his were bitter, heavy, and
woeful, such as would have pressed any other Creature as low as Hell, and have
swallowed him up for ever; but ours are but in comparison light and tolerable:
There has no temptation taken you but such as is common to man; 1 Cor. 10.13.
for God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able.

2. Positively, our sufferings must have conformity with Christ. 1. In the
cause of them; Christ's sufferings were instrumentally from Satan and wicked
men; we must look to suffer by the enemies of Christ, if we have any share in
Christ; the enemy continues still; Genesis 3.15.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed. This was primarily meant betwixt the Devil and Christ; but if we conform
to Christ, we must expect the very same conditions. 2. In the manner of
undergoing them; we must suffer with a proportion of that humility, and
patience, and love, and meekness and obedience which Christ showed in his very
sufferings. 3. In respect of the issue of them; we must look upon Christ's
issue, and expect it to be ours: Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, Luke 24.26. Romans 8.17. 2 Tit. 2.12.
and so enter into Glory? -- And, if so be that we suffer with Christ, we shall
be glorified together with Christ. -- If we suffer with him, we shall also
reign with him.

By reason of this conformity, we have that communion and association with
Christ in all these particulars; as, 1. We have Christ's strength to bear
sufferings 2. His Victories to overcome sufferings. 3. His Intercession to
preserve us from falling away in sufferings. 4. His Compassion to moderate and
proportion our sufferings to the measure of strength which he has given us. 5.
His Spirit to draw in the same yoke with us, and to hold us under all
sufferings, that we sink not. 6. His Graces to be more glorious by our
sufferings, as a Torch, when it is shaken, shines the brighter. 7. His Crown to
reward our sufferings when we shall have tasted our measure of them. For our
light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

O my Soul! study this conformity, and be content with thy portion; yea,
comfort thy self in this condition of sufferings; must we not drink of our
Savior's Cup? what, not of our Master's own Cup? We read of Godfrey of
Bullein, that he would not be crowned in Jerusalem with a Crown of Gold, where
Christ was crowned with a Crown of Thorns, because he would not have such a
great disproportion betwixt him and Christ: and we read of Origin, that when
Alexander Severus the Emperor sent for him to Rome, and that he might take his
choice, whether he would ride thither on a Mule, or in a Chariot, that he
refused them both, saying, he was less than his Master Christ, of whom he never
read that he rode but once. O the sufferings Christ endured! he was called a
Wine-bibber, a Samaritane, a Devil; he was pursued, entrapped, snared, 2 Timothy
3.12.
slain: And surely they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution. Never wonder that thou art hated of men, or persecuted of men;
why, I tell thee, if Christ himself were now amongst us in the form and fashion
of a servant, in that very condition that sometimes he was, and should convince
men of their wickedness as searchingly as sometimes he did, I verily think he
would be the most hated man in all the world. It Is plain enough what carnal men
would do, by these very doings of the carnal Jews.

3. We must conform to Christ in his death, carrying in us a resemblance and
representation of his death. But what death is this? I answer in a word, a
death unto sin; so the Apostle; Romans 6.10, 11. Romans 6.5.
in that he died, unto sin; -- likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed
unto sin. There is a likeness betwixt Christ's death, and our death, in this
respect, we are planted together in the likeness of his death. True
Mortification carries a similitude, a likeness, a resemblance of the death of
Christ. As for instance.

See Mr. Brinsley at large, mystical implantation. John 10.17, 18 Psalm. 100.3.
1. Christ's death was a voluntary death. I lay down my life that I may take it
again; no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again; not all men on earth, nor all
Devils in Hell could have enforced Christ's death, if he had not pleased; his
death was a voluntary death, a spontaneous act; so is our mortification: Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy power; many may leave their sins
against their wills; but this is not true mortification; it bears not in it the
likeness of Christ's death; for he died willingly: it may be thou have a
clamorous Conscience, which continually dogs thee, and therefore thou leavest
thy sin; thus Judas came in with his thirty pieces of silver, Mat. 27.5.
and cast them down in the Temple at the High Priest's feet; but no thanks to
Judas, for they were too hot for him to hold; or it may be there is some
penalty of the Law, or some temporal judgment that hangs over thy head, like
Democles s sword, and therefore thou leavest thy sin; thus Ahab for a time acts
the part of a penitent, but no thanks to Ahab; for the Prophet had rung him
such a peal for his fin, as made both his ears tingle; 1 King 21.19.
In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood,
even thine; or it may be there is in thee a fear of Hell, in thy apprehension
death is come, and is ready to carry thee before the dreadful Tribunal of a
terrible God, and therefore thou leavest thy sin; thus Seamen in a stress,
part with their goods, not because they are out of love with them, but because
they love their lives better; they see plainly that either they must part with
them, or perish with them. Now in these cases, thy leaving off sin, bears no
similitude with the death of Christ; for his death was voluntary, and true
mortification is a voluntary action.

But may there not be some reluctance in this work betwixt the flesh and the
Spirit? Quest.
and if so, is it then voluntary? I answer, --

Yes, such a reluctance we find in the humane nature of Christ concerning the
Cup, Answ. Mat. 26.39.
that it might pass from him, and yet his death was a true voluntary death. An
action is said to be voluntary, or involuntary according to the superior
faculties of the Soul, and not according to the inferior; if the reasonable
part be consenting, the action may be called voluntary, though there be some
reluctance in the sensitive appetite. Thus in the Christian, in whom there is
nature and grace, flesh and spirit, an unregenerate, and a regenerate part, if
the superior and better part be willing (I mean advisedly and deliberately
willing, with full consent of the inward man) though perhaps there may be some
reluctance in the flesh, in the unregenerate part, yet this is said to be a
true voluntary act. So then with the mind, I my self serve the Law of God, Romans
7.25, 22, 23.
but with my flesh the Law of sin. -- I delight in the Law of God after the
inward man; but I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my
mind. Paul was dead to sin according to the inward man, the regenerate part,
though he found a reluctance in his outward members; and therefore his death
to sin carried with it the resemblance of the death of Christ, it was a
voluntary death.

2. Christ's death was a violent death; he died not naturally, but violently; 1
Pet. 3.18. Isa. 53.7.
he was put to death in the flesh, he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter.
So is our mortification, it is voluntary in respect of us, but violent in
respect of sin; and herein is the life (as I may say) of this death: Oh when a
man lays violent hands on his sins; when he cuts them off, being yet in their
flower, and strength, and power, and vigor; when he pulls up those weeds before
they whither in themselves, this is true mortification: many have left their
sins, who never mortified them; so the aged Adulterer has left his Lust,
because his body is dead: and hence it is that late repentance in an aged
sinner is seldom found true: alas, he dies not to sin, but his sin dies to him:
I will not say but God may call at the eleventh hour, though it be very seldom;
but in that case you had need to be jealous over your selves with a godly
jealousy: what, do you find some sins within you to be dead, that were
sometimes alive? O be inquisitive, impannel a Jury, call a Coroners Inquest
upon your own souls, enquire how they came by their deaths; whether they died a
violent or natural death? search what wounds they have received, and whether
they were deadly wounds, yea, or no? enquire what weapon it was that slew them,
whether the Sword of the Spirit, that two-edged Sword, the Word of God? what
purposes, what resolutions have been taken up, and levelled against them? what
prayers and tears have been spent upon them? If you find not these signs, you
may g^^e in your Verdict, that they died not a violent, but a natural death.
And here is a good Caveat for others; Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them. Oh take heed of reprieving your Lusts! let them not
live till to morrow; now bring them forth in the sight and presence of God;
arraign, condemn, crucify, mortify them whiles they might yet live. Surely
this is true mortification, when the body of sin dies, as Christ died, a
violent death.

3. Christ's Death was a lingering death; he hung diverse hours upon the Cross,
From the first hour to the ninth hour, says Matthew; (i.e.) from our twelve to
three, before he gave up the Ghost. So is our mortification a lingering death;
sin is not put to death all at once, but languisheth by little and little; this
is looked upon as one main difference betwixt justification and sanctification;
the former is a perfect work, admitting of no degrees, but so is not the
latt^r; though a Believer is freed perfectly from the guilt of sin, yet not so
from the power of it; sin dwells in us, though it has not altogether a
dominion over us; Romans 7.17.
It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me; like a rebellious
Tenant, it keeps possession in despite of the owner, till the house be pulled
down over his head. True indeed, the body of sin in a regenerate soul has
received its death-wound, and in that respect it may be said to be dead, but it
is not quite dead; still it stirs and moves, dying but by degrees: What the
Apostle says of the renewing of the new man we may say of the destroying of
the old man the inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16.
and the old man is destroyed d^y by day; or as Paul said of himself, in
respect of his afflictions, we may say of a Christian in respect of his sins, I
die daily; 1 Cor. 15.31.
there is not the most sanctified soul upon earth but has some remainders of
corruption left in it, which God in his wise providence permits for the trying,
exercising, and humbling of our souls, and for the making his own rich Graces,
in renewing and multiplying pardons, so much the more glorious.

Genesis 25.22.
And here is a ground of consolation to a drooping and dejected soul; such an
one cries out, alas I feel the stirring and vigorous actings of sin, and I am
afraid my sin is not mortified; as Rebekah said, when she felt the Children
struggling within her; if it b^ so, why am I thus? so, if sin be mortified,
says the soul, why am I thus? -- trembling soul let not this discourage; Jesus
Christ was not dead so soon as he was fastened to the Cross: But have thou taken
the same course with the body of sin, that the Jews did with the body of sin?
have thou arraigned it, accused it, condemned it, and fastened it to the Cross?
have thou arraigned it at the Bar of God's judgment, accused it by way of
humble and hearty confession, condemned it in passing the sentence of eternal
condemnation upon thy self for it, and fastened it to the Cross, in beginning
the execution of it, in setting upon the mortification of it with a serious and
unfeigned resolution to use all means for its mortifying and killing? why then
be not disheartened; it may be thou feel it stirring, and struggling within
thee, and so will a crucified man do, and yet in the eye of the Law, and in the
account of all men that see him, he is a dead man; surely so is the body of
sin, when it is thus crucified; though it still move and stir, yet upon a
Gospel-account, and in God's estimation, it is no better than dead, and it
shall certainly die, it shall decay and languish, and die more and more; is not
the promise express? He that has begun the good work, Phil. 1.6.
he will perfect it to the day of Jesus Christ. Of this Paul was confident in
behalf of his Philippians; and of this let all true Believers rest confident in
respect of themselves. Thus far we see wherein we must conform to Christ, viz.
in his Graces, in his Sufferings, and in his Death.

For the Query, what is the cause of this conformity? I answer, The death of
Christ is the cause of this conformity: And that a fourfold cause. --

Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
1. It is a meritorious cause; Christ's death was of so great a price, that it
deserved at God's hands our conformity to Christ. Christ loved the Church, and
gave himself for it, that by his death he might sanctify it, and cleanse it:
-- and present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.

1 Pet. 2.21.
2. It is an exemplary cause: He suffered for us, leaving us an example that we
should follow his steps; he died for us, leaving us an example that we should
die to sin, as he died for sin, we may observe in many particulars (besides
those I have named) a proportion, analogy, and likeness betwixt Christ's death
and ours; Christ died as a servant, to note that sin should not rule, or reign
over us; Christ died as a curse, to note that we should look upon sin as a
cursed thing; Christ was fast nailed on the Cross, to note that we should put
sin out of case, yea, crucify the whole body of sin: Christ died not
presently, yet there he hung till he died, to note that we should never give
over subduing sin, while it has any life or working in us.

3. It is an efficient cause, it works this conformity by a secret virtue
issuing from it. Thus Christians are said to be engraffed with Christ in the
likene^s of his death. Romans 6.5. Phil. 3.10.
The word (...), is of a passive signification, importing not only a being
like, but a being made like, and that by a power and virtue out of our selves,
so the Apostle elsewhere interprets, That I may know him -- and the fellowship
of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death. Not conforming my
self, but being made conformable, by a power out of my self.

But how then is the power of mortification attributed to men? as, Quest. Col.
3.5. Gal. 5.24.
Mortify ye your members which are upon the earth. -- And, They which are
Christ's have crucified the flesh.

I answer, there is a twofold mortification, the one habitual, the other
practical; Answ.
the former consists in a change of the heart, turning the bent and inclination
of the heart from all manner of sin; now this is the only and immediate work of
the Spirit of Grace, breathing and working where it will; the latter consists
in the exercise of putting forth of that inward grace, in the acting of that
principle, in resisting temptations, in suppressing inordinate Lusts, in
watching against sinful and inordinate acts; now this is the work of a
regenerate person, himself cooperating with the Spirit of God, as a rational
instrument with the principal Agent, and therefore the Apostle joins both
together; If ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, Romans 8.13.
ye shall live.

4. It is an impelling, or a moving cause, as all objects are; for objects have
an attractive power. Achan saw the wedge of Gold, and then coveted it: David
saw Bathsheba, and then desired her. As the brazen Serpent did heal those who
were bitten by the fiery Serpent, tanquam objectum fidei, merely by being
looked upon, so Christ crucified does heal sin, beget grace, encourage to
sufferings by being looked upon with the eyes of Faith. Heb. 12.1, 2.
Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses,
let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and
let us run with patience the race that is set before us; looking unto Jesus the
Author and finisher of our Faith. The Apostle was to encourage the Hebrews to
hold on the well-begun profession of Faith in Christ; and to that purpose he
sets before them two fights to keep them from fainting, 1. A cloud of
witnesses, the Saints in heaven; on which cloud when he had staid their eyes a
while, and made them fit for a clearer Object, he scatters the cloud, and
presents the Sun of Righteousness, Christ himself, and he wills them (...), to
turn their eyes from it, to him, looking unto Jesus, q. d. this sight is enough
to make you run the race, and not to faint; why, Jesus is gone before you, and
will you not follow him? O look unto Jesus, and the very sight of him will draw
you after him: Christ crucified has an attractive power; And I, if I be lifted
up, John 12.32.
will draw all men to me. -- Thus of the causes of our conformity; we see how
it is wrought.

3. For the last Query; what are the means of this conformity as on our part? I
answer.

1. Go to the Cross of Jesus Christ. It is not all our purposes, resolutions,
promises, vows, covenants endeavors, without this, that will effect our
conformity to Christ in his sufferings and death; no, no, this conformity is a
fruit and effect of the death of Christ; and therefore whosoever would have
this work wrought in him, let him first have recourse to Christ's Cross: O go
we more immediately to the Cross of Jesus.

2. Look up to him that hangs upon it, contemplate the death of Jesus Christ,
consider seriously and sadly his bitter shameful, painful sufferings: Much has
been said, only here draw it into some Epitome: As, 1. Consider who he was. 2.
What he suffered. 3. Why he suffered. 4. For whom he suffered. 5. For what end
he suffered. 6. With what mind he suffered: Every one of these will make some
discoveries either of his Graces, or of his gracious actings in our behalf; and
who can tell how far this very Look may work on us to change us, and transform
us into the very image of Jesus Christ?

3. Let us humbly bewail our defect, exorbitancy, irregularity, and
inconformity either to the graces, sufferings, or death of Christ. As thus; Lo
here the profound humility, wonderful patience, fervent love, abundant mercy,
admirable meekness, constant obedience of Jesus Christ! Lo here the tortures,
torments, agonies, conflicts, extreme sufferings of Christ for the spiritual,
immortal good of the preciou^ souls of his redeemed ones: Lo here the death of
Christ, see how he bowed the head, and gave up the Ghost! why these are the
particulars to which I should conform: But Oh alas! what a wide, vast, utter
distance, disproportion is there betwixt me and them? Christ in his sufferings
shined with graces, his graces appeared in his sufferings, like so many stars
in a bright winter's night; but how dim are the faint weak Graces in my Soul?
Christ in his sufferings endured much for me, I know not how much; by thine
unknown sorrows and sufferings felt by thee' but not distinctly known to us
(said the ancient Fathers of the Greek Church, in their Liturgy) have mercy
upon us, and save us; his sorrows and sufferings were so great, that some think
it dangerous to define them; but how poor, how little are my sufferings for
Jesus Christ? I have not yet resisted unto blood, and if I had, what were this
in comparison of his extreme sufferings? Christ in his sufferings died; his
passive obedience was unto death, even to the death of the Cross: he hung on
the Cross till he bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost; Romans 6.10.
he died unto sin once: But alas! how do I live in that for which he died? To
this day my sin has not given up the Ghost; to this day the death of Christ is
not the death of my sin: O my sin is not yet crucified; the heart-blood of my
sin is not yet let out: Oh woe is me, how unanswerable am I to Christ in all
these respects?

4. Let us quicken, provoke, and rouse up our Souls to this conformity; let us
set before them exciting Arguments, ex. gr. The greatest glory that a Christian
can attain to in this world, is to have a resemblance, and likeness to Jesus
Christ. Again, the more like we are to Christ, the more we are in the love of
God, and the better he is pleased with us: It was his voice concerning his Son,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and for his sake, if we are
but like him, he is also well pleased with us. Again, a likeness or resemblance
of Christ is that which keeps Christ alive in the world: As we say of a child
that is like his Father, This man cannot die so long as his Son is alive: So we
may say of Christians who resemble Christ, that so long as they are in the
world, Christ cannot die; he lives in them, and he is no otherwise alive in
this nether world, than in the hearts of Gracious Christians, that carry the
picture and resemblance of him. Again, a likeness to Christ in his death, will
cause a likeness to Christ in his Glory, If we have been planted together in
the likeness of his death, Romans 6.5.
we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection: As it is betwixt the
Graft and the Stock, the Graft seeming dead with the Stock in the winter, it
revives with it in the Spring; after the Winter's death, it partakes of the
Spring's resurrection; so it is betwixt Christ and us; if with Christ we die to
sin, we shall with Christ be raised to Glory; being conformed to him in his
death, we shall be also in his resurrection. Thus let us quicken and provoke
our souls to this conformity.

5. Let us pray to God that he will make us conformable to Jesus Christ. Is it
Grace we want? let us beg of him, that of that fullness that is in Christ, we
may in our measure receive grace for grace. Is it patience, or joy in
sufferings that we want? let us beg of him, that as he has promised, he will
send us the comforter, that so we may follow Christ cheerfully from his cross
to his crown, from earth to heaven. Is it mortification our souls pant after?
this indeed makes us most like to Christ in his sufferings and death; why then
pray we for this mortification. --

But, how should we pray? I answer, 1. Let us plainly acknowledge, and heartily
bemoan our selves in God's bosom for our sins, our abominable sins. 2. Let us
confess our weakness, feebleness, and inability in our selves to subdue our
sins: we have no might (may we say) against this great company that come
against us, 2 Chr. 20.12.
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. 3. Let us put up our
request, begging help from heaven, let us cry to God that virtue may come out
of Christ's death to mortify our Lusts, to heal our Natures, to stanch our
bloody issues; and that the Spirit may come into helps us in these works: Romans
8.13.
for by the Spirit do we mortify the deeds of the body.

4. Let us press God with the merits of Christ, and with his promises through
Christ; for he has said, Sin shall not have dominion over us; for we are not
under the Law, but under Grace: Romans 6.14. Romans 8.2.
and Paul experienced it, The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ has freed me
from the Law of sin and death. 5. Let us praise God, and thank God for the help
already received, if we find that we have gotten some power against sin, that
we have gotten more ability to oppose the lusts of the flesh, that we are
seldom overtaken with any breaking forth of it, that we have been able to
withstand some notable temptations to it, that the force of it in us is in any
measure abated, that indeed and in truth virtue is gone out of the death of
Christ: Oh then return we praises to God, let us triumph in God, let us lead
our captivity captive, and sing new songs of praises unto God, and even ride in
triumph over our corruptions, boasting our selves in God, and setting up our
Banners in the name of the most High, and offering up humble and hearty thanks
to our Father for the death of Christ, and for the merit, virtue, and efficacy
of it derived unto us, and bestowed upon us.

6. Let us frequently return to our looking up unto Jesus Christ, to our
believing in Christ as he was lifted up. How we are to manage our Faith, to
draw down the virtue of Christ's death into our souls, I have discovered
before; and let us now be in the practice of those rules; certainly there is a
conveyance of an healing, strengthening, quickening virtue flowing into the Soul
in the time of its viewing, eying, contemplating, reflecting upon Christ
crucified, Christ lifted up; and this comes from the secret presence of God,
blessing this our looking upon Christ, as the Ordinance by which he has
appointed to make an effectual impression upon the heart. It is not for us
curiously to enquire, how this should be: Principles (we say) are not to be
proved; save only God has said it, and experience has found it out, that when
Faith is occasioned to act on any suitable sacred object, God by his Spirit does
not fail to answer, in such a case he fills the Soul with comfort, blessing,
virtue; he returns upon the Soul (by, from, and through the actings of Faith)
whatsoever by it is looked for. Indeed none knows this, but he that feels it;
and none feels this that knows how to express it; as there is somewhat in the
fire (heat, warmth and light) which no Painter can express; and as there is
somewhat in the face (heat, warmth and life) which no Limner can set forth; so
there is somewhat flowing into the soul, while it is acting faith on the Death
of Christ, which, for the rise, or way, or manner of its working, is beyond
what tongue can speak, or pen can write, or pencil can delineate. Come then, if
we would have grace, endure afflictions, die to sin, grow in our mortification:
let us again and again return to our duty of looking unto Jesus, or believing
in Jesus, as he was lifted up.

And yet when all is done, let us not think that sin will die or cease in us
altogether; for that is an higher perfection than this life will bear; only in
the use of the means, and through God's blessing, we may expect thus far, that
sin shall not reign, it shall not wear a Crown, it shall not sit in the Throne,
it shall hold no Parliaments, it shall give no laws within us; we shall not
serve it, but we shall die to the dominion of it, by virtue of this Death of
Jesus Christ. And this, He grant who died for us; Amen, Amen.

Thus far we have looked on Jesus as our Jesus; in his sufferings and death.
Our next work is to look on Jesus carrying on the great work of our Salvation
during the time of his Resurrection, and abode upon earth, until his Ascension,
or taking up to Heaven.

LOOKING UNTO JESUS In his Resurrection. The Seventh Book. PART VII.
CHAP. I.
Matthew. 28.6. He is risen. -- Come see the place where the Lord lay.

2 Timothy 2.8. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David, was raised from
the dead.


SECT. 1. Of the Time of Christ 's Resurrection.
THe Sun that went down in a ruddy cloud, is risen again with glorious beams of
light. In this piece, as in the former, we shall first lay down the Object, and
then give directions how to look upon it.

The Object is Jesus, carrying on the work of man's salvation in his
Resurrection, and during the time of his abode on earth after his Resurrection.
Now in all the transactions of this time, I shall only take notice of these two
things. 1. Of this Resurrection. 2. Of his Apparitions; for first, he rose; and
secondly, he shows himself that he was risen: in the first is the Position, in
the second is the Proof.

1. For the Position; the Scripture tells us that he rose again the third day.
In this point I shall observe these particulars. 1. When he arose. 2. Why he
arose. 3. How he arose.

1. When he arose; it was the third day after his crucifying. Mat. 12.40.
As Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the
Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. This was
the time he had appointed: and this was the time appropriated to Christ, and
marked out for him in the Calendar of the Prophets; of all those whom God
raised from death to life; there is not one that was raised on the third day,
but Jesus Christ; some rose before, and some rose after; the Son of the
Shunamite, the son of the widow of Sarephtah, the daughter of Jairus, he of
Naim, and some others rose before; Lazarus, and the Saints that rose again from
the dust when Christ rose, staid longer in the grave, but Christ takes the day,
which discovers him to be the Messiah: Luke 24.46.
Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the
dead the third day. Had he rose sooner a doubt might have been of his dying;
and had he lain longer, a doubt might have been of his rising; he would rise no
sooner, because in some diseases, as in the Apoplexy, or such like examples are
given of such, as seeming to be dead, have indeed revived; and he would lie no
longer in his grave, because in all dead carcasses (and especially in a wounded
body) putrefaction and corruption begins the third day: this may be gathered by
the Story of Lazarus in the Gospel, where Jesus commanding the stone to be
rolled from his grave, John 11.39. Psalm. 16.10.
Martha his Sister answered, Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he has been
dead four days. Now the body of Christ (as it was prophesied) must not
corrupt; for thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption. Mark this Text: All men shall rise again, but their
bodies must first see corruption; only the Messiah was to rise again before he
saw corruption; and therefore he would not delay his resurrection after the
third day. Hosea 6.2.
Some think this, and that of Hosea, after two days he will revive us, and in
the third day he will raise us up, to be the main Texts to which Christ refers,
when he said, Luke 24.46.
Thus it is written. And to which the Apostle refers, when he said, that Christ
rose again the third day according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15.4.


I dare not be too curious, in giving reasons for this set time; and the
rather, because Christ is a free worker of his own affairs; he does what he
pleases, and when he pleases; times and actions are in his own power, and he
needs not to give us any account of them; and yet so far as Scripture
discovers; we may go along; and amongst many others, I shall lay down these
following Reasons. --

1. Because the Types had so prefigured; we see it in Isaac, Jonah, and
Hezekiah, a Patriarch, a Prophet, and a King. 1. For Isaac; from the time that
God commanded Isaac to be offered for a burnt offering, Isaac was a dead man;
but the third day he was released from death; this the Text tells us expressly,
that it was the third day when Abraham came to Mount Moriah, Genesis 22.4. Heb.
11.19.
and had his Son, as it were, restored to him again, Genesis 22.4. And Paul
discovers that this was in a figure, Heb. 11.19. 2. For Jonah; from the time
that Jonah was cast into the sea, and swallowed up of the Fish, Jonah was, in
account as a dead man; but the third day the Lord spoke unto the Fish, and it
vomited up Jonah upon the dry land, Jonah 2.10.
Jonah 2.10. And that this was a figure of Christ, Christ himself discovers;
for as Jonah was three days and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the
Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. Mat. 12.40.
3. For Hezekiah; from the time that Isaiah said unto him, set thine house in
order, for thou shall die, and not live; 2 King. 20.1.
Hezekiah was, in account, as a dead man; his bed was to him as a grave; but on
the third day he was miraculously raised up again; and as the Prophet said, on
the third day thou shall go up to the house of the Lord. Ver. 5.
Surely this was a figure of Christ. And th^se Types prefiguring Christ, are as
one Reason.

2. Because the Prophets and himself had so foretold: for the Prophets we have
cited, Psalm. 16.10. Hosea 6.2. And for himself, he told them very expressly,
that he must suffer many things of the Elders, Mat. 16.21.
and chief Priests, and Scribes, and be raised again the third day; Mat 17.22
23. Mat 20.18.19.
yea, said he, the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men, and they
shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again; and after this, he
tells them again, that the Son of man should be betrayed, -- and crucified, and
the third day he should rise again: so often had he prophesied thus, that the
chief Priests and Pharisees came to Pilate after his death, Mat. 27.62, 63.64.
saying, Sir, we remember that this deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
after three days I will rise again; command therefore that the Sepulcher be
made sure until the third day. And no question his Disciples remembered these
sayings; for so the two Disciples traveling toward Emmaus, after they had
said many things concerning him, and that they trusted it had been he, which
should have redeemed Israel, they added this as a most special observation
above all the rest, Luke 24.21.
that to day is the third day since these things were done. Why, all these
signify that his rising on the third day was the accomplishment of Prophesies,
and a certain evidence that he was the Messiah indeed.

3. Because that time was most suable for comforting his friends, for
confounding his enemies, for clearing the truth both of his Humanity and
Divinity; he would stay no longer, lest his Disciples might have been swallowed
up with grief; and he would come no sooner, lest his enemies should have urged
that he had not died; the watchmen kept the Sepulcher till this very time; but
then the Angels appearing, and the earth trembling, they became as dead men;
and as soon as they could, they run away, and with their tidings confounded all
Christ's enemies. And withal, as Christ consisted both of a divine and humane
nature, so in respect of his humanity, he must die; and to show his death, it
was requisite that he should rise no sooner than the third day; and in respect
of his divinity, it was impossible that he should be held of death any longer
than three days; for as he must not see corruption, so God raised him up,
having loosed the pains of death, Acts 2.24.
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.

SECT. II. Of the Reasons of Christ's Resurrection.
2. WHy he rose, we have these Reasons. --

1. That he might powerfully convince, or confound his adversaries; they that
crucified him were mightily afraid of his Resurrection; they could tell Pilate,
Sir, we remember this deceiver said while he was yet alive, after three days I
will rise again; Mat. 27.63, 64.
and therefore they desire him of all loves to command the Sepulcher to be made
sure until the third day; if ever he rise again whom they have killed, then
they knew they were all shamed; then the last error (as they said) would be
worse than the first: All the world would look on them as a cursed generation,
to kill the Messiah, to crucify such a one as after his death and burial
should rise again; now then, that he might either convince them, or confound
them, notwithstanding their care, their watch, their Seal, their making all
sure as possibly they could; at the very same time he told them before, he
broke open the gates of death, and made the gates of Brass to fly asunder.

2. That he might confirm the faith of all his followers. If Christ be not
risen, 1 Cor. 15.14.
your Faith is vain, says the Apostle. Christ's resurrection both confirms our
faith, as to his person and to his office: for his person; Romans 1.4.
this speaks him to be the eternal Son of God, by the resurrection from the
dead: and for his office; this speaks him to be the promised Messiah, the great
Prophet, the chief high Priest, the King and Savior of his Church. When the
Jews saw Christ purging the Temple, and Messiah-like reforming what he saw
amiss in the House of God, What sign (say they) show thou unto us, Joh.
2.18, 19, 22.
seeing thou do these things? And he said unto them, destroy this Temple, and
in three days I will raise it up. -- When therefore he was risen from the dead,
his Disciples remembered that he had said this unto them, and they believed the
Scripture, and the Word which Jesus had said: As the resurrection of Christ
argues his Mediatorship, so it confirms their faith? as it is said, They
believed the Scriptures, and they believed Jesus Christ. And thus John writing
of his resurrection, tells us, John 20.31.
These things are written that ye might believe, and that believing, etc.

3. That it might clearly appear, that he had fully satisfied the justice of
God for sin: So it was, that God laid the forfeiture of the bond on Christ; he
arrested him, brought him to the Goal, the Grave, and there he was till the
Debt was paid to the utmost farthing; and then, that it might clearly appear
that the bond was cancelled, the Prisoner discharged, God's justice satisfied,
he rose again from the dead. Some make a question when his Bond was cancelled?
and they say, as the debt was paid, so the Bond was cancelled ere he stirred
off the Cross (only by the Cross, I suppose they mean the utmost degree of
Christ's humiliation, viz. his being held in captivity and bondage under death)
and so the handwriting of the Law that was against us, was there delivered
him; and there he blotted it out, cancelled it, took it out of the way, Col.
2.14.
nailing it to his Cross. Others think, that as to the full discharge of a
debt, and freeing the debtor, two things are requisite; first, the payment of
the debt: secondly, the tearing, or cancelling of the bond; so the payment was
wrought by Christ's death, and the cancelling of the Bond was at his
resurrection; I shall not disprove either of these: I am sure, this is without
all controversy, that Christ rose, that it might fully appear that now the
Bond was cancelled, and Gods Justice satisfied.

4. That he might overcome and conquer sin, death, and devil; and hence the
Apostle cries victory upon the occasion of Christ's resurrection, 1. Cor. 15.55.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? now was the day that
he broke the prison, and carried the keys of death and hell at his own girdle;
now was the day that he spoiled Principalities, and Powers, that he troad on
the Serpents head; and all-to-bruised it, that he came upon him, took from him
his armor wherein he trusted, and divided his spoils; now was the day that
the Jew lost his rage, and death his sting, and the grave his corruption, and
Hell his purchase; now was the day of his victory over all his enemies; now was
the day that the Phaenix sprung up out of its own ashes, that Jonas came safe
out of the belly of the whale, that the Tabernacle of David that was fallen,
was raised again, that the Son of righteousness covered with a cloud appeared,
and shone with greater luster than before; that Sampson took the gates of the
City, and carried them away; He arose even upon that account.

1 Cor. 15.20.
5. That he might become the first fruits of them that slept. Christ is called
the first fruits in a double respect, 1. In respect of the day whereon he rose;
Paul was an excellent critic, the very feast carried him to the word; as the
day of his passion was the day of the passover, and the Apostle thence could
say, Christ is our passover; 1 Cor. 15.7. 1 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 15.20. Lev.
22.10, 11.
So the day of Christ's rising was the day of the first fruits, and the Apostle
thence could say, Christ is our first fruits. Concerning this feast of the
first fruits we read Lev. 22.10, 11. It was their first harvest of their basest
grain Barley, but the full harvest of their best grain of Wheat, was not till
pentecost. Now upon this day, the morrow after the Sabbath, the beginning of
their first harvest, when the sheaf of their first fruits was brought unto the
Priest, and waved before the Lord, Christ arose from the dead, and in this
respect Paul calls him the first fruits of them that sleep, of all the Saints.
1 Cor. 15.20.
He arose first as on this day, for the full Harvest is not till doomes-day,
the general Resurrection day. 2. he is called the first fruits in respect of
them whom he thereby sanctified: for as an handful of the first fruits
sanctified the whole Field of corn that was growing; so Jesus Christ the
first fruits of the dead, sanctifies all those who are lying in the grave to
rise again by his Power, even when they are in the dust of death. 1 Cor. 15.17,
28.
If Christ be not risen, (says the Apostle) ye are yet in your sins. -- But
now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
sleep.

6. That being formerly abased as a servant, and crucified as a sinner, he
might thus be declared to be the Son of God; and exalted to be a Prince and
Savior of men; and so his name might be glorified of all the World. He was
made of the Seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3, 4.
and declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of
Holiness by the resurrection from the dead. It was of necessary consequence,
that he that was so humbled, must be thus exalted; therefore will I divide him
a portion with the great, Isa. 53.12.
and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his
soul unto death, agreeable to which is that of Christ, Thus it is written, and
thus it behooved Christ to suffer, Luke. 24.46.
and to rise from the dead the third day. When Peter was Preaching Christ to
the high Priest and council that condemned him to death, he told them that the
God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, him
has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior; Act. 5.30,
31. Phil. 2.8.9.
and suitable to this is that of Paul, he humbled himself, and became obedient
to the death, even to the death of the Cross, wherefore God also has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name. It was for his own
glory, and his Fathers glory that he should rise again from the dead, 1 Pet.
1.21. Phil. 2.11.
God raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; and he was therefore
exalted, that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father. Of all the reasons of Christ's resurrection, we must
look upon this as the main; for as he has made all things for himself, so he
has done all things for his own glory; Romans 6.4.
Christ was raised up from the dead, (says the Apostle) by the glory of the
Father: By the glory, or to the glory, or for the glory of himself, and of his
Father:

SECT. III. Of the manner of Christ's Resurrection.
3. HOw he rose; for the manner of his resurrection we may consider in it these
particulars. --

1. That Christ rose again as a common Person, he stood in our stead, and
therefore when he rose from death, we and all the Church of Christ rose
together with him, and in him. We have formerly observed that Christ took upon
him the Person of no man, he took only the nature of man into the union of the
second Person, that so he might dye and rise again, not as a Particular but a
common Person; that he might be as a representative in our room and stead; that
he might be as a Spiritual head, and as the second Adam, who could infuse life
into all his members. In this respect the Apostle makes comparison betwixt
Adam, and Christ; now Adam, we know, was reckoned before his fall as, a common
public Person, not standing singly or alone for himself, but as representing
all mankind to come of him; so Jesus Christ is reckoned to us, both before his
death, and in his death and after his death, as a common public Person; not
living, dying, or rising again, singly, or alone for himself, but as
representing all the believers in the world; and hence it is that Adam is
called the first man, 1 Cor. 15.47.
and Jesus Christ is called the second man; as if there never had been, nor
ever should be any more men in the world, save only these two; and why? but
because these two between them had all the rest of the Sons of men hanging at
their girdles: Adam had all the Sons of men born into this world called earthly
men, included in him; and Christ had all his elect, whose names are written in
heaven, and therefore called Heavenly men, included in him; so that now
whatsoever Christ did, it is reckoned by God as if done by us and for us. When
Christ arose, he arose as our head, and as a common Person, and in God's
account we arose with him, and in him. As among all the sheaves in the Field,
there was some one sheaf, that in the name and room of all the rest was lift
up, and waved before the Lord; so when all were dead, Christ as the
first fruits rose again from the dead, and by this act of his resurrection all
the Elect from the beginning of the World to the end, are risen with him and in
him. He is the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20.
though the Saints are a sleep, yet are they vertually risen already with
Christ, because he is their first fruits. Let this ever be remembered, that
Christ rose again as the first fruits, as the second man, as an head, as a
common Person.

2. That Christ rose again by his own Power, this he meant when he said, John
2.19.
destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. He says not,
destroy, you, and some other shall raise it up; no, no; but I, even I my self
will do it; yea, and I will do it, by my own Power and virtue; here is a plain
argument of the Divine nature of Christ, for none ever did, ever could do that
but God himself; some were raised before Christ was incarnate, but not any by
himself, or by his own proper Power; only a Power was imparted to some Prophet
by God for that time and turn, and so they were raised: but Christ rose again
not by a Power imparted to some, but by his own Power. The Widows son of
Sarephtah was raised by Elias; and the Shunamites son was raised by Elisha;
both these were raised by others, and those others that raised them, did it not
by their own power, but by a power given them from above; and therefore though
in their lifetime they raised others, yet being dead they could not raise
themselves; but Jesus Christ did not only in his lifetime raise others, but
also being dead, and laid in his grave, and pressed with stones, and watched by
Soldiers, and sought to be detained by all the Power of darkness, yet he as a
conqueror, by his own Power raised himself; he caused all things by the
strength of his own arm to give way unto himself, I have Power to lay down my
life, and I have Power to take it up again; an equal Power to take it up, as to
lay it down. John. 10.18.


But against this it may be objected, The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus,
Acts. 5.30. Acts. 3.24.
-- whom God has raised up; having loosed the pains of death. In many places
the resurrection of Christ is ascribed to his Father, how then is he said to
raise up himself by his own Power?

I answer, it is true, that the Father raised him, and yet this contradicts not
but that he raised up himself; Whatsoever the Father does, I do, says Christ.
Christ's resurrection is the indivisible work of the blessed Trinity; it is a
work common to all the three persons; there is but one power of the Father, and
of the Son; so that of both it is truly verified, the Father raised him, and
the Son raised himself.

Mat. 28.2.
3. That Christ rose again with an Earthquake; and behold there was a great
Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven. The earth shook at
his death, and now it trembles at his Resurrection; plainly speaking that it
could neither endure his suffering, nor hinder his rising. As a Lion with a
Roar is said to make the Bed wherein he lies to tremble; so this Lion of the
tribe of Judah was able with his voice, or sight, to make his (Bed, the earth,
wherein he lay) to tremble: no sooner he shakes himself, but he shakes the
earth; at his first motion the earth moves; and now was fulfilled that
prophecy, Psalm. 114.7.
Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob. It is not for us, curiously to enquire into the cause of this
earthquake; certainly the cause was above Natures reach; it was not any hollow
wind got into the bowels of the earth; but either it was Christ's rising, or
the Angels descending; the earth either danced for joy that Christ was risen,
or it trembled for fear that men would no believe his resurrection. The
Evangelist seems to lay it on the Angel; for the Angel of the Lord descended
from heaven: sure the power of Angels is very great; they can move all
corporeal things almost in an instant, they can stir up tempests, they can
shake the earth, move the waters, only all their power is subjected to God's
will. Bless the Lord all ye Angels that excel in strength, Psalm. 103.20.
that do his Will: it was the Will of God that now an Angel should take hold on
the pillars of the earth, and make it shake; no wonder if for fear of him the
keepers shake, Mat. 28.4.
and become as dead men; and if one Angel be able to shake the earth, and to
shake the Keepers, those armed Soldiers that were set to watch the Tomb; what
then will Christ himself do, when he shall come to judgment the second time,
with many thousand thousands of Angels? Oh now terrible and fearful will his
coming be? As at Christ's Resurrection, so at the last Resurrection, there will
be earthquakes in diverse places: Mat. 24.7.
Christ has showed, and he will show himself to be the absolute Lord of heaven
and earth; see how the earth, trembling under his feet, does (as it were) pay
him homage; and behold there was a great Earthquake.

Mat. 28.2.
4. That Christ rose again Angels ministering to him. An Angel came and rolled
back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. Christ's Power was not included
in the grave, or on the earth, but extended to Heaven, and to the Hosts
therein; however the chief Priests and Pharisees conspired together to close
him in the earth; they sealed the stone, and set a watch, they made all as sure
as possibly they could; yet, the Angels of heaven are ready to wait on him as
their Sovereign Lord. An Angel descended to role away the Stone; not that
Christ was unable to do it himsef: he shook the earth, and could he not lift up
a stone? O yes! but thus he would manifest his Power, by declaring his Power
over the mighty Angels; he needed but to say unto his Angel* do this, and he
does it. I find some difference amongst Authors, why an Angel should role away
the Stone: some think it was only for the women's sake, that they might go into
the Sepulcher, and take a view of the empty Tomb, and so be satisfied that
Christ was not here, but risen; Mat. 28.6.
as they said, Come, see the place where the Lord lay: Others think it was to
do their office of duty and service to Christ Jesus, to make way for his body
to pass out of the grave without any penetration of other Bodies: for my part,
I adhere to these; though we need not to exclude the former; for the stone
might be removed, both that Christ might come forth, and that the women might
be convinced that he was risen again. But as for the opinion of them, who think
the stone was not removed till after the resurrection; and that the body of
Christ went through the gravestone when he rose again, it is without all
warrant; the very order of nature will not permi^ that one body should pass
through another, without corruption or alteration of either: We say two bodies
cannot be together, and at once, in one proper place; no more than one body can
be together, and at once, in an hundred, or a thousand places; now that
Angelical argument is full for this; he is not here, for he is risen; he is not
in the grave, Mat. 28.6.
for he is risen out of the grave; he could not be in the grave, and out of the
grave at one and the same time. But I mean not to dwell on controversial Points.

Mat. 27.52, 53.
5. That Christ rose again accompanied with others; and the graves were opened,
and many bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after
his resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many. It may
be the graves were opened when Christ was laid down in his grave; yet the
spirits came not into the dead bodies till Christ's Resurrection; the Text i^
plain, that they came not out of their graves till Christ was raised; Christ is
the beginning (says the Apostle) the firstborn from the dead: Col. 1.18.
how the firstborn? I answer, both in time and efficacy. 1. In time; he rose
to eternal life the first of all men. This was the sum of Paul's preaching,
that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise
from the dead. It is true indeed, Acts 26.2, 3.
that Lazarus and fundry others rose before Christ, but they rose to live a
mortal life, and to die again. Christ was the first of all that rose to eternal
life; never any in the world rose, before Christ, in this manner. 2. In respect
of efficacy, Christ rose first, that by his power all the rest might rise;
there is in Christ's resurrection a reviving and a quickening virtue; and herein
is a main difference betwixt the Resurrection of Christ, and the Resurrection
of any other man; the Resurrection of Abraham availes nothing to the
resurrection of Isa^c, or of Jacob; but the resurrection of Christ availes to
the resurrection of all that have believed, or that shall believe in him: is
not Christ called a quickening Spirit? how then should he but quicken all his
members? 1 Cor. 15.45.
when a man is cast into the Sea, and all his body is under water, there is
nothing to be looked for but present death; but if he carry his head above the
water, there is good hope then of a recovery: now Christ is the head unto his
Church, and therefore he being raised, all his members must follow in their
time; no sooner did Christ arise, but many of the bodies of the Saints arose;
not all that were dead, but only some; to show the resurrection of all to come,
the time for the whole Churches rising being not yet, till the great
resurrection day. It is a question what became of those bodies which now arose:
Some think they died again; but it is more probable, that seeing they rose to
manifest the quickening virtue of Christ's resurrection, that they were also
glorified with Christ; and as they rose with Christ arising, so they ascended
up into heaven with Christ ascending.

6. That Christ rose again with a true, perfect, incorruptible, powerful,
spiritual, agile, and glorious body.

1. He had a true body, consisting of flesh and blood, and bone; so he told his
Disciples, when they supposed him a Spirit; Handle me, Luke 24.39.
and see (said he) for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. I
know, this body, after his resurrection, was comparatively a spiritual body;
yet for all that, he never laid aside the essential properties of a true body,
as length, and breadth, and visibility, and locality, and the like; he still
keeps these, because they serve to the being of a true body.

2. He had a perfect body; however he was cut, and bored, and mangled before
his death, yet after his resurrection, all was perfect. Eusebius tells of one
of the Children of the Machabees, that were put to death for the profession of
the Truth; and when they cut off his members, says he, I have received these
from heaven, and now I do give them unto the God of heaven, and I hope I shall
have them again. Not a member of Christ was wanting, not a bone out of joint,
but all was perfect.

3. He had an incorruptible, immortal body. To this end (says the Apostle)
Christ both died, and rose and revived; and why revived? but to show that he
rose, never to die again. The Apostle is yet more express; Christ being raised
from the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over him. Consonant
hereunto is that of Christ, I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold, I am
alive for evermore, Amen. Romans 14.9. Romans 6.9. Rev. 1.18.
And herein the body of Lazarus and the rest, whom Christ raised, differed from
his; for after they were raised, they died again; but Christ died no more.

4. He had a powerful body. Luther could say of the glorified Saints, that they
had a power so great as to toss the greatest mountains in the world like a
Ball: And Anselm has an expression, not much unlike, that they have such a
power, Anselm. lib. de simil. cap. 52.
as they are able to shake the whole earth at their pleasure. How much more
could Christ cause that great Earthquake at the rising of his Body? O it was
powerful!

5. He had a spiritual body; it needed not to meat, drink or refreshings, as it
did before; it is true, that the Disciples gave him a piece of a broiled fish,
Luke 24.42, 43
and of an honeycomb, and he took it, and did eat before them; but this he did
only to confirm their faith, that he appeared solidly, and not imaginarily; he
Ate out of power, and not out of necessity, even as the Sun sucks up the water
out of power, but the earth out of want: he Ate not, as standing in need of
food, but to show the truth of his being risen again; as the Saints in heaven
neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor have Magistrates, nor Ministers, but the
Spirit of God is all in all to them; so it was with Christ after his
Resurrection: he was full of the Spirit; he was enlivened immediately by the
Spirit of God; which flowed into him, and that supplied the absence of all
other things.

6. He had an agile body; it was in his pleasure to move as well upwards as
downwards, as it may appear by the ascension of his Body into heaven; which was
not caused by constrain^, or by any violent motion, but a property agreeing to
all bodies glorified. Aug. li^. 22. de C^v. Dei, cap. ult.
Augustine has an expression concerning the glorified Saints, that they shall
move to any place they w^ll, and as soon as they will; they shall move up and
down like a thought, how much more may it be said of the Body of Christ?

7. He had a glorious body; this appeared in his Transfiguration, when his face
did shine as the Sun, Mat. 17.2.
and his raiment was white as light; but especially after his Resurrection and
Ascension, Rev. 1.14, 15. Phil. 3.21.
when his head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow, and his
eyes were as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, as if they
burned in a furnace; the glorified bodies of Saints which are fashioned like
unto his glorious body, are said to shine like stars, Dan. 12.3 or like the Sun
it self, Matthew. 13.43. O then how glorious is the Sun of righteousness, from
whence all those Suns and Stars do borrow their Light? It is true, that from
his Resurrection, until his Ascension, his body appeared not thus glorious unto
them that saw it: But whither his Glory was delaied, and he was not possessed
of it du^ing his forty days abode upon the earth; or whether he so far
condescended for his Disciples sake, as to keep in his Glory, that it might not
dazzle them, and therefore appeared sometimes in the form of a Gardener, John
20.15. John 20.15.
and sometimes in the form of a stranger, Luke 24 18. Luke 24.18.
and sometimes in another form, Mark 16.12. Mark 16.12.
and sometimes in his own form, in the same form wherein he lived before he was
crucified, John 20.20, 27. Joh. 20.20, 27
is hard to determine. I am apt to think, that in some sort he might draw in
the beams of his Glory, and yet that he was not entered into that sulness of
glory, as after his Ascension; and so some expound those words of Christ to
Mary, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; q. d. fix not thy
thoughts so much upon my present condition, for I am not yet attained to the
highest pitch of my exaltation, nor shall I until I ascend unto my Father.

Use. Romans 1.4.
From this Resurrection of Christ, how are we informed, that Christ is the Son
of God? Thus Paul speaks, he was declared to be the Son of God with power,
according to the Spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead. And how
are we informed that Christ is Lord over all things that are? Romans 14.9
For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, 1 Cor. 15.20.
that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. And how are we informed
that Christ rose again for us, as one that stood instead and room of all the
Elect? but now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that sleep. And how are we informed that by his resurrection we are
justified? Romans 4.25. 1 Pet. 1.5.
who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification: and that by his resurrection we are regenerate; for he has
begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead. And that by his resurrection we are sanctified? for as he was raised
up from the dead by the glory of his Father, Romans 6.4.
even so we also should walk in newness of life; and that by his resurrection
at the last day we shall be raised? Romans 8.11.
for if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken
our mortal bodies; and that by his resurrection finally we shall be saved? for
after we are raised, we shall never die any more, but be equal unto the Angels,
and be the children of God, Luke 20.36.
as being the children of the resurrection of Christ.

Thus far the position, Christ rose again the third day. Now for the proof.

SECT. IV. Of the Arguments of Christ 's Resurrection.
CHrist after his passion showed himself alive by many infallible proofs. Acts
1.3.
And so he had need to persuade men into the faith of so strange a truth; if we
consult with antiquity, or novelty, with primitive times, or later times, never
was matter carried on with more scruple, and slowness of belief, with more
doubts and difficulties than was this truth of Christ's resurrection. Mary
Magdalen saw it first, and reported it. But they believed her not, Mark 16.10.
the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, they saw it also, and reported it, but
they believed them not, Luke 24.37. diverse women together saw him, and came and
told the Disciples, but their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they
believed them not, Luke 24.11. They all saw him, and even seeing him, Yet they
believed not for joy, but wondered, Luke 24.41. When the wonder was over, and
the rest told it but to one that happened to be absent, you know how peremptory
he was, Not he, except he saw in his hands the print of the nails, and put his
fingers into the print of the nails, and thrust his hands into his side, he
would not believe, John 20.25. -- In aftertimes the whole world stopped their
ears at this report of the resurrection of Christ, it was with the Grecians at
Athens a very scorn; When they heard of the Resurrection of the dead, some
mocked, Acts 17.32. It was with Festus, the great Roman, (...), a sickness of
the brain, a plain phrenzy; Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art
besides thy self, much learning does make thee mad, Acts 28.24. -- But come we
to our own times, the resurrection of Christ is to this day as much opposed by
Jews, and Atheists, as any one Article of our Creed. And surely we had need to
look to it, for if Christ be not risen (as the Apostle argues) then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain, 1 Cor. 15.14. If Christ be not
risen, ye are yet in your sins; and they which are fallen asleep in Christ, are
perished, 1 Cor. 15.17, 18. Of all the precious truths in the Book of God, we
had need to preserve this truth, and to be well skilled in the defending of
this truth of the resurrection of Christ. Some talk of a tolleration of all
Religions, and some desire that the Jews may have free commerce amongst us; it
will then be time, as I think, to be well armed at this point. Let the ordinary
Professors of our times, who are of weak judgments, and fiery Spirits, look to
this point, least as now, when they cannot answer a Separatist, they turn
Separatists, and when they cannot answer an Antinomian, they turn Antinomians,
and when they cannot answer a Seeker, Quaker, Blasphemer, they turn to them, so
when they cannot answer the subtle Arguments of a Jew, they should as easily
turn Jews, and deny Christ, and the resurrection of Christ.

I mean not to enter into controversies; only I shall declare from what heads,
Arguments of this nature may be drawn. As --

1. More generally from Gentiles grants; Jews concessions, typical
instructions, prophetical predictions.

2. More specially from these clear demonstrations, that circumstantially and
substantially do prove this Christ to have risen again.

1. the Arguments in general are --

1. From Gentiles grants: Pilate that condemned Christ, testified in a letter
to Tiberius Caesar, that Christ was risen again; Tertul. l. cont. Gent.
Egesippus de vito and resur. Christi.
and therefore Tiberius desired the Senate to admit Christ into the number of
their gods, which when they refused, Tiberius was incensed, and gave free leave
to all Christians to profess Christianity. And to the Gentiles, Sybylla left
written these very words, He shall end the necessity of death by three days
sleep, and then returning from death to life again, he shall be the first that
shall show the beginning of resurrection to his chosen, for that by conquering
death, he shall bring us life.

2. For the Jews concessions; Josephus, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 8. c. 9.
the most learned amongst the latter Jews acknowledges, that after Pilate had
crucified him, he appeared unto his followers the third day, accordingly as the
Prophets had foretold. The Scribes and Pharisees being astonished with the
sudden news of his rising again, confirmed by the Soldiers whom they set to
watch, found no other way to resist the same, but only by saying (as all the
Jews do unto this day) that his Disciples came by night, and stole away his
body, whiles the Soldiers slept: O strange! if they were asleep, how know they
that his Disciples stole away his body? and if they were not asl^ep, how could
a few weak fishers take away his body from a band of armed Soldiers?

3. From typical instructions; such was Adam's sleep, Isaac's laying upon the
Altar, Joseph's imprisonment, Sampson's breaking of the gates of Gaza, David's
escaping out of Readiness hands, Jeremy's deliverance out of the pit, the raising
of the Shunamites child, of the widow of Sarephtahs son, of the Temple of
Solomon, of Jonah from the deep; a thousand of these types might be produced,
which relate to this antitype, Christ's resurrection.

4. From prophetical predictions, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither
will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption, Psalm. 16.10. Psalm. 16.10.
After two days he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, Hosea
6.2. Hos. 6.2.
he will raise us up (i.e.) his Son united to us, or our flesh assumed by his
Son, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7. Psalm. 2.7.
Acts 13.33. I laid me down and slept, I waked, for the Lord sustained me,
Psalm. 3 5. Psalm. 3.5.
Above all, how plain was the prophecy of Christ himself, that he must go to
Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and chief Priests, and
Scribes, and be killed, and be ra^sed again the third day, Matthew. 16.21? Mat
16.21.


2. The special Arguments are exceeding many, as 1. The Angels Assertion, He is
not here for he is ris^n, as he said, come see the place where the Lord lay,
Matthew. 28.6. Mat. 28 6.
2. The great Earthquake, And behold there was a great earthquake, for the
Angel of the Lord ^^cended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door, Matthew. 28.2. Mat. 28.2.


3. The Apparitions of raised bodies, and the graves were opened, and many
bodies of Saints which s^^pt arose, and came out of the graves after his
resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many, Matthew.
27.52, 53. (...). 27.52, 53


4. The sudden courage of the Apostles; whereas a little before they durst not
peep out of doors, they presently after compassed the whole world, and
confidently taught, that there was no other name given under heaven, whereby
men may be saved, but the Name of jesus, Act. 4.12. Acts 4.12.
5. The Martyrs sufferings even for this truth. 6. The Adversaries conf^ssions
even to this truth. 7. The Jews punishments even to this day, for not believing
this saving truth. There is one Rabbi Samuel, who six hundred years since writ
a Tract in form of an Epistle to Rabbi Isaac, Master of the Synagogue of the
Jews; wherein he does excellently discuss the cause of their long captivity,
and extreme misery: And after that he had proved it was inflicted for some
grievous sin; he shows that sin to be the same which Amos speaks of, For
three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the
punishment thereof, because they sold the righteous for silver, Amos 2.6. Amos
2.6.
the selling of Joseph he makes the first sin; the worshipping of the Calf in
Horeb the second sin; the abusing and killing of God's Prophets the third sin;
and the selling of Jesus Christ the fourth sin. For the first, They served four
hundred years in Egypt; for the second, They wandered forty years in the
wilderness; for the third, They were captives seventy years in Babylon; and for
the fourth, They are held in pitiful captivity even till this day. 8. The last
Argument on which only I shall insist, it is the several Apparitions that
Christ made to others after his Resurrection, some reckon them ten times,
others eleven times, and others twelve times, according to the number of his
twelve Apostles.

Luke 24.34.
1. He appeared unto Mary Magdalen apart. As a woman was the first instrument of
death, so was a woman the first Messenger of Life; she brought the first
tidings of the Resurrection of Christ, which is the surest Argument of man's
Salvation.

2. He appeared to all the Mary's together, as they returned homewards from the
Sepulcher, never any truly sought for Christ, but with these women they were
sure to find Christ.

3 He appeared to Simon Peter alone; he was the first among men to whom he
appeared, he first went into the Sepulcher, and he first saw him that was
raised thence: he was called first, and he confessed Christ to be the Son of
God, and therefore Christ appears first to him; Mark 16.7.
the Angel bade the women to tell his Disciples and Peter (that is to say, and
Peter especially) that he was risen, and gone before them into Galilee. 1 Cor.
15.5.
Of this speaks Paul, He was first seen of Cephas, and then of the Twelve.

4. He appeared to the two Disciples journeying toward Emmaus; the name of the
one was Cleophas, and probable it is, the other was Luke, Theoph. super Luke
who out of his modesty concealed his own name, says Theophilact.

5. He appeared unto the ten Apostles, when the doors were shut. Some
controversy there is in this, because the Evangelist says expressly, Luke.
24.33. ver. 36. John 20.24.
that the eleven Disciples were gathered together -- and as they spoke, Jesus
himself stood in the midst of them. Now Judas was hanged, and Matthias was not
elected, and Thomas Didimus was not with them when Jesus came: how then could
he appear to eleven Apostles, considering at at this time there were but eleven
in all? -- Some say it is a certain number put for an uncertain. Others say,
that the eleven might be together when the two Disciples came, and when Jesus
came, Thomas might be absent, and gone from amongst them. And if the Text be
viewed well, there is no contradiction in this saying, But I must not dwell on
controversial points.

6. He appeared to all the Disciples, and Thomas was with them; John 20.26.
and then he showed them his wounds, to strengthen the weak faith of his
wavering servants. Thomas would not have believed unless he had seen, and
therefore Christ shows him the wounds of his body, that he might cure the
wounds of Thomas's unbelieving soul.

7. He appeared to Peter, and John, and James, and Nathaniel, and Didimus, John
21.2.
and two other Disciples, when they were a fishing at the sea of Tiberias;
there he proved the verity of his Deity by that miracle of the fishes, and the
verity of his humanity by eating meat with them. ver. 14.
And this was the third time that he showed himself publicly and solemnly unto
all, or to the most part of his Disciples.

8. He appeared unto more than five hundred brethren at once; of this we read
not in the Evangelists, but the Apostle Paul records it, 1 Cor. 15.6.
after that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the
greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

9. He appeared unto James the Brother of the Lord: (i.e.) the Cozen-german of
Christ according to the Flesh; he was called James the just in regard of his
upright and innocent life. Jerome in his Book De viris illustribus tells us,
that before Christ's death this James made a vow, that he would eat no bread
till Christ were risen again from the dead; and now Christ appearing to him, he
commanded Bread and Meat to be set on the table; saying to James, O my brother,
now rise and eat, for now I am risen again from the dead. Of this Apparition
Paul makes mention: 1 Cor. 15.7.
After that he was seen of James.

10. He appeared to the eleven Disciples, on Mount Tabor in Galilee. And this
Matthew intimates, when Jesus bade the woman tell his Brethren that he was
risen, and that they should go into Galilee, and there they should see him;
Mat. 28.10, 16, 17.
and accordingly in that Mountain where Jesus had appointed them, they saw him,
and worshipped him.

11. He appeared to all his Apostles and Disciples upon Mount Olivet by
Jerusalem, when in the presence of them all he ascended up into Heaven. This
mountain is expressed by Luke, when after Christ's ascension it is said, Acts.
1.12.
that the Disciples returned back to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet.

12. He appeared unto Paul traveling unto Damascus. This indeed was after his
forty days abode upon the earth. And yet this Paul mentions amongst the rest
of his apparitions, and last of all he was seen of me also, 1 Cor. 15.8.
as of one born out of due time.

My meaning is not to speak of all these Apparitions in order; for of some of
them we are neither assured of the order, nor of the time. But of the most
considerable, and most edifying we shall treat.

SECT. V. Of Christ's Apparition to Mary Magdalen.
ON the first day were many Apparitions; But I shall speak only to one, or two,
as related by the Evangelist John.

1. Christ appeared unto Mary Magdalen apart; The first day of the week comes
Mary Magdalen early, when it was yet dark, unto the Sepulcher, John 20.1.
and sees the stone taken away from the Sepulcher; she came whiles it was yet
dark; she departed from home before day, and by that time she came to the
Sepulcher the Sun was about to rise; thither come, she finds the stone rolled
away, and the body of Jesus gone; upon this she runs to Peter, and John, and
tells them, they have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we know not
where they have laid him. Then Peter and John ran as fast as they could to see,
they looked into the Sepulcher, and not finding the body there, they presently
returned. By this time Mary Magdalen was come back, and howsoever the Disciples
would not stay, yet she was resolved to abide by it, and to see the issue.

We find this apparition for our further assurance, compassed, and set about
with each needful circumstance; here is the time when, the place where, the
persons to whom the manner how ^e appeared, together with the consequents after
his apparition.

John. 20.1.
1. For the time when he appeared; Now upon the first day of the week very early
in the morning It was the first day of the week, the next day to their Sabbath;
I shall speak more particularly to this in the next apparition; and it was very
early in the morning; the app^rition was early, but Mary's seeking Christ was
so early that it was yet dark; she is going to the grave, when by course of
nature she should have been in her bed; she sought him early whom she loved
entirely: giving us to learn that we should seek Christ betimes, Ecle s. 12.1.
even in the days of our youth; that in these first days of the week, we
should ri^e up early to enquire after Christ; they that will not seek Christ
until they have given over seeking other things, may justly fear to miss
Christ. First seek the kingdom of God, Mat. ^.33.
and his righteousness, and then (says Christ) all other things shall be added
unto you.

2. For the place where he appeared, it was in the garden, where Christ was
buried; in a garden Adam first sinned, in a garden Christ first appeared; in a
garden death first was threatened and deserved, and in a garden life is
restored, and conferred upon us; Christ makes choice of a garden both for his
grave, and resurrection, and first apparition, to tell us where we might seek
him, if we have lost him, My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds
of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lillies, that is, Jesus Christ
is to be sought and found in the particular assemblies of his people; Cant. 6.2.
they are the garden of his pleasure, wherein are varieties of all the beds of
renewed souls, there he walks, and there he feeds, and there he solaceth
himself with those fruits of righteousness, and new obedience, which they are
able to bring forth to him. O there let us seek him, and we shall find him.

3. Eor the Person to whom he appeared; it was Mary Magdalen; she that
sometimes lived a sinful life, that was no better than a common Curtizan, now
is first up to seek her Savior. Let never any despair of mercy, that but hears
of the conversion of Mary Magdalen. Dionisius tells us, that she that was loose
and dissolute in her youth, betook her self in old age to a most solitary life;
that she sequestered her self from all worldly pleasures in the mountains of
B^lma; full thirty years; in all which time she gave her self to meditation,
fasting and prayer. The texts tells us, That much was forgiven her, and she
loved much. Luke 7.47. John. 20.11.
Her love to Christ appears at this time. But Mary stood without at the
Sepulcher weeping, and as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the
Sepulcher: this Scripture we may call a song of loves, or if you will a song of
degrees; every word is a step, or degree of love more than other: As --

1. Mary stood at the Sepulcher; she stood by the grave of Christ; it signifies
her great love to Jesus Christ; many would stand by him while he was alive, but
to stand by him dead none would do it; those we love most we will wait on them
living, or if they dye, we will bring them to the grave, and lay them in the
grave, but there we leave them: -- only Mary chooses Christ's Tomb for her best
home, and his dead corpse for her chief comfort, she praises the dead more than
the living, and having lost that light of the Sun of righteousness, she desired
to dwell in darkness, in the shadow of death.

2. But] Mary stood. q. d. others did not, but she did: Peter and John were
there even now, and when they could not find Jesus, away they went, but Mary
went not, she stood still: their going away commends her staying behind; how
many circumstances may we observe in Mary, setting out her love to Christ above
them all? to the grave she came before them; from the grave she went to tell
them; to the grave she returns with them; and at the grave she stays behind
them. Certainly there was in Mary a stronger affection than either in Peter, or
John, and this affection fixed her there, that she could, not stir; go who
would, she would not go, but stay still. But Mary stood without.

3. But Mary stood without at the Sepulcher weeping: This was love indeed; see
how every word is a degree of love. But Mary stood there weeping, when Christ
stood at Lazarus's grave-side weeping, the Jews said then, Behold how he loved
him, and may not we say the very same of Mary, Behold how she loved him, her
very love runs down her cheeks, she cannot think of Jesus as lost, but she
weeps; she weeps for having lost him whom she loved; at first she mourned for
the departing of his soul out of his body, and now she laments the taking his
body out of the grave; at first she mourned because she could not keep him
alive, yet that sorrow had some solace, in that she hoped to have enjoyed him
dead; but when she considers that his life was lost, and not so much as his
body could be found, Oh she weeps, and weeps. The last office she could do, was
to anoint his body, and to bewail his death; and to that purpose she comes now
unto his grave; as sometimes she had washed his feet with her tears, now she
would shed them afresh upon his feet, and head, and hands, and heart, and all;
but when she saw the grave open; and the body gone, and nothing of Christ now
left her to mourn over, she weeps the more, she weeps most bitterly; But Mary
stood there weeping.

4. And as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the Sepulcher. She did
so weep as she did seek withal; her weeping hindered not her seeking, she
sought and sought; to what purpose? that Christ is not in the tomb her own eyes
have seen; the Disciples hands have felt, the empty winding sheet does plainly
avouch; Peter and John had looked in before, nay, They went into the Sepulcher,
and saw the linen clothes lying, John 20.6, 7.
and the napkin that was about his head wrapped by it self; and yet for all this
she will be stooping down, and looking in; she would rather condemn her own
eyes of error, and both their eyes and hands of deceit; she would rather
suspect all testimonies for untrue, than not to look after him whom she had
lost, even there where by no diligence he could be found. It is not enough for
love to look in once. You know this is the manner of our seeking, when we seek
something seriously; where we have sought already, there we will seek again; we
are apt to think we sought not well, but if we seek again we might find it were
we sought: And thus Mary sought, and when she could think of no other place so
likely to find Christ in as this, she sought again in this, she will not
believe her own senses, she would rather think that she looked not well before,
than she will leave off looking. When things that are dearly affected are gone
and lost, loves nature is never to be weary of searching, even the oftenest
searched corners; they must still be an haunt for hope. O love thinks it has
never looked enough! in the first verse she looked, And saw the stone taken
away from the Sepulcher; and now again she stooped down, and looked into the
Sepulcher.

4. For the manner how he appeared; it was first by his Angels, and secondly by
himself.

1. There was an apparition of Angels, she sees two Angels in white, sitting,
John. 20.12, 13.
the one at the head, and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had
layen. I will not stay here, only for the opening of the words I shall answer
these questions; As 1. What means the apparition of Angels? I answer, it is not
only a preparation to Christ's apparition. Mary's loss must be restored by
degrees; though she saw not Christ at first; yet she saw his Angels; it often
pleases Christ in the desertions of his people, to come to them by degrees,
and not at once, he comes first by his Angels; so it was at his birth, and so
it is at his resurrection. -- But, 2. What do Angels in a Sepulcher? it is a
place fitter for worms than Angels: we never read of Angels being in a grave
before this time; they are blessed creatures, and is the grave a fit place for
them? O yes! since Christ lay in the grave, that very place is a blessed place;
Blessed are the dead, Rev. 14.13. Psalm. 116.15.
which dye in the Lord from henceforth. Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints. But, 3. Why are the Angels in white? Solomon answers,
that white is the color of joy. Let thy garments be always white, and let thy
head lack no ointment. Eccles. 9.8. Mark 9.3. Rev. 7.9.
When Christ was transfigured, his Raiment was all white, no Fuller in the
earth could come near it; and the Saints in Heaven are said to walk in white
Robes. And here the Angels are in white, to signify the joy they had in
Christ's resurrection from the dead. -- But, 4. Why are they one at the head,
and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had layen? Some answer, that
as Mary Magdalen had anointed his head and feet, so at those two places the two
Angels sit; as it were to acknowledge so much for her sake. Others think it
speaks comfort to every one of us; if we are but in Christ, we shall go to our
graves in white, and lie between two Angels, who are said to guard our Bodies
even dead, and to present them alive again at the day of the resurrection.

But in this apparition we see further, a question, and answer; 1. The Angels
question Mary, Woman why weepest thou? May I paraphrase upon these words? it is
as if they had said, O Mary! what cause is there for these tears? where Angels
rejoice, it agrees not that a woman should weep; thou could before with a
manly courage arm thy feet to run among swords when thou came to the grave,
and art thou now so much a woman that thou can not command thine eyes to
forbear tears? O woman, why weepest thou? If thy Christ were here in his grave,
under this Tombstone, we might think thy sorrow for the dead enforced thy
tears, but now that thou find it a place of the living, why do thou stand
here weeping dead? for if thy tears be tears of love, as thy love is
acknowledged, so let these tears be suppressed; if thy tears be tears of anger,
they should not here have been shed, where all anger was buried; if thy tears
be tears of sorrow and duties to the dead, they are bestowed in vain where the
dead is now revived; and therefore, O woman, why weepest thou? would our eyes
be dry, if such eye-streames were behoveful for us? did not Angels always in
their visible resemblances represent their Lords invisible pleasure; shadowing
their shapes in the drifts of his intentions? As for instance, when God was
incensed they brandished swords; when he was appeased, they sheathed them in
scabbards; when he would defend, they resembled Soldiers; when he would
terrify, they took terrible forms; and when he would comfort, they carried
mirth in their eyes, sweetness in their countenance, mildness in their words,
savor, and grace, and comeliness in their presence: why then do thou weep,
seeing us to rejoice? do thou imagine us to degenerate from our nature, or to
forget any duty, whose state is neither subject to change, nor capable of the
least offense? art thou more fervent in thy love, or more privy to the counsel
of our eternal God, than we that are daily attendants at his Throne of glory? O
woman, why weepest thou? Thus for Paraphrase.

John 20.13.
2. For her answer; She says unto them, because they have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him: Here was the cause of Mary's tears; 1.
They have taken away my Lord. 2. I know not where they have laid him, q. d. He
is gone without all hope of recovery: for they, but I know not who, have taken
him away, but I know not whither; and they have laid him, but I know not where;
there to do him, but I know not what. O what a lamentable case is this! she
knows not whither to go to find any comfort; her Lord is gone, his life is
gone, his soul is gone, his body is gone, yea gone, and carried she knows not
whither; and do they ask her, Woman, why weepest thou? why, here is the cause,
They have taken away my Lord, (i.e.) the dead body of my Lord, and I know not
where they have laid him. Where a little of Christ is left, and that is lost,
it is a lamentable loss. Mary had sometimes a possession of whole Christ, she
had his presence, she heard his words; she saw his divinity in his miracles,
and in casting seven devils out of her own Body; but now she had lost all
Christ, his presence lost, his preaching lost, his divinity lost, his humanity
lost, his soul lost, and last of all his body lost. O what lamentable loss was
this! Mary would now haven been glad of a little of Christ; O ye Angels, fill
but her arms with the dead body of her Jesus, and she will weep no more; one
beam of that Sun of righteousness would scatter all the clouds of Mary's grief.

Quest.
But does Christ ever leave his totally?

Answ.
I answer, not indeed, but only in apprehension. In desertions a Christian may
to his own apprehension find nothing of Christ; and this was the Case of Mary
Magdalen: or if Christ desert a soul indeed, and truth (for desertions are
sometimes in appearance, and sometimes real) yet never does he forsake his own
both really and totally: The Lord will not wholly forsake his people, 1 Samuel
12.22.
for his great Name sake; the acts of his love may be withdrawn, but his love
is still the same, it is an everlasting love; those acts which are for
well-being may be withdrawn, Jer. 31.3.
but his acts of love that are for being, shall never be removed. No such good
things will God withhold from them that walk uprightly. Or Christ may go away
for a season, Psalm. 84.11. Isa. 54.7, 8. John 14.18.
but not for ever; For a moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies
will I gather thee; in a little wrath have I hid my face from thee for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy Redeemer; It was Christ's promise to his Disciples, I will not leave you
comfortless, or as Orphans, but I will come again. Though his compassions may
be restrained, yet they cannot be extinguished; as the Sun sets to rise again,
and as the tender Mother lays down her Child to take it up again, so deals
Christ with his, only for the present it is a sad thing; O it is a lamentable
thing to lose all Christ; though but in our own apprehensions. To hear Mary's
pitiful complaints, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they
have laid my Lord, it would make a flint to weep; methinks I hear her cries, O
my Lord, What Is become of Thee? Time was that my Soul was an enclosed Garden,
and the chiefest of Ten Thousands did walk in the shadow of the Trees; but now
the Fence is down, my Love is gone, and Sharon is become a desert: Time was
that I sat at the Feet of my Lord, and I received daily Oracles from his
Mouth, but now he hides himself, and will not come at me; I pray, and he hears
not, I hearken after him, but he speaks not, I call, but he answers not. O my
Lord, if I had never known thee, I could have lived without thee, but this is
my misery, not so much that I am without thee, as that I have lost thee, many
are well without thee, because they never enjoyed thee; the children of beggars
count it not their misery that they are not Princes, but oh the grief when the
children of Princes shall be turned to beggars! O my Lord, once I had thee, but
now I have lost thee; yea, I have lost thee every jot, and piece, and parcel of
thee; O ye Apostles, Where is the dead body of my Lord? O Sir Angel, tell me if
you saw his torn, his macerated, crucified body? O grave! O death! show me, is
there any thing of Christ's body (though but a few dead ashes) in your keeping?
no, no, all is gone; I can hear nothing of what I would hear; death is silent,
the gra^e is empty, the Angels say nothing to the purpose, the Apostles are
fled, and they, (I know not who) have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him.

2. After this, Christ himself appears; but first as unknown, and then as
known; 1. As unknown, She turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing, John
20.14, 15.
and knew not that it was Jesus: Jesus says unto her, Woman, Why weepest thou?
whom seek thou? she supposing him to be the Gardener, etc. In this
Apparition of Christ unknown, I shall only take notice of Christ's que^^ion,
an^ Mary's inquisition; his question is in these words, Woman, Why weepest
thou? whom seek thou? 1. Why w^epest thou? This very question the Angels
asked her before, and now Christ asks it again; sure there is something in it,
and the rather we may think so, because it is the first opening of his Mouth,
the first words that ever came from him, after his rising again. Some say that
Mary Magdalen represents the state of all m^nkind before this day, viz. One
weeping over the grave of another, as if there were no hope: and now at his
resurrection Christ comes in with weep not; Woman, Why weepest thou? q. d.
there is no cause of weeping now, Lo I am risen from the dead, and am become
the first fruits of them that sleep.

And yet we may wond^r at the question, Why should Christ demand of Mary, why
she wept? but a while since, she saw him hanging on a tree, with his head full
of thorns, his eyes full of tears, his ears full of blasphemies, his mouth full
of gall, his whole person mangled and disfigured, and does he ask her, Woman,
Why weepest thou? scarce three days since, she beheld his arms, and legs
racked with violent pulls, his hands and feet bored with nails, his side and
bowels pierced with a spear, his whole body torn with stripes, and gored in
blood: and does he ask her, Woman, Why weepest thou? she saw him on the cross
yielding up his soul; and now she was about to anoint his body, which was the
only hope she had alive; but his body is removed, and that hope is dead, and
she is left hopeless of all visible help, and yet does he ask her, Woman, Why
weepest thou? O yes! though it may be strange, yet it is not a question without
cause, she weeps for him dead, who was risen again from the dead; she was sorry
he was not in his grave; and for this very cause she should have been rather
glad; she mourns for not knowing where he lay, when as indeed, and in truth, he
lay not any where; he is alive, and present, and now talks with her, and
resolves to comfort her; and therefore, Woman, Why weepest thou?

2. Whom seek thou? she seeks Christ, and Christ asks her, Woman, Whom
seek thou? We may wonder at this also; if she seek Christ, Why does she not
know him? or if she know Christ, Why does she seek him still? O Mary! Is it
possible thou have forgotten Jesus? there is no part in thee but is busy about
him, thy eye weeps, thy heart throbs, thy tongue complains, thy body faints,
thy soul languisheth, and notwithstanding all this, Have thou now forgotten
him? What, are thy sharp eyes so weak sighted, that they are dazzled with the
Sun, and blinded with the Light? O yes! a shower of tears comes betwixt her and
him, and she cannot see him, or it may be, Her eyes were holden that she should
not know him; Luke 24.16.
or it may be he appeared (...) in some other shape, such as resemble the
Gardener; whom she took him for; howsoever it was, She saw Jesus standing, but
knew not that it was Jesus, and therefore says Jesus to her, Woman, Why
weepest thou? whom seek thou? There is a double presence of Christ, felt,
and not felt; the presence felt, is when Christ is graciously pleased to let us
know so much, and this is an heaven upon earth. The presence not felt, is that
secret presence, when Christ seems to draw us one way, and to drive another
way. So he dealt with the Woman of Canaan, he seemed to drive her away, but at
the same time he wrought in her by his Spirit an increase of faith, and by that
means drew her to himself. Thus may a soul suppose Christ lost, and seek and
weep, and weep and seek, and yet Christ is present.

2. For Mary's enquiry, She supposing him to be the Gardener, said unto him,
Sir, If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will
take him away.

In the words we may observe, first her mistake; 2. Her speech upon her mistake.

1. Her mistake, She supposing him to be the Gardener; O Mary! has Christ
lived so long, and labored so much, and shed so many showers of blood, to come
to no higher preferment than a Gardener? this was a very strange mistake; and
yet in some sense, and a good sense too, Christ might be said to be a Gardener;
As 1. It is he that gardens all our souls, that plants in them the seeds of
righteousness; that waters them with the dew of grace, and makes them fruitful
to eternal life. 2. It is he that raised to life his own dead body, and will
turn all our graves into a garden-Plot, Thy dead men shall live together, Esa.
26.19.
with my dead body shall they arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in dust, for
the dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Besides,
there is a mystery in her mistake; As Adam in the state of grace and innocence
was placed in a garden; and the first office allotted to him, was to be a
Gardener; so Jesus Christ appeared first in a garden, and presents himself in a
Gardiners likeness. And as that first Gardener was the Parent of sin, the ruin
of mankind, and the Author of death; so is this Gardener the ransom for our
sins, the raiser of our ruins, and the restorer of our life. In some sense
then, and in a Mystery Christ was a Gardener: but Mary's mistake was in
supposing him the Gardener of that only place; and not the Gardener of our
souls. Souls in desertion are full of mistakes, though in their mistakes are
sometimes many mysteries.

2. Her speech upon her mistake; If thou have born him hence, etc. we may
observe, --

1. That her words to Christ are not much unlike the answer she gave the
Angels; only she seems to speak more harsh to Christ, than she did to the
Angels; to them she complains of others; They have taken away my Lord; but to
Christ she speaks as if she would charge him with the fact, as if he looked
like one that had been a breaker up of graves, a carrier away of Corpses out of
their place of rest; Sir, if thou have born him hence. But pardon love, as it
fears where it needs not, so it suspects very often where it has no cause;
When love is at a loss; he, or any that comes but in our way, has done it,
has taken him away.

2. That something she spoke now to Christ which she had not mentioned to the
Angels. She said not unto them, tell me where he is, but reserved that question
for himself to answer, Come, tell me where thou have laid him, q. d. thou art
privy to the place, and with the action of removing Christ my Lord; Oh how she
errs, and yet how she hits the truth! Jesus must tell her what he had done with
himself, sure it was fittest for his own speech to utter, what was only
possible for his own power to do.

3. That the conclusion of her speech was a mere vant or flourish, And I will
take him away. Alas poor woman, she was not able to lift him up, there are more
than one or two allowed to the carrying of a corpse; and as for his it had more
than an hundred pound weight of myrrh and other odours upon it; sure she had
forgotten that women are weak, and that she her self was but a woman; how was
it possible that she should take him away? she could not do it; well, but she
would do it though; there is no essay too hard for love; she exempts no place,
she esteems no person, she speaks without fear, she promises without condition,
she makes no exception, as if nothing were impossible that love suggesteth; the
darkness could not fright her from setting out before day, the watch could not
fear her from coming to the Tomb where Christ was laid; she resolved to break
open the seals, and to remove the stone, far above her strength; and now her
love being more incensed with the fresh wound of her loss, she speaks
resolutely, I will take him away, never considering whether she could or no,
love is not ruled with reason, but with love; it neither regards what can be,
nor what should be; but only what it self desires to do.

4. That through all this speech she omits the principal verb, she enquires for
Jesus, but she never names him whom she enquires after. She could say to the
Angels, they have taken away my Lord; but now she talks of one under the term
of him if thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I
will take him away: him, him, him; but she never names him, or tells who he is;
this is solaecismus amoris, an irregular speech, but loves one dialect; q.d.
who knows not him? why, all the world is bound to take notice of him; he is
worthy to be the owner of all thoughts; and no thought in my conceit, can be
well bestowed upon any other than him. And therefore Sir Gardener, whosoever
thou art, if thou have born him hence, thou know who I mean, thou can not
be ignorant of whom I love; there is not such another among the sons of men; as
the psalmist, Psalm 45.2.
he is the fairest among the Children of men; or as the Spouse, he is the
chiefest of ten thousands; and therefore tell me some news of him; of none but
him: of him, and only of him: O tell me where thou have laid him, and I will
take him away. A soul sick of love, thinks all the world knows her beloved, and
is therefore bound to tell her where he is; the daughters of Jerusalem were
very ignorant of Christ, Can. 5.9. and yet I charge you, O daughters of
Jerusalem (said the Spouse) if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him I am sick
of love. Can. 5.8. John 20.16.


2. Christ appears as unknown: Jesus says unto her, Mary; she turned her self,
and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master. Sorrow may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning; she that hitherto had sought without
finding, and wept without comfort, and called without answer, even to her
Christ now appears; and at his apparition these passages are betwixt them,
first he speaks unto her, Mary; and then she replies unto, him, Rabboni, which
is to say Master.

1. He speaks unto her, Mary! it was but a word, but O what life? what Spirit?
what quickening and reviving was in the word? the voice of Christ is powerful;
if the Spirit of Christ come alone with the Word, it will rouse hearts, raise
spirits, work wonders. Ah poor Mary, what a case was she in before Christ speak
unto her? she ran up and down the Garden, with O my Lord, where have they laid
my Lord? but no sooner Christ comes, and speaks to her by his Spirit, and with
power, but her mind is enlightened, her heart is quickened, and her soul is
revived. Observe here the difference betwixt the Word of the Lord, and the Lord
speaking that word with power and Spirit; we find sometimes the hearts of
Saints are quickened, fed, cherished, healed, comforted in the use of the
means; and sometimes again they are dead, senseless, heavy, and hardened; nay,
which is more, the very same truth which they hear at one time, it may be
affects them, and at another time it does not; the reason is, they hear but the
Word of the Lord at one time, and they hear the Lord himself speaking that word
at another time; Mary heard the Word of the Lord by an Angel, woman, why
weepest thou? but her tears dropped still; she heard again the word of the Lord
by Christ himself, woman, why weepest thou? and yet she weeps, and will not be
comforted; but now Christ speaks, and he speaks with power, Mary! and at this
word her tears are dried up, no more tears now, unless they be tears for joy;
and yet again, observe the way how you may know and discern the effectual voice
of Jesus Christ; if it be effectual, it usually singles a man out; yea, though
it be generally spoken by a Minister, yet the voice of Christ will speak
particularly to the very heart of a man, with a marvelous kind of Majesty and
Glory, stamped upon it, and shining in it, take an humble, broken, drooping
Spirit, he hears of the free offer of grace and mercy in Jesus Christ, but he
refuses the offers; he hears of the precious promises of God in Christ, but he
casts by all promises, as things that are generally spoken and applied by man;
but when the Lord comes in, he speaks particularly to his very heart, he meets
with all his objections, that he thinks, this is the Lord, and this is to me.
Thus Mary before heard the voice of an Angel, and the voice of Christ, woman,
why weepest thou? it was a general voice, no better title was then afforded,
but woman; thou weepest like a woman; O woman, and too much a woman, why
weepest thou? but now Christ comes nearer, and he singles her out by her very
name, Mary! Oh this voice came home, he showed now that he was no stranger to
her, he knew her by name: as sometimes God spoke to Moses, thou have found Grace
in my sight, I know thee by name; so Christ speaks to Mary, thou have found
grace in my sight, I know thee by name. Exodus 33..17
Why how should this voice be ineffectual? Oh now it works! now she knows
Christ; which before she did not; and indeed this is the right way to know
Christ, to be first known of Christ. But now (says the Apostle) after that ye
have known God (and then he corrects himself Gal. 4.9
or rather are known of God; for till he know us, we shall never know him
aright. Now her dead spirits are rai^ed, which before were benumbed; and no
marvel that wi h a word he revive her spirits, who with a word made the W^rld,
and even in this very word showed an omnipotent power. The Gardener had ^one
his part (^aith one) to making her all g^^en on a sudden. But even now her body
seemed the hearse of her dead heart, and her heart the coffin of her dead soul;
and see how quickly all is turned out and in: a new world now; Christ's
resurrection is Mary Mag^alens resurrection too; on a sudden she revives,
raised (as it were) from a dead and drooping, to a lively and cheerful state.

^ She laid unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master. As she was ravished
with his voice, so impatient of delay she takes his talk out of his mouth, and
to his first and only word, she answered but one other, Rabboni, which is to
say, Master. A wonder that in this verse but two words should pass betwixt them
two; but some give this reason, that a sudden joy rouzing all her passions, she
could neither proceed in her own, nor give him leave to go forward in his
speech. Love would have spoken, but fear enfor^ed sil^^ce; hope framed words,
but doubt melts them in the passage; her inward concei^s served them to come
out, but then her voice trembled, her tongue faultered, her breath ^^iled; why
such is the estate of them that are sick with a surfeit of sudden joy^ her joy
was so sudden, that not a word more could be spoken, but Rabboni, which is to
say, Master. Sudden joys are not without some doubts or tremblings; when Jacob
heard that his son Joseph was alive, Gen ^^ 26. Psalm. 1.26.1. Acts 12.9.
his heart fainted, he was even astonished at so good a news; when God restored
the Jews out of captivity, they could think of it no otherwise then as a dream;
when Peter was by an Angel delivered out of prison, he took it only for a
vision or apparition, and not for truth; when Christ manifested his
resurrection to his Disciples, Luke 24.41.
it is said, that for very joy, they believed not; their fears (as it were)
kept back, and questioned the truth of their joys. As in the Sea when a storm
is over, there remains still an inward working and volutation; even so in the
mind of man, when its fears are blown over and there is a calm upon it, there
is still a motus trepidationis, a motion of trembling, or a kind of solicitous
jealousy o what it enjoyes. And this might be Mary Magdalens case; though she
suddenly answered Christ, upon the first notice of his voice, yet because the
novelty was so strange, his Person so changed, his presence so unexpected, and
so many miracles were laid at once before her amazed eyes, she found (as it
were) a sedition in her thoughts; her hope presumed best but her fear suspected
it to be too good to be true; and while these enterchange objections and
answers, she views him better; but for the present cannot speak a word more
save this Rabbony, which is to say, Master.

5. For the consequents after this apparition, Jesus says unto her, touch me
not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; John 20.17.
but go to my brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and to your
Father; and to my God and your God.

In these words we may observe, a prohibition and a command; the prohibition,
touch me not; the command, but go to my brethren, and say unto them, etc.

1. Touch me not. It seems Mary was now fallen at his sacred feet, she was now
ready to kiss with her lips his sometimes grievous, but now most glorious
wounds. Such is the nature of love, that it covets not only to be united, but
if it were possible, to be transformed out of it self, into the thing it
loves. Mary is not satisfied to see her Lord, nor is she satisfied to hear her
Lord, but she must touch him, embrace his feet, and kiss them with a thousand
kisses; Oh how she hangs, and clings about his feet! or at least, how she
offers to make toward him, and to fall upon him! -- but on a sudden he checks
her forwardness, touch me not.

What a mystery is this! Mary a sinner touched him, and she being now a Saint,
may she not do so much? she was once admitted to anoint ^is head, and is she
now unworthy to touch his feet? what meant Christ to debar her of so desired a
duty? she had the first sight of Christ and heard the first words of Christ
after his resurrection, and must she not have the privilege of his first
embracing? there is something of wonder in these words; and it puts many to a
stand; and many an interpretation is given to take off the wonder; I shall tell
you of some of them, though for my p^rt I shall cleave only to the last.

1. Some think that Mary not only essayed to kiss his feet, but to desire the
fulfilling of the promise of the Spirit of Christ; this promise Christ made to
his Disciples at his last supper, John 6.7.
I will send you the Comforter; and she expected it to be now performed after
his resurrection: to which Christ answered, Quia nondum sanctum spiritum
miserat ideo a tactu suo Mariam prohibebat, dicens nondum ascendi in calem,
unde ipse per me spiritum sanctum ad vos mittet. Cyril. l. 12. in Joha. c. 50.
that he would not then give the Spirit unto her, for that as yet he was not
ascended into heaven; whence the Spirit should come, q. d. forbear Mary; if
this be the meaning of thy complement, hands off, O touch me not; for I am not
yet ascended to my Father.

2. Others think that Mary was forbidden to touch, because of her unbelief: she
had not the least thought till just now that Christ was risen, or that he
should ascend; and therefore she deserved not the least favor at his hands. q.
d. Touch me not, Noli me tangere, quia in fide tua nondum resurrexi, and ad
gloriae statum perveni. Hieronym. Epist. 95. c. ad-Hedibiam.
for in thy faith I am not risen, nor shall I ascend unto my Father; thou
complainest of men, they have taken away my Lord, thou seek for the living
among the dead, and therefore thou art unworthy of a touch, or any approach: O
touch me not.

3. Others think that Christ forbade Mary's touch, because she looked upon it
as the most manifest confirmation of her faith touching Christ's resurrection.
There was a more sure and certain evidence of this thing than touching or
feeling, and the discovery of that was to be after his ascension when the holy
Ghost should be given, q. d. touch me not, for I would not have my resurrection
chiefly approved by the judgment of sense, Noli me tangere, noli meam
resurrectionem judicio sensuum comprobare sed parumper expecta tempes meae
ascensionis and missionis spiritus sancti, and tunc long melius and tenacius
percipies veritatem resurrectionis meae, quam modo me contingens. Bern. Ser.
28. in Cant.
rather expect a while, till I ascend to my Father in heaven, for then I will
send the holy ghost, and he shall declare the truth and certainty of my
resurrection far surer and better.

4. Others think that this touch was forbidden, Mat. 28.9.
Vt ostenderet manifestum castitatem, and sanctimoniam persanctificationem,
dixit Mariae, ne me attingas. Epiphan. haeresii 26. propefinem.
that Christ might show his approbation of chastity, and sanctity, and inward
purity; Mary was now alone with Christ, and that he might give an example of
most pure chastity, he forbids her touch, which afterward in presence of
others he admits her, and other women too; for so it is said, that they came
and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. And to this exposition the reason
affixed does well agree, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, q. d. for an
example of holy chastity, touch me not now, but hereafter in heaven I will give
thee leave; when men and women shall be as the holy Angels, and shall neither
marry, nor be given in marriage, then may thou touch; there will be no need
of the like example then as now; then I will not forbid thee; but till then,
especially if thou art alone, Oh touch me not!

5. Others think that Mary too much doated upon that present condition of Jesus
Christ; she looked upon it as the highest pitch of Christ's exaltation; she
desired no more happiness than to enjoy him in that same condition wherein now
she saw him, Ne pristina illa familiaritate, qua eum in carne mortalem
intuebatur, per tractaret, judicans post resurrectionem gloriam reverentius,
and gravius cum illo agendum esse. Chrisost. hom. 58. in Johan.
and thereupon said Christ, touch me not, for I am not yet ascended; q. d. O
Mary fix not thy thoughts so much upon my present condition, in as much as this
is not the highest pitch of my exaltation; I am not as yet attained to that,
nor shall I attain to it until I ascend; the degrees of my exaltation are
first my resurrection. 2. My ascension. 3. My session at Gods right hand; but
that is not yet.

6. Others think that Mary carried it with too much familiarity toward Christ;
she looked upon Christ as she did formerly, she had not that reverence or
respect of Christ as she ought to have had; she differenced not the mortal
state of Christ from his new glorified state after this resurrection, whereas
with him the case was quite altered; he is risen in a far otherwise condition
than he was, for now his corruptible has put on incorruption, and his mortal
has put on immortality, he dyed in weakness and dishonor, but he is risen
again in power and glory; and as in another state, so to another end, he was
not now to stay upon earth, or to converse here any longer, but to ascend up
into heaven, q. d. though I be not yet ascended to my Father, yet I shall
shortly ascend; and therefore measure not thy demeanor toward me by the place
where I am, but by that which was due to me; and when thou will rather with
reverence fall down a far off, than with such familiarity seem to touch me;
Thus touch me not.

7. Others think this prohibition was only for that time, and that because he
had greater business for her in hand, Christus non aliud prohibivit Magdalenae,
quam ne nimium temporis absumeret, proututea solebat, ad pedes ejus, sed quam
citius inde se expediret, ut de ejus resurrectione certiores faceret fratre
suos? Card. Tolet. sup. Cap. 20. Joh.
Christ was not willing now to spend time in complements, but to dispatch her
away upon that errand, Go to my brethren, etc. And the reason following suits
with this comment, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, q. d. thou need
not so hastily to touch me now, for I am not yet ascended; though I be going,
yet I am not gone, another time will be allowed, and thou may do it at better
leisure, only forbear now; and the first thing thou do, go to my brethren; it
will do them more good to hear of my rising, than it will do thee good to stand
here touching, and holding, and embracing; and therefore in this respect, now
touch me not.

Christus loquitur de tactu, and de ascensione, non corporali, sed spirituali.
Etexinde Magdalena a Christ Domino illuminata fuit, ut deinceps non solum
credideret, sed and alias feminas ad credendum instruerit. vid. Aug. Tract. 21.
in Ioh. Sermon. 60. de verbis Domini, and 252. and 155. de tempore Ambros. Luc.
Ultim. and lib. de Isaac. and anima. c 5. and Ser. 58.
8. Others think, that Christ in these words meant to wean her from all sensual
touching, and to teach her a new and Spiritual touch by the hand of faith; and
to this sense the reason agrees well, for I am not yet ascended, or, I shall
quickly ascend unto my Father; till Christ were ascended she might be touching
with a sensual touch, but that would neither continue nor do her any good; but
if she would learn the Spiritual touch, no ascending could hinder that; one
that is in heaven might be touched so: and hence it is, that if now we will but
send up our faith, we may touch Christ to this day, and there will virtue come
out of him. It was Christ's care to wean Mary from the comfort of his external
presence, and to teach her how to embrace him by a true and lively faith: he
was not long to be seen in his visible shape, being shortly to ascend unto his
Father; and therefore the main business was to learn that touch, that would
both continue and do her good to her souls health. And I believe for this very
cause, Christ would not stay long with any of his Disciples at any time; he
only appeared to manifest himself, and to prove his resurrection, and then to
wean t^em from all sensual and carnal touching; he would quickly have been
gone. Observe, that a Spitual touch of Christ by faith, is that which Christ
prefers before all touches: it is the Apostles saying, henceforth know we no
man aft^r the flesh, yea, though we ha e known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more The words have a double interpretation; As, 1.
Henceforth know we him no more; if we had any earthly carnal thoughts of Christ
like unto the rest of the Jews, that he, as the King of Israel, should begin an
earthly Temporal Kingdom, and that we should enjoy all manner of earthly carnal
privileges; as honor, riches, power, yet now we kno^ him no more, we have put
off all such carnal imaginations of his Kingdom. Or, 2. Henceforth know we him
no more; we stand no longer affected toward Christ after any merely humane,
civil, or natural manner of affections, such as those bear to him, who
conversed with him before his resurrection, but altogether in a divine and
Spiritual manner, agreeable to the state of glory, whereunto he is exalted.
Some vilified the Ministry of Paul, below that of the rest of the Apostles,
because he had not been conversant with Christ in the flesh; to which Paul
answers, away with this fleshly knowledge, henceforth know we no man after the
flesh; our way to deal with Christ is in a Spiritual manner, yea the blessing
is upon this manner, and not on that; blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet have believed. It is said of Mary his mother, that she had a double
conception of Jesus Christ, one in the womb of her body, another in the womb of
her soul; the first indeed was more miraculous, the second more benefical; that
was a privilege singular to her self, but this was her happiness common to all
the chosen; it is the work of the inward man that God accepts; a Spiritual
touch of Christ by faith is that which Christ prefers before all touches.

2. But go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your
Father, and to my God, and your God, this was the command of Christ; instead of
touching him, she must go with a message to his Apostles, and this was more
beneficial both to her and them. The first preacher of this resurrection
(besides the Angels) was Mary Magdalen; she that before had seven devils cast
out of her, had now the holy Spirit within her; she that was but a woman, is
now by Christ made an Apostle; Apostolorum Apostola, the Apostles, for to them
she was sent, and the message she was to deliver, it was Christ's rising and
ascending; and what were they but the Gospel, yea the very Gospel of the
Gospel? this was the first Sermon that ever was made by any mortals of Christ's
resurrection; and this her fact had some reference unto Eves fault; a woman was
the first messenger of this our joy, because a woman was the first Minister of
that our sorrow.

But what means he to speak of the ascension, when as yet we are but upon the
resurrection? I suppose this was to prevent their mistake, who might have
thought, if Christ be risen, why then we shall have his company again as
heretofore; no says Christ, I am not risen to make any abode with you, or to
converse with you on earth as formerly; my rising is in reference to my
ascending, look how the stars no sooner rise, but they are immediately in their
ascendent: so Christ no sooner risen, but he is presently upon his ascending up.

But whither will he ascend? to his Father, and our Father; to his God, and our
God. Every word is a step, or round of Jacobs ladder; by which we may ascend up
into heaven: As, 1. Father is a name of much good will: there is in it bowels
of compassion. Oh what tenderness is in a Father? and yet many a Father wants
good means to express his good will unto his Child; now therefore God is added,
that he may not be thought to be defective in that way; Oh Blessed message!
this is the voice of a Father to his Son: all that I have is thine. Luke. 15.31.
Now if this Father be also God, and if all that is God's to be also ours, what
can we desire more than all that God has; or all that ever God was worth? Oh
but here is the question, whether his Father and God be also ours? that he is
Christ s Father, and Christ's God, is without all question; but that his Father
should be our Father, and that his God should be our God, this were a Gospel
indeed; O then what a Gospel is this, Go to my brethren, and say unto them,
that our relations and interests are all but one; the same Father that is mine
is theirs, and the same God that is mine is theirs; his relations are made
ours, and our relations are made his interchangeably. No wonder if Luther tells
us that the best divinity lay in pronouns; for as there is no comfort in heaven
without God, and no comfort in God without a Father, so neither is there
comfort in Father, Heaven, or God, without ours, to give us a property in them
all. O the blessed news that Christ tells Mary, and that Mary tells us, I
ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God. Oh what dull
hearts have we that are not more affected with this blessed news? no sooner was
Christ risen from the dead, but he takes care in all haste to appear to Mary;
and no sooner he appears to her, but he sends her away in all haste to others;
go to my brethren, and tell it them: he would both have Mary and the rest of
his Apostles to hear of his loving kindness betimes in the morning; why alas!
they had for some days been amazed with sorrow and fear, but now he provides
for their joy; and no sooner they heard the news, but the^ joy according to the
joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide they spoil Christ's
resurrection was a cause of unspeakable joy to them, how is it that we hear the
same glad tidings, Isa. 9.3.
and yet we are no more affected with them? come Christians, since the occasion
extends to us, and is of equal concernment to us, let us tune our hearts to
this key; that as upon Christ's absence, we may Weep with them that weep; so
upon his return, we may spring out in joy, and rejoice with them that rejoice.
So much of the first Apparition.

SECT. VI. Of Christ's Apparition to his ten Disciples.
ON this day some reckon five apparitions; but of them five, as we have seen
the first, so I shall now only take notice of the last. Then the same day at
evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, Joh. 20.19,
20.
where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and stood
in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you; and when he had so said,
he showed unto them his hands and his feet. In these words we have the
apparition of Christ, with all its circumstances.

As, 1. When he appeared. 2. Where he appeared. 3. To whom he appeared. 4. How
he appeared. So necessary was it to confirm this point, that not a needful
circumstance must be wanting. And first is laid down the time; then the same
day at evening, being the first day of the week.

How exact is the Evangelist in this circumstance of time? it was the same day,
the same day at evening; and yet lest the day might be mistaken, it was the
same day at evening, being the first day of the week. 1. It was the same day
(i.e.) the very day of rising; he could not endure to keep them in long
suspense; the Sun must not down, before the Sun of Righteousness would appear.
The same day that he appeared to Peter, to the two Disciples going to Emmaus,
to the woman coming to the sepulcher, and to Mary Magdalen, as we have heard;
the very same day he appears to the ten. Oh what a blessed day was this? it was
the day of his resurrection, and the day of these several apparitions.

2. It was the same day at evening. Both at morn, noon, and evening Christ
showed himself alive by many infallible proofs. Early in the morning he
appeared to Mary, and presently after to the three Mary's, who touched his
feet, and worshipped him. About noon he appeared to Simon Peter; in the
afternoon he traveled with two of his Disciples almost eight miles, to the
Castle of Emmaus; and in the evening of the same day he returned invisible from
Emmans to Jerusalem. At all times of the day Christ is prepared, and preparing
grace for his people.

3. It was the same day at evening, being the first day of the week. (...),
that is, in one of the Sabbaths; but the Greek words are an Hebraism, and the
Hebrews use often by one to signify the first, as in Genesis 1.5. the evening and
the morning were one day (i.e.) the first day. And whereas the Greeks found one
of the Sabbaths, (...), must be understood either properly, for Sabbaths; or
else figuratively signifying the whole week; and this acception was usually
with the Jews; so the Evangelist brings in the Pharisee speaking, Luke 18.12.
(...), I fast twice in the Sabbath (i.e.) in the week; for it is impossible to
fast twice in one day; and hence the translatour renders it thus, primo die
h^bdomadis, on the first day of the week. In which is a discovery of his mercy;
Christ took no long day to show himself to his Apostles, nay he took no day at
all, but the very first day. When Joseph showed himself unto his brethren, he
would not do it at first, and yet he dealt kindly, and very kindly with them; O
but Christ's kindness is far above Joseph's; for on the first day of the week,
the very same day that he arose from the dead he appears unto them. Thus for
the time.

2. For the place, it is laid down in this passage, where the Disciples were
assembled. Now if we would know where that was, the Evangelist Luke speaks
expressly, it was in Jerusalem; Luke 24.33.
but in what house of Jerusalem it is unknown; only some conjecture that it was
in the house of some Disciple, wherein was an upper room. This upper room,
according to the manner of their buildings at that time, was the most large and
capacious of any other, Mede Churches
and the most retired and free from disturbance, and next to heaven, as having
no room above it. Mede tells us expressly, this was the same room wherein Christ
celebrated the passover, and instituted the Lords supper, and whereon the day
of his resurrection he came, and stood in the midst of his Disciples, the doors
being shut; and where eight days after, the Disciples being within, he
appeared again to satisfy the incredulity of Thomas; Joh. 20.26. Act. 1.12, 13.
and where the Apostles met after Christ was ascended. Then returned they unto
Jerusalem from the Mount called Olivet, -- and when they were come in, they
went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and
the rest. If this be true, it should seem that this (...) this upper room first
consecrated by Christ at his institution, and celebration of the Lords supper,
Nicephor. l. 8. Et. hist. cap 30 Psalm. 87.2. Jeron. in Epitaphio Paulae Epist.
27.
was thenceforth devoted to be a place of prayer, and holy assemblies; and for
certain the place of this (...) was afterward enclosed with a goodly Church,
known by the name of the Church of Syon; to which Jerome made bold to apply
that of the Psalm, The Lord loves the gates of Syon, more than all the
dwellings of Jacob.

Now of this upper room the doors are said to be shut, and the reason, by way
of adjunct, is for fear of the Jews; they were shut up as men environed and
beleaguered with enemies; and here a question is raised, whether Christ could
enter, the doors being shut? the text is plain, that he came in suddenly, and
because of his sudden presence (the doors being shut) they were terrifyed, Luke
24.37. Aug. Sermon. 59.
and afrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit. The ancients speaking
of it, tell us, that he entered while the doors were shut, and yet he was no
phantasme, but he had a true body consisting of flesh and bones. Now, Aug. in
Sermon. Pasch. Just quest 17. Qui intravit per ostia clausa non erat phantasma,
etc. Christ.
how such a body consisting of crass parts should enter into the room, and no
place at all open, is a great question; but it is generally answered, that it
was by miracle. As by miracle he walked on the sea, Mat. 10.25. and as by
miracle he vanished out of their sight, Luke. 24.31. so by miracle he came in,
the doors being shut. I know it is against the nature of a body, that one
should pass through another, both bodies remaining entire; and it is an axiom
in Philosophy, that penetration of bodies is merely impossible; yet for my
part, I shall not dispute the power of the Allmighty; this answer is enough for
me to all the objections either of Papist or Lutherans, that the creature might
yield to the Creator, and the Creator needed not to pass through the Creature;
Christ came in when the doors were shut, either causing the doors to give
place, the Disciples not knowing how; or else altering the very substance of
the doors, that his body might pass through them without destru^tion, I know
not but he that thickened the waters to carry his body, might also attenuate
the doors to make way for his Body.

3. For the persons to whom he appeared, they were his Disciples; they that
were shut up in a conclave, not daring to step out of doors for fear of the
Jews, to them now Christ appeared. It is Christ's usual course to appear to
them who are full of fears, and griefs, and most in dangers; Isa 43.2. Psalm. 23
4.
when thou passest through the wate^s I will be with thee, and through the
Rivers they shall not overslow thee; yea though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil (says David) for thou art with me. He
was with Joseph in prison, with Jonas in the deep, with Daniel in the Lions
den, with the three Children in the fiery furnace: Lo I see four men (said
Nebuchadnezzar) walking in the midst of the fire, and the form of the fourth is
lik^ the Son of God. Dan. 3.24
And thus he was with Paul when he stood before Nero, though all men f^^sake
me, yet Christ the Lord stood by me, and strengthened me. And do not his
apparitions th^^ day speak thus much? when Mary was full of grief, then Christ
appeared to her; when the two disciples traveling toward Emmans, talked
together of all those things which had happened, and w r^ sad, then Christ
appeared to them. And when all the Apostles were afraid of the Jews, 2 Timothy
4.16, 17.
and therefore shut the doors that none might enter, then Christ appeared to
them, they were his Disciples, his sad, distracted, timorous Disciples, to whom
Christ appeared.

4. For the manner how he appeared; it appears in these passages: 1. He stood
in the midst. 2. He said peace be unto you. 3. He showed unto them his hands
and his side.

1. He stood in the midst. Herein he represents himself as a common good; Luke
24.17.
things placed in the midst are common; and he stands in the midst as a common
Savior: and hence it is that our faith is called a common faith, Tit. 1.4.
to Tytus my son after the common faith: Ju^. 3.
and our salvation is called a common salvation I gave all diligence to write
unto you of the Common salvation. And in that way as salvation is common,
Christ Jesus is called a common Savior; behold I bring you glad tidings of
great joy which shall be to all people; for unto you, (unto all you) is born in
the City of David a Savior, Luke 2.10, 11
which is Christ the Lord. This posture of Christ (standing in the midst)
decla^es that he despises none, but that he takes care of them all. Some
observe, that all the while Christ was on earth, he most-what stood in this
posture; at his birth he was found in a stable in the midst of beasts; Luke
2.49. John 1.26. Luke 22.27.
in his Childhood he was found in the Temple in the midst of the Doctors; in
his manhood, John the Baptist told them, there stands one in the midst of
you, whom ye know not; and he said of himself, I am in the midst of you as one
that seveth; at his death that very place fell to his turn: for they crucified
him in the midst betwixt two theeve^, one on the right hand, and the other on
the left. Luke 23.33.
And now at his rising there we find him again, the Disciples in the midst of
the Jews, and he in the midst of his Disciples. After this in Patmos, John saw
him in heaven in the midst of the throne; Rev. 7.17.1.13.
and in earth he saw him in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks; Mat.
25.33.
and in the last day he shall be in the midst too, of the sheep on his right
hand, and of the goats on his left.

But I find there is yet more in it, that he stood in the midst: for the midst
is Christ's place by nature, he is the second Person in the Trinity; and the
midst is Christ's place by office, he deals betwixt God and man; and the
midst is Christ's place in respect of his Person, he is God-man, one that has
interest in both parties; it was the middle Person who was to be the middle one,
that undertook this mediation betwixt God and us. We read in the Roman history,
that the Romans and Sabines joining battle together, the women being daughters
to the one side, and wives to the other, interposed themselves and took up the
quarrel; and by their mediation, who had a peculiar interest in either side,
they who before stood upon highest terms of hostility, did now join themselves
together into one body and state. God and we were enemies, but Christ stood in
the midst to reconcile us unto God, and to slay this enmity; and to this
purpose Christ is called (...), a Mediator, a term peculiar to the Scriptures,
not to be found amongst profane Authors. O what comfort is here to see Jesus
Christ stand in the midst; now may the Disciples behold him as their blessed
peace maker, their Mediator, as one that has slain the enmity; Ephesians. 2.16
not only that enmity betwixt men and men, J^ws and Gentiles, but also betwixt
God and men. This he did by his death, and now he declares it at his
resurrection; for so the Apostle there goes on, having slain the enmity, by his
Cross, he came and preached peace; ver. 17.
and so the evangelist here goes on, after his resurrection, Jesus came and
stood in the midst, and said unto them, peace be unto you. You see how he
stood. --

2. What he said, this is the next passage, he said peace be unto you, a
seasonable salutation; for now were the Disciples in fear and trouble; they had
no peace with God, or man, or with their own consciences; and therefore a more
welcome news could not have come; I suppose this refers to all these. As, --

1. It speaks their peace with God: sin was it that brought a difference
betwixt God and man, John 1.29.
now this difference Jesus Christ had taken away by his death, Behold the Lamb
of God which takes away the sins of the World; he had taken it away in its
condemning power, or as ^o it is separating power betwixt God and them; this was
the great design of Christ's coming to make peace betwixt God and man; his
Father imposed this office upon him, and Jesus Christ undertook it, and
discharged it, and he proclaims it, in the first place to his Disciples, Peace
be unto you.

2. It spakes their Peace with man: I know no reason why we should exclude
civil peace out of Christ's wish; many, and many a promise and precept we have
in the Word scattered here and there to this purpose, Lev. 26.6. Job. 5.23.24.
And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make
you afraid. -- and thou shall be in league with the stones of the field, and
thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, Ier. 29.7. Heb. 12.14.
and seek the peace of the City -- and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the
peace thereof shall ye have peace. And follow peace, and holiness, without
which no man shall see God. Orbem pecatum was ever a clause in the prayers of
the primitive Church, Romans 12.13.
that the world might be quiet; I am sure it is Christ's command, if it be
possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men.

3. It speaks there peace among themselves, peace one with another; such is, or
should be the condition of the Church, Jerusalem is builded as a City that is
compact together, Psalm. 122.3.
or unity within it self, the Apostle dwells in this unity, there is one body,
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
and one Spirit, and one hope, and one Lord, and one faith, and one baptism,
and one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you
all. The Church is a Court, whose very pillars are peace; the building of
Christianity knows no other material to work upon; if we look upon the Church
it self, there is one body; if upon the very soul of it, there is one Spirit;
if upon the endowment of it, there is one hope; if upon the head of it, there
is one Lord: if upon the life of it, there is one faith: if upon the door of
it, there is one Baptism; if upon the Father so it, there is one God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. Mark. 9.50.
It was sometimes Christ's commands unto his Apostles, have salt in your
selves, and have peace one with another; and as a blessed effect of this
salutation, (for I look upon them as words full of virtue) the Apostles and
Churches of Christ in primitive times kept a most sweet harmony, the multitude
of them that believed, were of one heart, Acts. 4.32.
and of one soul.

4. It speaks peace within, peace of conscience; the Apostles had exceedingly
fallen from Christ; one betrayed him, and another denied him, but all run away,
and left him alone in the midst of all his enemies; and yet to them he speaks
this salutation, peace be unto you; I know not a better ground for comfort of
poor humbled sinners than this is, it may be you have dealt very unkindly with
Jesus Christ, you have forsook him, denied him, forsworn him; O but consider,
all this hindered not Christ's apparition to his Apostles; he comes unexpected,
and quiets their spirits; he stays not till they had sued to him for mercy, or
pardon, but of his mere love, and free grace, he speaks kindly to them all, he
stills the waves, and becalmes their troubled Spirits, working in them
according to his words, peace be unto you.

O the sweet of peace! it is all wishes in one; this little word is a breviary
of all that is good; what can they more, than to have peace with God, and peace
with men, and peace within? Luke 2.14.
sure there is much in it, because Christ^ is so much upon it; at his birth the
Angels sung, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace; at his baptism
the form of a dove lighted upon him, and what meant this but peace? in his life
the sort of integrity was his court, and what was here but peace? near his
death he gives peace as a legacy to his Church, John 14.27.
peace I leave with you, my peace I give you; at his resurrection his first
salutation to his Apostles is a wish of peace, peace be unto you: what can I
say more to make us in love with peace; Ioh. 17.2021.
why all Christ did, and all Christ suffered was for peace; Luke 19.42.
he prayed for it; neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which
shall believe on me, -- that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and
I in thee, that they also may be one in us. And he wept for it, if thou had
known even thou at least in this thy day, the things which do belong unto thy
peace. And he dyed to (...) but ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh
by the blood of Christ, for he is our peace. Ephesians. 2, 13, 14.
Of this we need no other proof or sign, but that of the Prophet Jonah, when
the sea wrought and was tempestuous, what shall we do unto thee (said the
Mariners) that the sea may be calm unto us? and he said, take me up and cast me
into the sea, so shall the sea be calm; Jona. 1.11, 12.
when that great enmity was betwixt God and us, what shall I do (said God) that
my justice may be satisfied, and my wrath appeased, and that there may be a
calm? why, take me (said Christ) and cast me forth into the sea, let all thy
waves and thy billows go over me, make me a peace off^ring and kill me, that
when I am dead there may be a calm, and when I am risen I may proclaim it,
saying, peace be unto you. You hear what he said.

3. What he showed; this is the next passage, he showed unto them his hands,
and his side. I look upon this as a true and real manifestation of his
resurrection: And we find that without this, Thomas professed he would never
have believed, except I shall see in his hands the print of the nayls, and put
my finger into the print of the nayls, John 20.25.
and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. But a question or two is
here raised, as whether these wounds and prints of the nayls and spear, can
possibly agree with a glorified body? and why Christ retained those wounds and
prints? for the first, whether those prints could agree with a glorified bo^y?
some affirm it with much boldness; and they say that Christ not only retained
those prints whilst he abode upon earth, but now that he is ascended into
heaven he still retains them; for my part I dare not go so far, because
Scripture is silent; but the day is a coming when we shall see Christ face to
face, and then we shall know the truth of this: only I conceive that Christ's
body yet remaining on earth was not entered into that fullness of glory, as it is
now in heaven; and therefore he might then retain some skars, or blemishes, to
manifest the truth of his resurrection unto his Disciples, which are not
agreeable to his state in heaven. But this I deliver, not as matter of Faith;
reasons are produced both ways by the ancient writers, and I refer you to them.

For the second, why Christ retained these wounds and prints? many reasons are
rendered, though I shall not close with all.

1. Some think those skars or prints were as the trophies of his victory;
nothing is more delightful to a lover, than to bear about the wounds undergone
for his beloved; and nothing is more honorable for a Soldier than to show his
wounds undergone for his countries good; what are they but as so many arguments
of his valor, and trophies of his victory; this was Bedes sense, Christ
reserved his skars, Beda. in Luc.
not from any impotency of curing them, but to set out the glory and triumph of
his victory over death and hell.

2. Others think those skars or prints were for the setting out of Christ's
splendour and beauty, as in cut or pinck garments the inward silks do appear
more splended, so in Christ's wounds there appears inwardly far more beauty.
Aquinas affirms, that in the very place of the wounds, there is a certain
special comeliness in Christ. And Augustine thinks, Thom. 3. part. q 53. a
cert. Aug. 22. de civit. Dei.
that the very martyrs may retain some skarrs of their wounds in glory, because
there is no deformity, but dignity in them; and besides, a certain beauty may
shine in their bodies answerable to their virtues wherein they excelled.

3. Others think that Christ retains those skars that he might by them
interceed for us: upon these very words, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous: 1 John. 2.2.
they comment thus; that God is appeased by Christ, Thom. in. 1.
representing to him the prints and skars of his humane nature. Christ's wounds
are as so many open mouths, Jona. l. 2.
which cry at the tribunal of his Father for mercy, as Abels blood cried for
revenge.

4 Others think that Christ retains those skars, that thereby in the day of
judgment he might confound the Jews, and all the wicked in the world. It is
Augustine's judgment, that as Christ showed Thomas his hands and side, because
otherwise he would not believe; so at the last day will he show those wounds to
all his enemies, saying, Come, behold the man whom ye have crucified; come, see
the prints of the nayls, and the print of the spear; Aug. l. 2. de symb. 6.8.
these be the hands and feet that you nailed and clenched to a piece of wood:
this is the side you pierced; by you, and for you was it opened, but you would
not enter in that ye might be saved. And for this opinion they alledg this
text, Rev. 1.7.
Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him,
even so Amen.

5. All think that Christ retained his skarrs, that he might convince the
unbelieving Disciples of his resurrection; hereby they are assured that Christ
is raised, and that the same body of Christ is raised that before was
crucified; and to this we cannot but subscribe, the skars of his wounds were
for the healing of their doubts. Luke brings in Christ, Aug. tract. 121. in
Johan. Luke 24.39.
he bespeaking his Disciples thus; Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my
self, handle me and see: q. d. Come, let your Fingers enter into these prints
of the Nails, and let your hands he thrust into the depths of this wound; come,
and open these holes in my hands, open this wound in my side; I will not deny
that to my Disciples for their faith, which I denied not to mine enemies in
their rage; open, and feel till you come to the very bone, that so both bones
and wounds may witness, that I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am
alive for ever more. Rev. 1.18. Use.
Amen.

What testimonies are here to convince the world of Christ's resurrection;
surely this argues the goodness of God, that strives thus wonderfully with the
weak says of those that are his. At first he appeared to one, even to Mary
Magdalen; and after he appeared to two, Mat 28.1. Mark. 16.1.
says Matthew, to Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary; or to three, says Mark,
to Mary Magdalen, Mary the mother of James, and Salome; but of this apparition
he is seen of ten at least; and to confirm their faith, not a considerable
circumstance must be wanting; here is time, and place, and persons to whom he
appears, and the manner how he appears, he stands in the midst to be seen of
all, he speaks to them, breaths on them, eats with them, and shows them his
hands, and his side; O the wonderful condescentions of Christ! what helps does
he continually afford to beget in us faith? if we are ignorant he instructs us,
if we err, he reduces us, if we sin he corrrects us, if we stand he holds us
up, if we fall down he lifts us up again, if we go he leads us, if we come to
him he is ready to recieve us; there is not a passage of Christ betwixt him and
his, but it is an argument of love, and a means either of begetting, or of
increasing Faith; O then believe in Christ, yea believe thy part in the death
and resurrection of Jesus Christ; considering that these apparitions were not
only for the Apostles sakes, but if Christ be thine, they were for thy sake,
that thou might believe, and be saved. But I shall have occasion to speak
more of this in the Chapter following. So much of the second apparition as it
is recorded by the Evangelist John.

SECT. VII. Of Christ's Apparition to all his Apostles.
IMmediately after this apparition to his ten Apostles, the next is to all his
Apostles, not one being absent; and after eight days, again his Disciples were
within, and Thomas with them, then came Jesus, the doors being shut and stood
in the midst, and said peace be unto you; Joh. 20.26, 27. Ver. 28, 29.
then says he to Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but
believing; and Thomas answered, and said unto him, my Lord, and my God; Jesus
says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed; blessed
are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

In the whole story we have Christ's apparition, and fruits of it.

1. For the Apparition (as in the former) we have, 1. The time. 2. The place.
3. The Persons to whom he appeared. And, 4. The manner how he appeared.

1. For the time, and after eight days; it was on the same day seven night
after the former apparitions, which was the first day of the week, and now
because of his resurrection, Rev. 1.10.
and apparitions, called the Lords day; I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day,
(this in my apprehension) makes much for the honor of the Lord's day: the
first assembly of the Apostles, after Christ's death, was on the first day of
the week; and the second Church assembly that we read of, was again on the
first day of the week, and after eight days; a sign that the Lord's Day Sabbath
was on the first day instituted, and that the more solemn assemblies of God 's
people, were henceforth to be on the Lords days. Aug. de verb. Aposto. Sermon, 15.
It is an usual observation, that things and persons which are named the Lords,
are sacred and venerable, in an high degree; as the grace of our Lord, Romans
16.24. the spirit of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.17. the beloved of the Lord, Rom 16.8.
the glory of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18. the word of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.3. the cup
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27. Augustine tells us that the Lords resurrection
promised us an eternal day, and that it consecrated unto us the Lords day.
Surely then this day must needs be venerable, and a solemn day among us
Christians. Now it was that as the rising of the Sun dispelleth darkness, so
Christ the Son of righteousness shined forth unto the world by the light of his
resurrection; and hence we read of the Apostles observation of this very day
above all others; The first day of the week, the Disciples being come together
to break bread, Paul preached unto them: -- and concerning the collection for
the Saints, Act. 20.7.
as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye: upon the
first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God had
prospered him. Charitable contributions, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
and Church Assemblies were in use, and practice on the first day of the week,
(i.e.) on the Lord's day. An argument sufficient to me against all the opposers
of this sacred truth, that the first day of the week is our Christian Sabbath;
why then Christ arose, and at sundry times appeared before his ascension, and
after his ascension: Christ sent down the holy Ghost on that very day; and
after the sending of the holy Ghost, the Apostles then preached, the Churches
then assembled, Charities were then gathered, the Lord's Supper was then
celebrated; Christ's first apparition was on that day, and after that day
finished, not any other apparition before this time: And after Eight days.

2. For the place, it is said to be within; probably it was the same house
wherein the former apparition was; the house wherein Christ celebrated the
Passover, and instituted the Lord's Supper; wherein was the large upper room
made ready for Christ; In this upper room immediately after Christ's ascension,
Mark 14.15.
was that famous assembly of all the Apostles; as we have heard. And in this
upper room was that other famous assembly of all the twelve, when the holy
Ghost came down upon them in cloven tongues of fire, at the feast of Pentecost;
and if we may believe tradition; Act. 2.1.
in this upper room the seven Deacons (whereof Stephen was one) were elected
and ordained. And in this upper room the Apostles, and Elders of the Church at
Jerusalem held that council, the pattern of all councels, for the decision of
that question, whether the Gentiles that believed were to be circumcised? Acts
6.
in this upper room the Apostles and Disciples frequently assembled for prayer
and supplications; Yea they continued there with one accord in prayer and
supplication: And hence Cyril who was Bishop of the place, calls it (...), the
upper Church of the Apostles. Acts 15.
But of this upper room, and of the doors of it being shut, we have spoken
before.

3. For the persons, they were his ten Disciples, to whom he had appeared
formerly, only now Thomas was with them, and so the number is complete, Acts
1.14.
which before was not; his Disciples were within, and Thomas with them: and,
Why Thomas with them? was not Thomas one of them? was not Thomas a Disciple of
Christ, Cyr. Jerus. Cat. 16.
as well as the rest? I grant; but Thomas is added, because Thomas was not
present at the last apparition, and this apparition was more especially for
Thomas's sake; O the admirable love of Christ toward poor sinners! observe, in
Christ are bowels of mercy to his straying sheep; the Disciples in danger had
fled away from Christ, but he will not fly away from them; no, no, he seeks
them, he stands in the midst of them, and he comes again with an Olive branch
of peace, saying, peace be unto you. Of all these we have touched before; but
here is something new; a new mercy breaking out on faithless Thomas? Christ
proves it by lively examples, and strong arguments, Isa. 42.3.
that He will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed; that he
came to seek, and to save that which was lost: Luke 19.10.
that he was sent to bind up the broken hearted, and to heal the sick, to
reduce the abject, and to bring to the fold the straying sheep; for the sake of
one Thomas, Christ appears again, that to him as well as the rest he might
communicate his goodness, bequeath his peace, and confirm him in this necessary
point of faith, that he was risen again. O the goodness of Christ! like as a
Father pityeth his children, so the Lord pityeth them that fear him; Psalm.
103.13.
he that left the ninety and nine in the wilderness, to go after that sheep
that was lost, declares his desire to save sinners; Of all that thou have given
me, I have not lost one, not one of his sheep; John 17.12.
he may suffer them a while to stray, as this one Disciple, who continued
incredulous for one whole week, but a Lord's day comes, and then Christ appears
in the midst of the candlesticks: The Lord is not slack concerning his promise
(as some men count slackness) but he is long-suffering to usward, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Humbled sinners
that despair in themselves may here find encouragement; it is their usual cry,
O my sins, 1 Pet. 3.9
these sins are heinous, these sins will damn me. Oh but consider, has not the
Lord pardoned as great sins? if thou art wicked, consider the Publican; if thou
art unclean, remember Magdalen; if thou art a thief, a manslayer, muse on that
thief that was crucified with Jesus Christ; if thou art a blasphemer, call to
mind the Apostle Paul, who was first a Wolf, and then a Shepherd; first lead,
and then gold; first a Saul, and then a Paul; if thou art faithless, d^ffident,
an unbeliever, one that have turned thy back on Christ, fled away from thy
colors, look on Thomas, he fled away from Christ, as soon as any, and he is
longest from Christ, after his Resurrection of all the rest; and though his
fellow Disciples say, They have seen the Lord, and that he was risen indeed;
yet this will not sink into his head, he will not acknowledge it, Joh. 20.25.
but is most peremptory; Except he see in his hands the print of the nails,
and put his fingers into the print of the nails, and thrust his hand into his
side, he will not believe; Why should any sinner despair of Mercy? thou say,
I am wicked; and God says to thee, As I live says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and
live: thou say, I am an unbeliever, Ezekiel. 33.11.
I am shut up in the prison of unbelief, under bolts, and fetters, that I
cannot stir one inch toward Heaven; Why? so was Didymus, and yet he obtained
mercy; and the Apostle tells us, that God has concluded all, or shut up
altogether in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. Romans 11.32.
He despises none, rejects none, abhors none, unless they continue to despise,
reject, and abhor the Lord: Oh what a sweet point is here to gain sinners, to
move, to melt, to thaw hard hearts? the incredulity of this Disciple turns to
our profit; and tends more to the confirmation of our faith, if we are but
weak, than the very faith of all the other Disciples of Jesus Christ, had not
Thomas disbelieved, we had not received so great encouragements, to have
believed in Christ, as now we have.

Excuse me, that I speak thus much to encourage sinners to come in to Christ, I
would be sometimes a Boanerges, and sometimes a Barnabas; a son of thunder to
rouse hard hearts, and a son of consolation to cheer up drooping spirits. All
Ministers may learn of the great Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, to have a
respect in their minist^y to one sinner, to one incredulous Thomas; we cannot
be ignorant of these Scriptures, Romans 14.1.
Him that is weak in the faith receive you. -- And to the weak I became as
weak, 1 Cor. 9.22.
that I might gain the weak. -- And we exhort you brethren, warn them that are
unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all
men. 2 T^es 5.14.
-- And of some have compassion, making a difference; and others save with
f^ar, pulling them out of the fire. -- And brethren, if a man be overtaken in a
fault, ye which are spiritual, Jude. 22.23.
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness. -- And the servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient in meekness,
instructing those that oppose themselves, Gal. 6.1.
if God peradventure will give them repentance. Dear souls! 2 Timothy 2 24, 25.
How do we long for your conversion and salvation? how are you in our hearts,
in our Prayers, in our Sermons? My little children, How do we travel in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you? how gladly would we spend, and be spent
for you, though the more abundantly we love you, the less we are loved of you?
If I knew but one Thomas in the great assembly of God's people, I should think
it as a crown, and the glory of my ministry to persuade this man into faith.
Gal. 4.19. 2 Cor. 12.15.
Christ in this apparition, eyes one especially above all the rest; When his
Disciples were within, and Thomas with them, then came Jesus.

4. The manner how he appeared, 1. He came, the doors being shut. 2. He stood
in the midst. 3. He said, peace be unto you. All these we have dispatched in
the former apparition; I shall therefore proceed to that which is peculiar to
this, Then said he to Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but
believing. In this apparition he argues his Resurrection. Joh. 20.27.
1. From words. 2. From deeds.

1. From words. Thomas had said, Except I see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nayls, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe. 1. Now Christ repeats the very self-same words,
and therein gives in one argument of his resurrection; for if Christ could know
what Thomas had said, how is he but alive, and risen from the dead? the dead
have not sense, much less the use of reason, but least of all the knowledge of
another mind; but Christ has sense and reason, science and omniscience;
observe, Though Christ be absent as in his bodily presence, yet he
understands all our thoughts, and if need were, he could repeat all our
sayings, word by word; How then may this convince all unbelievers in the world,
that Christ is risen, that he that was dead, now lives, and that he is alive
for ever more?

2. He appears arguing his Resurrection from deeds, wherein is an act and
object. 1. The act is, Thomas seeing and feeling, and q. d. Thomas, thou will
not believe except thou see, and feel, now this is against the nature of
says; it consists not in seeing or feeling, but on the contrary, Faith is
the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. Indeed
in things natural a man must have experience; and then believe: but in divine
things a man must first believe, and then have experience, and yet to help thy
unbelief (says Christ) I am willing thus far to condescend, Heb. 11.1.
and yield unto thy weakness, come, feel the print of the nayls, and of the
spear, Come reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy
hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. Christ
compassionates his children, though full of weakness and wants; He pities them
that fear him, for he knows our frame, Ps. 103.12, 13.
he remembers that we are but dust. 2. The object is Christ seen or felt; his
prints, and skars, are the very witnesses of our redemption, and of his
resurrection; they declare that Satan is overthrown, that death and hell are
swallowed up in victory, that He has spoiled principallities and powers; and
to this purpose are these texts, Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed
garments from Bozrah? By Edom, is meant death, by Bozrah (the chief City of
Edom) is meant the state of the dead or hell; from both which Christ returned
at his glorious resurrection, For, thou will not leave my soul in hell, Col.
2.12, 13. Isa. 63.1, 2, 3.
neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption, Psalm. 16.10. Now
says the Prophet, or some Angel, Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed
garments from Bozrah, who is this that comes so triumphantly, with the keys
of Edom, and Bozrah, of death and hell at his girdle? to which the answer is
given, I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save; as much as to say, it is
I Jesus Christ, I that am righteous in speaking, and mighty in saying; whose
Word is truth, and whose Work is salvation, it is I, even I; this answer given,
another question is propounded, Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and
thy garments like him that treads in the wine-fat? q. d. here is nothing but
skars, and wounds, and blood; if thou art so mighty to save, How comes thy
apparel to be so red, and sprinkled, or stained with blood? to which Christ
answers, I have trodden the wine press alone, -- and I will tread them in mine
anger. I was troad, and pressed, till the very blood streamed out of my hands,
and feet, and side, so pressed, that they pressed the very soul out of my body.
See here, Behold my hands, and my feet, and my side; that it is I my self, I
have tread the wine press alone. But as I was troad, so I will tread; up he
gets, and he treads on them that troad on him, his enemies of Edom and Bozrah,
are now like so many clusters under his feet, and he tramples upon them, as
upon Grapes in a fat, till he makes the blood spring out of them, and all to
sprinkle his garments, as if he had come out of the wine press indeed. See here
a double sight, his own blood, and his enemies blood; here is the blood of the
Lamb that was slain, and the blood of the Dragon that was troaden upon; here is
a show both of his passion, and his resurrection; of his suffering and
triumphing, -- another text of this nature; And one shall say unto him, What
are these wounds in thy hands? then he shall answer, Those with which I was
wounded in the house of my friends. Zach. 13.6.
I know in the stead of Christ some have employed these words to the false
Prophets, as if they had passed through the Churches discipline, and so had
received their wounds. But others refer them to Jesus Christ, of whom without
controversy the next verse speaks; and of whom the first verse of this chapter
speaks, and to whom after a long Parenthesis the Prophet seems to return; And
one shall say unto him (who was the fountain opened) what are these wounds in
thy hands? or as the Septuagint, in the midst of thy hands? a wonder it is to
see those prints, and skars in the hands of Christ; and therefore is the
question, What are these wounds? to which Christ answers, Those with which I
was wounded in the house of my friends (i.e.) in the house of my beloved, the
children of Israel, my brethren according to the flesh, the people of the Jews;
why these are the wounds they gave me, and which now I show as the signs of my
victory, and as the marks of my resurrection.

Thus far of the first head, the apparition of Christ.

2. For the fruits of this apparition, they contain Thomas's confession, and
Christ's commendation of him in some respects.

1. Thomas's confession, And Thomas answered, and said unto him, my Lord, and
my God, a few words, but of great weight; 1. He acknowledges Christ a Lord;
Mat. 28.18.
into whose hands are put the very keys of heaven; all power is given unto me
in heaven and in earth. 2. He acknowlegeth Christ God; whom he saw with his
eyes, and felt with his hands, he looks on, not as a mere man, but as God, and
as the second person in the Godhead. 3. He acknowledges Christ to be his
Lord, and his God; this apropriating of Christ, is the right character of a
faith, by which he brings home all the benefits of Christ unto his own soul, I
shall a while insist on all these.

1. He acknowledges Christ a Lord, How is he a Lord? I answer, 1. By essence,
as God is Lord, so Christ is Lord, the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, and the
Holy Ghost is Lord; and yet they are not three Lords, but one Lord.

2. By creation, Christ is before all things (says the Apostle) and by him all
things consist. Col. 1.17.
This very thing is an argument of his Lordship. To us there is but one Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.9.
by whom are all things, and we by him.

3. By redemption, unction, office, and Mediatorship, unto which he was
designed by his Father; Act. 2.36.
and therefore the Apostle says, that God has made him Lord and Christ; he is
a Lord by his office, and by the accomplishment of his office, in dying,
rising, and reviving, he became Lord both of quick and dead, For to this end
Christ both dyed, and rose, Romans 14 9.
and revived, that he might be Lord both of dead and living. And thus he is a
Lord in two respects. 1. A Lord in Authority, to command whom, and what he
will; he only is Lord over our persons, over our faith, over our consciences;
to him only we must say, Lord what will thou have me to do? Lord save us, or we
perish. 2. A Lord be is in power, he has power to forgive, and power to
cleanse; he has power to justify, and power to sanctify; he has power to
quicken, and power to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him; he
has power to hold fast his sheep, and power to cast out the accuser of the
brethren; he has power to put down all his enemies, and power to subdue all
things unto himself; in every of these respects Christ is a Lord. True, say
blasphemers, he is Lord by office, but he is not Lord by essence, as God is
Lord, No? peruse some texts in the Old Testament where the title of Lord is
essentially spoken of, and we shall find the very same texts, and titles
applied to Christ in the New Testament. As for instance, in Isa. 6.5. Woe is me
(says Esaias) for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hoasts; now this
John refers to Christ; these things says Esaias, when he saw his Glory, Isa.
6.5.
and speak of him. In Psalm. 68.17, 18. the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in
the holy place, thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive,
thou have received gifts for men; now this the Apostle applies to Christ, when
he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. In
Psalm. 110.1. Psalm. 110.1.
the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, Joh. 12.41.
until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Now this Jesus Christ applies to
himself, Psalm. 68.17.
saying, that David in spirit called him Lord, saying, the Lord said unto my
Lord. In Isa. 40.3. the voice of him that cries in the wilderness, prepare ye
the way of the Lord; now this the Evangelist applies to Christ. Ephesians. 4.8.
This is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, the voice of one
crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord. No wonder if Thomas
call Christ Lord, why, both the Old and New Testament agree in this, that
Christ is Lord; Lord by creation, and Lord by redemption; Lord by office, and
Lord by essence.

Mat. 2.44, 45. Isa. 4.5. Mat. 3.3.
2. He acknowledges Christ to be God, as well as Lord; my Lord, and my God. But
how is he God? I answer, not only by participation, similitude, or in some
respects, as Angels, and men are called gods; but simply, absolutely,
essentially, and without any restriction. Sometimes we read in Scripture, that
Men or Angels, Exodus 7.1.
good and bad, are called Gods; And the Lord said to Moses, see, I have made
thee a God to Pharaoh. -- And thou shall be instead of God to Aaron. Thus
Nebuchadnezzer is called the mighty one, Exodus 4.16. Ezekiel. 31.11. 2 Cor. 4.4.
Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 82.6. Psalm. 138.1.
or the God of the Heathens; and Satan is called the god of this world. Thus
Magistrates are called gods; thou shall not revile the gods. I have said ye
are gods; Angels are called gods, before the gods will I sing praises unto
thee; but in all these there is some restriction, or improper speech; Moses is
called Pharoah's God, and Aaron's God, not absolutely, but with restriction to
Pharaoh and Aaron; Nebuchadnezzer is called the god of the heathen, and Satan
the god of this world; not absolutely, but with restriction to the heathen, and
this world; Magistrates are called gods, and good Angels are called gods, Heb.
1.5.
not absolutely, but in respect of some offices or excellency, which they
partake of from God. Only Jesus Christ is called God without any restriction,
Ver. 8 Romans 8.32.
and not only in respect of some office, or similitude, but absolutely,
essentially, properly; as being from all eternity God of God; as being God of
the substance of the Father before all worlds. What, is Christ only God, as an
Angel is God? Joh. 2.16. 1 John 5.20.
I challenge here all blasphemers in the world. Unto which of the Angels said
he at any time, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Or unto which
of the Angels said he at any time, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever? or to
which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, my own Son, my only
begotten Son? unto which of the Angels said he at any time, this is the true
God; the great God; who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen? Tit. 2.13.
Romans 9.5.
unto which of the Angels are those divine Attributes given, as of eternity,
immutability, omnipotency, omniscience, omnipresence? and yet are all these
given to Christ; for eternity, I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was; for immutability, Prove. 8.23. Heb. 1.15. Mat.
11.27. John 2.25. Mat. 28.20.
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. For omnipotency, all things
are delivered unto me of my Father; For omniscience, he needed not that any
should testify of man, for he knew what was in man. For omnipresence, lo I am
with you always unto the end of the world.

Men, Brethren, and Fathers: I am forced to make this defense of the divinity
of Christ, because of the blasphemy of those Arians, Photinians, Eunomians, now
again raked out of hell. O who would think that such a generation of men should
be amongst us in this Island, where the Gospel has shined so brightly for so
many years? we maintain Christ is God, and Christ is Lord; we say with Thomas,
my Lord, and my God. Ah say blasphemers, Christ is God, and Christ is Lord, as
Magistrates and Angels are called Gods and Lords: I hope I have said enough to
difference betwixt Christ and them; howsoever I conclude with the Apostle,
Though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as there
be Gods many, and Lords many) yet to us there is but one God, the Father of
whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.


3. He acknowledges Christ to be his Lord, and his God; And Thomas answered,
and said unto him, my Lord, and my God. Now his says broke out; from the
things seen and felt; he is raised up to believe things neither seen nor felt;
he sees the prints and skars in the manhood of Chrst, and now he believes that
Christ is God, yea that Christ is his God; my Lord, and my God. Observe here,
that faith gives the soul a propriety in God and Christ. As God loves some with
a special and peculiar love, so faith answers God and Christ's particular love,
by a particular application, my Lord, and my God, and my Christ. Faith is an
apropiating, an applying, an uniting grace; in the actings of faith on God, or
on Christ as God, we may observe these steps, --

1. It sees God in his Glory and Majesty, in his Greatness and Goodness, and
all other his attributes; it sees God as the infinite fountain of all good, and
it considers what an infinite dreadful thing it were to be separated from this
God; it sees God, and the sight makes a deep impression on that very soul; the
love of that God is more to the soul than all the world; and the least
displeasure of that God is more trouble to that soul, than all the miseries
that all creatures under heaven are able to bring upon it.

2. It discovers the reality of this Glory and Majesty, of this greatness and
goodness of God. Before any faith is planted in a soul, the very use of reason
may come to understand much of God and Christ, but in comparison it looks upon
God and Christ as notions, conceits, and imaginary things; only faith convinces
the soul thoroughly of the certainty and truth of such things; where true faith
is, the things we believe are more certain to us than things we see, or feel,
or handle; faith is so sure in its apprehensions of God and Christ, that it
will venture soul and body, the loss of all upon that account; it will bear any
hardship, yea it will venture the infinite loss of eternity upon them.

3. It enables the soul to cast it self upon God in Christ for all the good and
happiness it ever expects. Alas, says the soul, I have formerly rested on
worldly things, I looked upon them as the only, real, sure excellences that I
had to enjoy; but now I find they are vain things, deceitful things, no better
than reeds of Egypt, vanity of vanities; and nothing is real, sure, excellent
on this side God and Christ, Cant. 6.2.
and therefore I will rely upon him, and none but him; it is only God is an
all-sufficient good, it is only Christ that is the rock that will never fail,
on him will I role my self, unto him will I make an absolute resignation of
all, I will betrust him with all I have, and all I am; I will commit all unto
him for ever, and ever.

4. As faith relyes all upon God in Christ, so it apropriates all God, and all
Christ unto it self, I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine; there is a
mutual propriety betwixt Christ and the Church, and betwixt Christ and the
soul; Christ has a propriety in me, Psalm. 73.35.
and I have a peculiar propriety in Christ, Christ is mine, so as I have none
in the world so mine, whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee, Christ is mine, and mine in a peculiar
manner, there is a propriety with peculiarity, my Lord, and my God. O the
excellency of Faith! this step goes beyond all the rest; it is a blessed thing
to have a true sight of God, there is much Power in it; but to see God in his
glory, Majesty, greatness, goodness, as my God; to see all the att^ibutes of
God as those things that my soul has an interest in; to see Christ coming from
the Father for me, to be my redeemer; to see Christ in whom all fullness dwells,
(in whom the treasures of all God's riches are, not only Christ dying as man,
but rising as God for me, and my salvation; John 20.29
to see Christ, and then to lay hold on Christ, and to say, my Lord, and my
God. O this is the work of precious says; and to this now is Thomas arrived in
this confession of his, my Lord and my God.

2. Hereupon follows Christ's commendation and correction; Jesus says unto
him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed; blessed are they
that have not seen, and yet have believed; In the first place Christ commends
Thomas's says, because thou have seen me, thou have believed, q. d. thou see
me a man; but considering how I am risen from the dead, thou believe in me as
God; I commend thy faith, but it is a weak faith in respect of its rise; now
therefore to correct it, I pronounce those blessed to all generations, that
when I am gone, as in regard of my bodily presence, yet they will believe in
me; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. I am afraid of
tediousness, and therefore I shall not enlarge any more on this apparition.

SECT. VIII. Of Christ's apparition to some of his Apostles at the Sea of
Tiberias.
John 21.1.
THere is but one apparition more recorded by John; after these things Jesus
showed himself again to the Disciples at the sea of Tiberias, and on this wise
showed he himself. In these apparitions the Evangelist uses one and the same
method; As in the former, so here again is set down the time when, the place
where, the persons to whom, the manner how he appeared; not one of these
circumstances must be wanting to show the evidence, and certainty of his
resurrection.

Ver. 21.
1. The time, after these things; after the three former apparitions he comes to
a fourth, and he concludes with this, as therein making some mention of
himself, with which he concludes the whole book: This is the Disciple which
testifies these things, and wrote these things, and we know his testimony is
true.

2. The place, at the sea of Tiberias; or at the lake Genezareth; where he had
called them to the Apostleship, there now he appears to these Apostles; they
were at first fishers, and now they are at their Calling upon the sea, Christ
standing on the shore.

3. The Persons to whom he appears, they were Disciples, their names are in the
next verse. All Christ's apparitions were to the Disciples of Christ; we read
not that ever he showed himself after his resurrection to any but to his
followers; he showed himself openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses,
chosen before of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him after he rose
from the dead, Act. 10.41. Acts 10.41.
strangers to Christ must be no witnesses of Christ's resurrection, and this
was his meaning; yet a little while, and the world sees me no more, but ye see
me, Joh. 14.19.

4. For the manner of his apparition, on this wise showed he himself.

Chrysostom. hom. 86. in Job.
1. He showed himself, so it is in this verse twice repeated, after these things
Jesus showed himself, and in this wise he showed himself. Christ now was not
seen, or known to the bodily eye (for his body was immortal) unless by
dispensation he condescended thereto. I deny not, but that glorified bodies are
ever actually seen of bodies that are glorified; but of mortal men who are yet
in this vail of tears those glorious creatures cannot be seen actually, except
there be some peculiar and divine dispensation. As the air is too subtle to
be seen, or as the Sun is too glorious for a weak eye to behold; so are
glorified bodies too subtle, too solendid for a mortal eye to pierce: Mat.
1.43. Mat. 22.30. 1 Cor. 15.44.
our Savior tells us, that the bodies of the Saints do shine forth as the Sun
in the Kingdom of their Father; and that they are as the Angels. And the
Apostle tells us, that their bodies are spiritual bodies; there is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body? now without dispensation we cannot see
spiritual things. And hence it is, that when Christ showed himself to the two
disciples at Emmaus, it is said that their eyes were opened, Luke 24.31.
and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight. Mark, first their eyes
were opened, why, no question but their eyes were open before; they did not
walk with him, and talk with him, and sit with him, and eat with him, but their
eyes were then opened; ay but now their eyes were opened in another manner, as
it is said of Elisha's servant, that at the prayers of Elisha, The Lord opened
the eyes of the young man, 2 King. 6.17.
and he saw, and behold the mountain was full of horses, and chariots of fire,
round about Elisha; in like manner their eyes were so opened, that they knew
Jesus. And then, 2. He vanished out of their sight; in a strange unusual manner
they lost his sight, and they could not tell what was become of him; in a
moment he was invisible to them whose eyes he had opened: it plainly shows that
glorified bodies, as corpulent, and commensurable, may be seen of mortals; but
as they are subtle, and spiritual, they cannot be seen actually without
dispensation. Christ appeared (says Damascene) not by necessity, (...).
but by his own free will; not by the law of nature, but by way of
dispensation. It was his mere condescension, permission, that he would show
himself at any time unto his Disciples.

2. He showed himself on this wise; There were together Simon Peter, and
Thomas, John 21.2, 3, 4, etc.
called Dydimus, etc. In the whole narration we may observe. 1. The occasion;
and 2. The Apparition; in the occasion we have a council among the Apostles
what to do; and it is concluded they would go a fishing; they did so, though to
no purpose; for they fished all night, but caught nothing. In the Apparition.
1. Christ is unknown, ver. 3. ver. 4.
He stood on the shore, but the Disciples knew not that it was Jesus: in this
condition we have Jesus speaking, and then working a Miracle; ver. 6.
he bids them cast the net on the right side of the ship, and then draw; but
they were not able to draw for the multitude of the fishes. 2. Hereupon Christ
is known, Therefore that Disciple whom Jesus loved, says unto Peter, ver. 7.
it is the Lord: the alarm given, now all the Disciples bestir themselves. 1.
Peter, he casts himself into the sea. 2. The other Disciples they come in a
little ship to the land; and there they dine, and commune with Jesus; which is
the end of the history, and so ends this Book of our Evangelist John.

Thus far we have propounded the object; our next work is how to direct you to
look unto Jesus in this respect. CHAP. II.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus as carrying on the great work of our Salvation in
his Resurrection.
THAT in all respects we may look on Jesus.

1. Let us know Jesus carrying on the great work of our salvation for us in his
resurrection; and during the time of his abode upon earth after his
Resurrection. This is worth the knowing; on it depends our justification,
sanctification, salvation; For if Christ be not risen, we are yet in our sins,
and our faith is in vain, and our hope is in vain; little hope have we either
of Heaven, or of Resurrection, if Christ be not risen; of all men we are most
miserable that believe in Christ, if he whom we believe in be not risen again.
O my soul study this point; many take it up in gross, they can run over this
Article of their Creed, The third day he rose again from the dead; but for a
particular understanding of it, in respect of the time, or the end, or the
manner, or the certainty, how many are to seek? I shall appeal to thy self, are
not many discoveries already made which before thou never tookest notice of?
and if thou would but study this point, how much more might yet appear?
especially, how much more might yet appear as to thine own good? it is not
enough to know Christ's resurrection, unless thou know it for thy self. Be sure
thou have this in mind, That Christ rose again, but what is that to me? saving
knowledge is ever joined with a particular application; if Christ be my Head,
then he could not rise, but I rose with him, and in him: and thus O my soul,
look on Christ; and thus search into every particular of Christ's resurrection;
come, study when he rose; study the Arguments that make out Christ's
resurrection sure and certain; study all the Apparitions of Jesus Christ; O
what delightful studies are these? had thou been with them to whom Christ
appeared, would not thy heart have leaped with joy? come, study it close, for
the benefit of these Apparitions extend to thee; the fruit of Christ's
resurrection is thine, Job 5.27.
even thine, as well as theirs; Know this for thy self.

SECT. II. Of considering Jesus in that respect.
2. LEt us consider Jesus, carrying on this work of our salvation for us in his
resurrection. It is not enough to know a saving necessary truth, but it is
required further that we digest truths, and that we draw forth their strength
for the nourishment and refreshing of our poor souls. As a man may in half an
hour chew and take into his stomach that meat, which he must have seven or
eight hours at least to digest; so a man may take into his understanding more
truths in an hour, than he is able well to digest in many; what good those men
are like to get by Sermon's or Providence, who are unaccustomed to this work
of meditation, I cannot imagine; it is observed by some, that this is the
reason why so much preaching is lost amongst us; why Professors that run from
Sermon to Sermon, and are never weary of hearing or reading, have
notwithstanding such languish starved souls, because they will not meditate.
And therefore God commanded, Joshua, not only to read the Law, but to consider
of it, Josh. 1.8.
and dwell upon it; This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein day and night; why, this is the duty that I am now
pressing to; if thou know these things, consider, ^uminate, meditate, ponder
on them again, and again. And because this work requires enlargedness of heart
and spirit, therefore take it into parts, and consider of each of them apart by
it self. As --

1. Consider of the time when Christ rose again. As Christ had his three days,
and no more, so must thou have the same three days like unto his; the first
day was called the day of preparation; the second was the Sabbath Day; and the
third was the resurrection day; so thy first day is a day of preparation, a day
of passion, wherein thou must strive and struggle against sin, and Satan,
wherein thou must suffer all their bitter darts till thou dyest, and give up
the Ghost. And thy second day is a day of rest, wherein thy body must lie in
the grave, and thy flesh rest in hope; wherein thou shall enter into peace, and
rest in thy bed, until the trumpet sound, and bid thee arise, Isa. 52.7.
and come to judgment: And thy third day is a day of resurrection unto glory.
It is the first day of the week, or the first beginning of a never ending
world. Thus consider the time of Christ's resurrection, and thence may thou
draw down some use for thy souls nourishment.

2. Consider of the reasons why Christ arose; was it not to confound the Jews?
they could not endure to hear of Christ's resurrection, and therefore when
Peter and the other Apostles preached that point, Acts 9.33.
They were cut to the heart, and took council to slay them. It is the case of
them to say, We will not have that man to reign over us; they that by their
sins crucify Christ every day, cannot without horror think of his exaltation,
it cuts them to the heart that Christ is risen to be their Judge. Again, was it
not to confirm the faith of Christ's followers? till he was risen, their faith
was but a weak faith; weak in knowledge, weak in assent, weak in confidence,
weak in assurance; much ado had Christ with them, many a time had he chid them,
Why are ye fearful O ye of little faith? but after he had showed uimself alive
by many infallible proofs, they could then cry it out, My Lord, and my God.
Again, was it not to evidence that he had fully satisfied all our debts? the
Apostle tells us, that Christ was our Surety; Heb. 7.22.
at his death he was arrested, and cast into Prison, whence he could not come
till all was paid: and therefore to hear that Christ is risen, and that he
has brokens the bolts and fetters of the grave, it is a clear evidence that
God is satisfied, and that Christ is discharged by God himself. Oh what breasts
of consolation are here? Again, was it not to conquer sin, death, and devil?
now he took from death his sting, and from hell his standard; now he seized
upon the handwriting that was against us, and nailed to his cross, now he
spoiled Principalities and Powers, and carried the keys of death and hell, at
his own girdle; now he came out of the grave as a mighty Conqueror, saying as
Dehorah did in her song, O my soul, Judge. 5.21.
thou have trodden down strength, thou have marched valiantly. Again, was it
not to become the first fruits of them that sleep? Christ was the first that
rose again from the grave to dye no more; and by virtue of his resurrection (as
being the first fruits) all the Elect must rise again; As in Adam all dye, even
so in Christ shall all be made alive; 1 Cor. 15.22, 23.
but every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, and afterward they
that are Christ's at his coming. Some may wonder, can the resurrection of one,
a thousand six hundred years ago, be the cause of our rising? yes, as well as
the death of one, five thousand six hundred years ago, is the cause of our
dying; Adam, and Christ were two heads, two roots, two first fruits, either of
them in reference to his company whom they stand for. And now O my soul, thou
may say with Job, I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25.
and that I shall see him at the last day, not with other, but with these same
eyes. If Christ live, then must I live also; if he be risen, then though after
my skin worms shall destroy this body, Ver. 26.
yet in my flesh I shall see God. Again, was it not that he might be declared
to be the Son of God? was it not that he might be exalted, and glorified? this
is the main reason of all the rest; see thou to this! O give him the glory, and
praise of his resurrection; so muse, and meditate, and consider on this
transaction, as to ascribe to his Name all honor, and glory; what, is he risen
from the dead? Has God highly exalted him, Psalm. 2.11.
and given him a name above every name? O then let every tongue confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

3. Consider of the manner of Christ's resurrection; he rose as a common
person; in which respect his resurrection concerns us no less than himself. We
must not think that when Christ was raised, it was no more than when Lazarus
was raised; his resurrection was the resurrection of us all; it was in the name
of us all, and had in it a seed-like virtue to work the resurrection of us all.
O the privilege of this communion with Christ's resurrection! if I believe
this truly, I cannot but believe the resurrection of my body, and the life
everlasting; why, Jesus Christ has led the dance, and though of my self I have
no right to Heaven or Glory, yet in Christ my Head I have as good right to it
as any heir apparent to his lands. -- 2. He rose by his own power; and so did
none but Jesus Christ; from the beginning of the world it was never heard that
any dead man raised himself; Indeed one Instance we have that a dead man's Corpse
should raise up another dead man, They cast the man into the Sepulcher of
Elisha, 2 King 13.21.
and when the man was let down and touched the bones of Elisha, he revived and
stood up on his feet; dead Elisha raised up a dead man from the grave, but dead
Elisha could not raise up himself from the grave; only Christ arose himself,
and at the same time he raised many others; and here was the argument of his
Godhead, John 10.18.
I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again; how
should we but trust him with our life, who is the resurrection and the life? He
that believes in him though he were dead, yet shall he live. O my soul, he was
able to raise himself, much more is he able to raise thee up; only believe, and
live for ever. -- 3. He rose with an earthquake; O the power of Christ in every
passage! what ayled thee O earth to skip like a Ram? was not the new Tomb hewn
out of a Rock? and was not a great stone rolled to the door of the Sepulcher?
the ground wherein he lay was firm and solid, Job 18.4. Psalm. 99.1.
and shall the rock be removed out of his place? O yes; the Lord reigns, and
therefore the earth is moved; Oh what a rocky heart is this of mine? how much
harder is it than that rock; that moves not, melts not at the presence of God,
at the presence of the God of Jacob? the Sun (they say) danced that morning at
Christ's resurrection; the earth (I am sure) then trembled; and yet my heart is
no way affected with this news; I feel it neither dance for joy, nor tremble
for fear; O my soul be serious in this meditation, consider, what a posture
would thou have been in, if thou had been with those Soldiers that watched
Christ; so reallize this Earthquake, as if thou now felt it trembling under
thee.

4. An Angel ministered to him at his resurrection; An Angel came, Mat. 28.2.
and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. Angels were the
first Ministers of the Gospel, the first Preachers of Christ's resurrection;
they preached more of Christ than all the Prophets did; they first told the
woman that Christ was risen; Luke 24.6.
and they did the first service to Christ at his resurrection, in rolling the
stone from the doors mouth; O my soul, that thou were but like these blessed
Angels! how is it that they are so forward in God's Service, and thou art so
backward? One day thou expectest to be equal with the Angels, and art thou now
so far behind them? What! to be equal in Reward, and behind them in Service?
Here Is a Meditation able to check thy Sloth, and to spur thee on to thy Duty.
-- 5. Many of the Bodies of the Saints arose out of their Graves at His
Resurrection; as the Angels ministered, so the Saints waited on Him. In this
Meditation, trouble not thy self whether David, Moses, Job, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob were some of those Saints, as some conjecture upon some Grounds: It is a
better Consideration to look upon them as the Fruit of Christ's Resurrection,
and as an Earnest of thy Own: The Virtue of Christ's Resurrection appears
immediately, and it will more appear at the general Resurrection Day. As sure
as these Saints arose with Him, and went into the Holy City, and appeared unto
many; so sure shall thy Body rise again at the Last Day; and (if thou art but a
Saint) it shall go with Him into the Heavenly Jerusalem, and appear before God,
and His Son Jesus Christ in Glory. -- 6. Christ rose again with a true and
perfect Body, with an Incorruptible and Powerful Body, with a Spiritual and an
Agile Body, with a Glorious Body, brighter than the Sun in his utmost Glory. On
these things may the Soul expatiate: O it is a worthy, blessed, soul-ravishing
Subject to think upon; and the rather, if we consider that Conformity which we
believe: Phil. 3.20, 21.
We look for a Savior (says the Apostle) the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned unto His Glorious Body. O my
Soul, that this Clay of thine should be a Partaker of such Glory! That this
Body of Dust and Earth should shine in Heaven like those Glorious Spangles of
the Firmament; that this Body that shall rot in Dust, and fall more vile than a
Carrion, should rise, and shine like the Glorious Body of our Savior on Mount
Tabor: Surely thou owe much to Christ's Resurrection. O consider of it, till
thou feellest the Influence, and come to the Assurance of this Blessed Change.

4. Consider of the several Apparitions of Jesus Christ, especially of those
written by the Evangelist John. As, --

1. Muse on His Apparition to Mary Magdalen: Oh the Grief before He appeared!
And, Oh the Joys when He appeared! -- 1. Before, she apprehended nothing, but
that some or other had took away her Lord; these were all the words she uttered
before he appeared; They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they
have laid Him; so she told Peter and John: And when Two Angels appeared in
White, asking her; Woman, Why weepest thou? she gives the same Answer to them;
They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid Him. A Soul
in desertion knows not what to do, but to weep and cry; Oh my Lord is gone! I
have lost my Lord, my God, my Jesus, my King! In this Meditation, consider, O
my Soul, as if thou had been in Mary's Case: Was it not a sad Case, when the
Angels of Heaven knew not how to comfort her? Suppose any Son of Consolation
had stood by, and had such a one persuaded; O Mary, suppress thy Sadness,
refresh thy Heart with this Blessed Vision; thou did seek but One, and thou
have found Two; a dead Body was thy Errand, and thou have light on Two alive:
Thy Weeping was for a Man, and thy Tears have obtained Angels: Observe them
narrowly; the Angels invite thee to a Parley, it may be they had some happy
News to tell thee of thy Lord: Remember what they are, and where they sit, and
whence they come, and to whom they speak; they are Angels of Peace; neither
sent without Cause, nor seen but of Favor; they sit on the Tomb, to show they
are no Strangers to thy Loss: They come from Heaven, from whence all happy News
descends; they speak to thy self, as if they had some special Embassage to
deliver unto thee. No, no; these Cordials are in vain; neither Man nor Angel
can do her good, or comfort her drooping Soul: Either Christ Himself must come
in Presence, or she cries; Miserable Comforters are ye all! Alas! small is the
Light that a Star can yield, when the Sun is down: A sorry Exchange it is, to
go and gather Crumbs, after the Loss of the Bread of Life. Oh, What can these
Angels do? They cannot persuade me that my Master is not lost; for my own Eyes
will disprove them: They can less tell me where He may be found; for they
themselves would wait upon Him, if they knew but where: I am apt to think, they
know not where He is; and therefore they are come to the Place where He last
was, making the Tomb their Heaven, and the Remembrance of His Presence the
Fuel of their Joy: Alas! What do Angels here? I neither came to see them, nor
desire to hear them: I came not to see Angels, but the Creator of Angels, to
whom I owe more than both to Men and Angels.

2. After He appeared, she was filled with Joy; for so it was, that when
nothing else would satisfy, or comfort this poor Creature, Jesus Himself
appears: At first He is unknown, she takes him for the Gardener of the place,
but within a while he utters a voice that opens both her ears, and eyes; And
Jesus says unto her, Mary. It was the sweetest sound that ever she heard; many
a time had she been called by that name, but never heard she a voice so
effectual, powerful, inward, feeling as at this time; hereby the cloud is
scattered, and the Sun of Righteousness appears; this one word Mary, lightens
her eyes, dryes up her tears, chears her heart, revives her spirits that were
as good as dead. One word of Christ wrought so strange an alteration in her, as
if she had been wholly made new, when she was only named. And hence it is that
being ravished with his voice, and impatient of delays, she takes his talk out
of his mouth, and to his first and only word Mary, she answers, Rabboni] which
is to say, Master, q. d. Master, is it thou? with many a salt tear have I
sought thee, and art thou unexpectedly so near at hand! thy absence was hell,
and thy presence is no less than heaven to me: Oh how is my heart ravished at
thy sound? if the babe leaped in the womb of Elizabeth when she but heard the
salutation of Mary, how should my heart but leap at thy salutation? I feel I am
exceedingly transported beyond my self. Instead of my heavy heart and troubled
spirit, I feel now a sweet and delightful Tranquillity of mind; thou art my
solace, and souls delight; whom have I in heaven but thee? and whom desire I
upon earth in comparison of thee? and yet I am not satisfied; not only fruition
of thee, but union with thee is that which my soul longs after; not only thy
presence, but thy embraces, or my embraces of thee can give content; come then,
and give me leave, my Lord, my God, to run to the haunt of my chief delights,
to fall at thy sacred feet, and to bathe them with my tears of joy; O my Jesus
I must needs deal with thee, as the Spouse dealt with thee: Now I have found
thee whom my soul loves dearly, I will hold thee, Cant. 3.4.
and I will not let thee go.

I know not in all the Book of God a soul more depressed with sorrow, and
lifted up with joy: O meditate on this! if Christ be absent, all is night; but
if Christ appear, he turns all again into a lightsome day; there is no sorrow
like that which apprehends Christ's loss, and therefore in hell it is looked
upon as the greatest pain; of the two (say Divines) it is a greater torment to
lose God, and to lose Jesus Christ, than to endure all those flaming whips,
unquenchable fires, intolerable cold, abominable stench; and on the other
side, there is no joy in heaven like to that which apprehends Christ's
presence: In thy presence there is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and at thy right hand there are pleasures evermore. I had rather be in hell
with Christ (said one) than in heaven without Christ. This is the very top of
heavens joy, the quintessence of glory, the highest happiness of the Saints; O
my soul, seek with Mary, yea seek and weep, and weep and seek, and never rest
satisfied till Christ appear. If thou art but in the use of means, he will
appear sooner or later; or what if thou never saw a good day on earth, one
sight of Christ in heaven will make amends. Surely if thou knew the joy of
Christ's presence, thou would run through death and hell to come to Christ:
it was Paul's saying, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ which is
far better; Phil. 1.23.
he cared not for death so he might go to Christ, for that was better than very
life it self.

2. Muse on his Apparition to the Ten Disciples, John 20.19.
When the doors were shut for fear of the Jews, then came Jesus, and stood in
the midst, saying to them, Peace be unto you. Before his Apparitions, sorrow
and fear had possessed all their spirits: sometime they walked abroad, and were
sad; and sometimes they kept within, and shut the doors upon them, as being
exceedingly afraid: In this condition Jesus Christ (that knows best the times
and seasons of grace and comfort) comes and stands in the midst of their
Assembly; he comes in, they know not how; and no sooner he is in, but he
salutes them in this manner, Peace be unto you.

This was the prime of all his wishes; no sooner is he risen, but he wishes
peace to all his Apostles; no sooner meets he with them, but the very opening
of his lips was with these words; they are the first words, at the first
meeting, on the very first day. -- A sure sign that peace was in the heart of
Jesus Christ; howsoever it is with us, peace, or war; there is a Commonweal
where Christ is King; and there is peace, and nothing but peace; come, sift,
try, and examine; art thou, O my soul, a member of this body? a subject of this
Commonweal? has the influence of Christ's peace (wrought and declared at his
resurrection) any force on thee? have thou peace with God? and peace within?
and peace without? do thou feel that ointment poured upon Aaron's head, and
running down to the skirts of his garments? do thou feel the dew of Hermon,
and the dew that descends upon Mount Sion, dropping (as it were) upon thy
heart? does the spirit assure thee, that Christ the Prince of peace has made
peace and reconciliation betwixt God and thee, betwixt the King and thee, a
rebel to his Crown and dignity; Isa. 52.7.
O how beautiful upon the mountains would the feet of him be, that should
publish peace, that should bring these good tidings, that thou art a Citizen of
that Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.3.
where God is King, and Christ the Prince of peace? where all the buildings are
compact together, as a City that is at unity within it self?

3. Muse on his Apparition to all the Apostles, when they were all convened,
and Thomas with them. This Apparition was occasioned by Thomas's incredulity;
except (said he) I see in his hands the print of the nails, John 20.15.
and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his
side, I will not believe. Now therefore says Jesus to Thomas, Ver. 27.
Come, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand,
and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. Methinks I see
Thomas's finger on Christ's boared hand, and Thomas's hand in Christ's pierced
side. Here Is a strong Argument to convince my soul that Christ is risen from
the dead; why, see; this is the same Christ that was crucified; the same Christ
that had his hands boared with nails, and that had his heart pierced with a
spear; though the wounds are healed as to sense of pain, yet the skars, and
holes, and clefts remain as big as ever: the hole in his hand is yet so large,
that Thomas may put his finger not only on it, but into it; and the cleft in
his side is yet so large, that Thomas may thrust his whole hand into his side,
and with his fingers touch that heart that issued out streams of blood for my
salvation. In this meditation be not too curious, whether the print of the
nails were but continued till Christ had confirmed his Disciples faith; or
whether he retains them still for some further use? it is a better
consideration to look upon them so as to confirm thy own faith; is there not
too much of Thomas's incredulity in thy breast? do not thou sometimes feel
some doubtings of Christ's rising? or at least do thou not question whether
Christ's resurrection belongs unto thee? is not Satan busy with a temptation?
is not thy conscience troubled for thy sins; and especially for thy sin of
unbelief? if so, (and I know not but it may be so with thee, and the best of
Saints) Come then, and reach hither thy finger, and behold Christ's hands; and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into his side; my meaning is, come with
the hand of faith, and lay hold on Christ, yea hide thy self in the holes of
the rock; Be like the Dove that makes her nest in the side of the holes mouth;
Jer. 48.28.
the Dove that would be safe from the devouring Birds, or from the Fowlers
snare, she flies to the hole in a rock; and thus Christ invites his Spouse, O
my Dove that art in the clefts of the rock, Cant. 2.14. Ber. ^er. 61. in Cant.
in the secret places of the stairs? let me see thy countenance, let me hear
thy voice. In the clefts of the rock I am safe, (said Bernard) there I stand
firmly, there I am secure from Satan's prey. It is storied of a Martyr, that
writing to his Wife where she might find him, Surius in vita Sancti Elzearii.
when he was fled from home; O my Dear (said he) if thou desire to see me,
seek me in the side of Christ, in the cleft of the rock, in the hollow of his
wounds; for there have I made my nest, there will I dwell, there shall thou
find me, and no where else but there. O my soul, that thou would make this
use of the wounds of Christ! are they not as the Cities of refuge, whither thou
may fly and live? Nothing is more efficacious to cure the wounds of
conscience, than a frequent and serious meditation of the wounds of Christ.
Bern. ibid.
Come, be not faithless, but believing; these Monuments of Christ's
resurrection are for the confirmation of thy faith; if well viewed and handled,
they will quiet thy conscience, quench the fiery darts of Satan, increase thy
faith, till thou come to assurance, and say with Thomas, Turbabor, sed non
perturbabor quia vulnerum Christi recordabor. Aug.
My Lord, and my God. I may be troubled, but I shall not be overwhelmed;
because I will remember the print of the nails, and of the spear, in the hands
and side of Jesus Christ.

4. Muse on his Apparition to the seven Disciples at the Sea of Tiberias.
First, Christ appears, and works a Miracle; he discovers himself to be Lord of
Sea as well as Land; at his word multitudes of Fishes come to the Net, and are
caught by his Apostles; nor is this Miracle without a Mystery; Mat. 13.47.
The Kingdom of Heaven, is like a drawn net, cast into the sea, which when it
is full, men draw to land; what is this divine trade of ours but a spiritual
fishing? the world is a sea, souls like fishes swim at liberty in this deep,
and the nets of wholesome doctrine are they that draw up some to the shore of
grace, and glory. 2. Upon this Miracle, The Disciple whom Jesus loved, said
unto Peter, it is the Lord. John is more quick-eyed than all the rest, he
considers the Miracle, and him that wrought it; and presently he concludes, It
is the Lord; O my soul meditate on the mystery of this discovery; if ever soul
be converted and brought home to Christ, it is the Lord; but oh whither is
Christ gone, that we have lost so long his converting presence? Oh for one
Apparition of Jesus Christ! till then we may preach our hearts out and never
the nearer; do what we can souls will to hell, except the Lord break their
career; Ministers can do no more but tell, thus and thus men may be saved; and
thus and thus men will be damned: He that believes on the Son has eternal
life, John 3.36.
and he that believes not the Son shall not see life; but when they have said
all they can, it is only God must give the blessing: Oh what is preaching
without Christ's presence? One hearing what mighty feats Scanderbag's Sword had
done, he sent for it, and when he saw it, Is this the Sword (said he) that has
done such great exploits, what is this sword more than any other sword? O (says
Scanderbag) I sent thee my Sword, but not my arm that did handle it: so
Ministers may use the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, but if the Spirits
arm be not with it, they may brandish it every Sabbath to little purpose; when
all is done, if ever any good be done, it is the Lord. No sooner John observes
the Miracle, that a multitude of fishes were caught and taken, but he tells
Peter of a blessed discovery, it is the Lord -- 3. Upon this discovery, Peter's
throws himself into the Sea; O the fervent love he carries toward Christ! if
he but hear of his Lord, he will run through fire and water to come unto him;
so true is that of the Spouse, Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the
floods drown it; Cant. 8.7.
if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly
be contemned. If I love Christ, I cannot but long for communion and fellowship
with Christ; Vbicunque fueris O domine Jesu, etc. Aug.
Wheresoever thou art O blessed Savior, give me no more happiness than to be
with thee; if on the earth I would travel day and night to come unto thee, if
on the Sea with Peter I would swim unto thee, if riding in triumph, I would
sing Hosanna to thee, but if in glory, how happy should I be to look upon thee?
Christ's Apparitions are ravishing sights; if he but stand on the shore, Peter
throws himself overboard to come to Christ; why now he stands on the pinacles
of heaven, wasting and beckoning with his hand, and calling on me in his Word,
Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away; O my soul make haste; Cant. 2.10.
in every duty look out for another Apparition of Jesus Christ: when thou
come to hear, say, Have over Lord by this Sermon: and when thou come to
pray, say, Have over Lord by this Prayer to a Savior; neither fire nor water;
floods, nor storms; death, nor life; principalities nor powers; height nor
depth; nor any other creature should hinder thy passage to Christ, or separate
thy soul from Christ. Consider what I say, 2 Timothy 2.7, 8.
(says Paul) and the Lord give thee understanding in all things; remember that
Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my
Gospel: that Christ was raised is a Gospel Truth; ay, but do thou remember it;
do thou consider it, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

SECT. III. Of desiring Jesus in that respect.
3. LEt us desire after Jesus carrying on the great work of our salvation for
us in his resurrection. What desire is, we have opened before; some call it the
wing of the soul, whereby it moves, and is carried to the thing it expects,
to feed it self upon it, and to be satisfied with it.

But what is there in Christ's resurrection, that should move our souls to
desire after it?

I answer. 1. Something in it self. 2. Something as in reference unto us.

1. There is something in it self; had we but a view of the glory, dignity,
excellency of Christ, as raised from the dead, it would put us on this heavenly
motion; we should fly as the Eagle that hastes to eat. The object of desire is
good, Heb. 1.8.
but the more excellent and glorious any good is, the more earnest and eager
should our desires be; now Christ as raised from the dead is an excellent
object; the resurrection of Christ is the glorifying of Christ; yea, his
glorifying took its beginning at his blessed resurrection; now it was that God
highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every name, Phil. 2.9.
etc. and in this respect how desirable is he?

2. There is something in reference unto us; As, 1. Romans 4.25.
He r^se again for our justification; I must needs grant, that Christ's death,
and not his resurrection is the meritorious cause of our justification; but on
the other side Christ's resurrection, and not his death is for the applying of
our justification, as the stamp adds no virtue, nor matter of real value to a
piece of gold; but only it makes that value which before it had actually
appliable and current unto us: so the resurrection of Christ was no part of the
price or satisfaction which Christ made to God, yet is it that which applies
all his merits, and makes them of force unto his Members. Some I know would go
further, Lucius a learned Writer says, that Justification is therefore
attributed to Christ's resurrection, because it was the complete, and ultimate
act of Christ's active obedience: and from hence infers, that remission of
sin is attributed to his passive obedience; and justification, or imputation of
righteousness, to his active obedience: Goodwin no way inferior to him, Romans
8.34.
faith, that justification is put upon Christ's resurrection with a rather, who
is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again;
not but that the matter of our justification is only the obedience and death of
Christ; but the form of our justification, or the act of pronouncing us
righteous, by that his obedience and death depends upon Christ's resurrection;
for then it was that Christ himself was justified, and then he was justified as
a common person, representing us therein, so that we were then justified with
him, and in him; and we are said to be risen with him, and to sit with him in
heavenly places. Burges, one admirably judicious, says, that justification is
given to Christ's resurrection, as a privilege flowing from its efficient
cause; Indeed Christ's death is the meritorious cause of our justification, but
Christ's resurrection is in some sense (says he) the efficient cause; because
by his rising again, the Spirit of God does make us capable of justification,
and th^n bestows it on us. I know there is some difference amongst these
Worthies, but they all agree in this, that the resurrection of Christ was for
our justification, and that by the resurrection of Christ all the merits of his
death were made appliable unto us. As there was a price and ransom to be paid
by Christ for the redemption of man, so it was necessary that the fruit,
effect, and benefit of Christ's redemption should be applied, and conferred;
now this work of application and actual collation of the fruit of Christ's
death, began to be in fieri upon the resurrection day; but it was not then
finished, and perfected; for to the consummation thereof, the Ascension of
Christ, the Mission of the holy Ghost, Apostolical preaching of the Gospel to
Jews and Gentiles, the Donation of Heavenly grace, and Christ's Intercession at
the right hand of God were very necessary. 1 Cor. 15.17.
O the benefit of Christ's resurrection as to our justification! If Christ be
not risen again, ye are yet in your sins, and your faith is in vain. Remission
of sin (which is a part of our justification) though purchased by Christ's
death, yet could not he applied to us, or possibly be made ours without
Christ's resurrection; and and in this respect oh how desirable is it!

Ephesians. 2.5, 6.
2. He rose again for our sanctification. So the Apostle, He has quickened us
together with Christ, and has raised up together with Christ. Our first
resurrection is from Christ's resurrection; if you would know how you that were
blind in heart, uncircumcised in spirit, utterly unacquainted with the life of
God, are now light in the Lord, affecting heavenly things, walking in
righteousness; it comes from this blessed resurrection of Jesus Christ; we are
quickened with Christ; it is Christ's resurrection that raised our souls, Romans
6.11.
being stark dead, with such a resurrection as that they shall never die more.
Whence the Apostle, Reckon your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. We are dead to sin, and alive unto God by the
death and resurrection of Jesus Christ; we may reckon thus for our selves, that
if we be in Christ, there comes a virtue from Christ, an effectual working of
Christ by his Spirit into our hearts, and it is such a work as will conform us
to Christ dead, and to Christ risen; why reckon thus, says the Apostle; go not
by guess, and say, I hope it will be better with me than it has been; no, no,
but reckon, Romans 6.4.
conclude, make account, I must live to God, I must live the life of grace, for
Christ is risen. To the same purpose he speaks before, Like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk
in newness of life. Christ rose again to a new life, and herein his
resurrection differed from the resurrection of those others raised by him, as
of Lazarus, Jairus Daughter, the Widow of Naims Son; for they were but raised
to the same life, which formerly they lived; but Jesus Christ was raised up to
a new life; and according to this ex^mplar we should now walk in newness of
life: this is the end of Christ's resurrection, that we should be new
creatures, of new lives, new principles, new conversations; he rose again for
our sanctification.

3. He rose again for our resurrection to eternal life; Christ is the pattern,
and pledge, and cause of the resurrection of our bodies; for since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all dye, 1
Cor. 15.21, 22
even so in Christ shall all be made alive. There is a virtue flowing from
Christ to his Saints by which they shall be raised up at the latter day; as
there is a virtue flowing from the head to the members, or from the root to the
branches, so those that are Christ's shall be raised up by Christ. 1 John 5.28,
29.
Not but that all the wicked in the world shall be raised again by the power of
Christ as he is a judge, for all that are in their graves shall hear his voice,
and they shall come forth; yet with this difference, they that have done good
unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
resurrection of damnation. In this respect the Saints shall have a peculiar
resurrection; and therefore they are called the Children of the resurrection,
because they shall obtain a better resurrection, Luke 20.36. Heb. 11.35.
as the Apostle calls it. And is not Christ's resurrection desirable in this
very respect; if we should think, these bodies of ours being dust, must never
return from their dusts, it might discourage; but here is our hope, Christ is
risen, and therefore we must rise; it is the Apostles own argument against
those that held, there was no resurrection of the dead; why, says the Apostle,
if there be no resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.12, 13, 16, 20.
then is not Christ risen -- If the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised --
But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
sleep: he argues plainly that Christ's resurrection is the principal efficient
cause of the resurrection of the just; I am the resurrection, and the life,
says Christ, (i.e.) I am the Author, John 11.25. John 5.21.
and worker of the resurrection to life. As the Father raises up the dead and
quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom he will; and hence it is that
Christ is called a quickening Spirit; Christ is the head and stock of all the
Elect, Christ is the Author, procurer, conveyor of life to all his offspring,
by the communication of his Spirit; Christ is a quickening Spirit, quickening
dead souls, and quickening dead bodies, 1 Cor. 15.45.
the Author both of the first and second resurrection. And is not this
desirable? --

He rose again for the assurance of our justification, sanctification and
salvation. This is the reason why the Apostle uses these words to prove the
resurrection of Christ, I will give you the sure mercies of David; Acts 13.34.
none of Gods mercies had been sure to us if Christ had not risen again from
the dead. But now all is made sure; his work of redemption being fully
finished, the mercy which thereupon depended was now made certain, (and as the
Apostle speaks) sure unto all the seed.

Methinks a thought of this object in respect of it self, and in respect of us,
should put our souls into a longing frame; Romans 4.16.
is it not a desirable thing to see the King in his beauty? were not the
Daughters of Zion glad to go forth, Cant. 3.11.
and to behold King Solomon with the Crown wherewith his Mother Crowned him in
the day of his espousalls? If Christ incarnate, and in humane frailty was the
desire of Nations, how much more is Christ exalted, and in his glory? if it was
Augustines great wish to have seen Christ in the flesh, how should we but wish
to see Christ as risen again from the dead? he is altogether lovely; or, he is
altogether desirable; desirable in the womb, Cant. 5.16
desirable in the cratch, desirable on the Cross, even when despised, and
numbered with thieves; desirable in his resurrection; yea all desirable, yea
above all desirable, as risen, exalted, glorified; in this consideration we
cannot fathom the thousand, thousand part of the worth, and incomparable
excellency of Jesus Christ. Or if Christ's resurrection in it self will not
stir up our lazy desires; as it not desirable as in reference unto us? what,
that he should rise again for our justification? that by virtue of his
resurrection thy soul should appear righteous before the judgment seat of God?
O what a ravishing word is that, what a triumphing challeng? Romans 8.33, 34.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
justifies; who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that
is risen again. O the stings that many have, saying, what shall I do when I
dye, and go down to the dust? may not the Lord have something against me at the
day of reckoning? why no poor soul, if thou art in Christ, it is he that dyed,
yea rather that is risen again for thy justification; by his resurrection he
has cleared all reckonings, so that now who shall condemn? not sin, Christ
has took it away; not the law, Christ has fulfilled it for us; not Satan, for
if the Judge acquit us, what can the Jailer do? O my soul, that thy portion may
be with theirs who has right and title to this blessed resurrection of Jesus
Christ. But thou say again, what is it to me; if I be justified in Christ,
and yet my heart remain unholy, and unsubdued to Christ? it is true, thou
find a woeful sinful nature within thee, cross and contrary to holiness, and
leading thee daily into captivity; yet remember it is Christ that dyed, yea
rather that is risen again; and by virtue of his resurrection he has given
thee a new nature; another nature, which makes thee wrestle against sin, and
shall in time prevail over all sin. But thou say again, what if I be
justified, and sanctified, if after death I shall not be raised to life? why
fear not O my soul, for if Christ be risen thou shall rise, and rise to eternal
life; John 14.19.
I am the resurrection and the life, not only the resurrection, but life is in
him originally, as water is in the fountain, and from him it is derived to us;
because I live ye shall live also. But thou say again, O that I were assured
of this! many doubts and jealousies are upon me from day to day. Sometimes
indeed I have a comfortable hope of my justification, Psalm. 88.14.
sanctification, salvation; and sometimes again I am forced to cry, Lord why
ca^test thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? O consider of the
ends of Christ's resurrection; was it not to give thee the sure mercies of
David? was it not to apply the merits of Christ's active, and passive
obedience, and to bring them home to thy soul? 1 Cor. 15.17.
was it not to confirm, and to ratify thy faith, else were it in vain? O the
Person of Christ! and O the privileges of Christ as being raised from the
dead! O my soul, that thou were on the wing in thy desires after Christ! O that
thy motions were as swift as the Eagles that hasted to eat! O that feelingly
thou knew him, and the power of his resurrection! that thou were resolved to
give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, until thou could
say, Christ's resurrection is mine! why Lord, that I should long after vanities,
trifles, toys, pleasures, profits, earthly contentments; that I should long
like some women with Child for a deal of baggage coals, or ashes, very loathsome
food; and yet that I should feel no pantings, breathings, hungerings,
thirstings after Christ's resurrection to feed upon it, and to be satisfied with
it! come, here is a blessed object; here is delights; O stir up thy appetite,
suck and be satisfied, drink ye, drink abundantly, O my beloved!

SECT. IV. Of hoping in Jesus in that respect.
LEt us hope in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us in
his resurrection. Only remember, I mean not a fluctuating, wavering, unsettled,
unestablished hope; no, no, let us hope firmly, surely, fixedly; let us come up
to that plerophory, or full assurance of hope; that we may conclude
comfortably, and confidently, Christ's resurrection is ours; and yet that our
conclusion may not be rash, but upon right grounds, we may examine the
firmness, solidness, substantialness of our hope in Christ's resurrection by
these following signs.

1. If Christ's resurrection be mine, then is Christ's death mine; the fruits or
effects of Christ's death and resurrection cannot be severed; if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, Romans 6.5.
we shall be in the likeness of his resurrection. Mortification, and
vivification, are twins of one and the same spirit; depart from evil and do
good. -- Cease to do evil, learn to do well. Many may think they have their
part in the first resurrection, Psalm. 34.14. Isa. 1.16, 17.
but can they prove their death unto sin? as there cannot be a resurrection
before a man dye, so there cannot be a resurrection to a new life, but there
must be a separation of the soul from the body of sin; what, shall a man cleave
to sin, be wedded to sin; yea shall a man like it, love it, live in it, and yet
say or imagine that Christ's resurrection is his? O be not deceived, God is not
mocked! come, scearch, try, examine, have thou any share in Christ's passion?
know thou the fellowship of his sufferings? art thou made conformable to his
death, that as he dyed for sin; so thou dyest to sin? if herein thou art at a
stand, peruse those Characters laid down in his sufferings and death, the truth
and growth of our mortification, or of our death unto sin is discovered before.

2. If Christ's resurrection be mine, then is Christ's Spirit mine, yea then am
I quickened by the Spirit of Christ. Romans 8.9, 11.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: -- but if the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, then he that
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies (and I may
add your mortal souls) by his spirit that dwells in you. Christ's Spirit (if
Christ's resurrection be ours) will have the same operation and effect in our
souls that it had in his body; as it raised up the one, so it will raise up the
other; as it quickened the one, so it will quicken the other. But the question
here will run on, how shall we know whether we have received this quickening
Spirit? many pretend to the Spirit never more than at this day, but how may we
be assured that the Spirit is ours? I answer. --

1. The Spirit is a Spirit of illumination; here is the beginning of his work,
he begins in light; as in the first creation, the firstborn of God's works,
was light, Genesis 1.3.
God said, let there be light, and there was light; so in this new creation,
the first work is light, God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness
has shined into our hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6.
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. Hence the state of nature is called darkness, and the state of grace is
called light; Ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye have light in the Lord.
Ephesians. 5.8. 1 Pet. 2.9.
And he has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. There is a
light in the mind, and a light in the heart, of those who have the Spirit of
Christ; there is a speculative and an affective knowledge, not only to know the
truth, but to love it, believe it, embrace it. O my soul, would thou know
whether Christ's Spirit be thine? consider, and see then whether any of this new
light of Jesus Christ has shined into thy heart; take heed, deceive not thy
self, thou may have a great deal of wit, and knowledge, and understanding,
and yet go to hell; this light is a light shining into thy heart, this light is
a Christ-discovering light; this light is a sin-discoverings light; this light
will cause thee to find out thy hypocrisy, deadness, dullness in spiritual
duties; if thou have not this light thou art near to eternal burnings; darkness
is one of the properties of hell, and without this light, inward darkness will
to utter darkness, where is nothing but weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth.

2. This quickening spirit, is a spirit of faith; as it reveals Christ, so it
inclines men's hearts to close with Christ upon those Gospel-terms, as he is
offered. I know there are degrees and measures of faith, but the least measure
of faith is a desiring, panting, breathing after the Lord Jesus; and no sooner
has the soul received that new light from the spirit of Christ, but it is
presently, at the same instant, exceedingly affected with Jesus Christ; O it
desires Christ above all desires. I know not a more undeceiving sign than this;
read over the whole Bible, and where ever there was any soul-saving
discoveries, there ever followed inward desires, soul-longings after Jesus
Christ; when Paul preached of the resurrection of Christ, some there were that
mocked, jeered, and slighted that doctrine, but others (whose heart the Lord
stirred) they were exceedingly taken with it saying we will hear thee again of
this matter; yea, and this very Sermon so wrought on some that they believed,
among whom was Dyonysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others
with them; Acts 17.32, 34.
and when he preaced another Sermon on the same subject at Antioch, the Jews
were much offended, but the Gentiles were so exceedingly taken with it that
they besought Paul, that these words (the very same resurrection Sermon) might
be preached to them the next Sabbath day. Their very hearts did so long after
Christ whom Paul had preached, that when the congregation was broken up, Acts
13.42,
many of the Jews and religious Procelites followed Paul and Barnabas; and the
next Sabbath day came almost the whole City together to hear the same Sermon. O
my soul, 43.
do thou hear these Sermons of Christ's resurrection; do thou hear
sweet-Gospel-preaching? 44.
do thou hear the free tenders and offers of Christ; with all his glory and
excellency to poor sinners, to vile, lost, undone souls, and art thou no whit
taken with them? can thou sleep away such Sermons as these? have thou no
heart-risings, no stirrings, workings, longings, desires in thy soul? O take
heed! this is a dangerous case: but on the contrary, if thou say in thy
heart, Oh that I could hear this Sermon again! O the sweet virtues of Christ's
resurrection! I had not thought such honey could have dropped out of this rock;
O the blessed beginnings and springings of grace which I felt in my soul on
such a meditation! Oh the desire, the delight! O the longings! O the comforts
of Christ's resurrection! O the drawings of the Spirit, inclining my heart to
receive Jesus Christ, to close with him, and to rest on him, and to give up my
self to him! why this Spirit of faith does argue thy title and interest to the
quickening spirit of Christ.

3. Thy quickening Spirit, is a Spirit of sanctification; such was the Spirit,
whereby Christ was raised, he was declared mightily to be the Son of God, Romans
1.4.
according to the Spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead.
That same Spirit which raised up Jesus Christ, was that same divine Spirit
which sanctified his humane nature wherein it dwelt; and such is that
quickening Spirit to all in whom it dwells; it is a Spirit of holiness, and
it works holiness, changing the heart, and turning the bent of it from sin to
holiness. 2 Cor. 5.17.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are passed away,
behold all things are become new. q. d. When once the believer is by an act of
faith passed over unto Christ, there goes immediately from the Spirit of Christ
into his soul an effectual power, which alters and changes the frame of the
whole man; now he is not the same that he was; he is changed in his company, in
his discourse, in his practice; he is changed in his nature, judgment, will,
affections; he is sanctified throughout in soul, body, and Spirit; O my soul,
try thy self by this sign, do thou find such an inward change wrought in the
soul? do thou find the law of God, a law of holiness written on thy hearr?
do thou find a law within thee contrary to the law of sin, commanding with
authority that which is holy and good? so that thou can say with the Apostle,
I delight in the law of God after the inward man? Romans 7.23, 25. Romans 8.1.
and with my mind I my self serve the law of God? if so, surely this is no
other, but the law of the spirit of life in Jesus Christ; or the law of this
quickening Spirit, communicated from Christ, unto thy soul.

3. If Christ's resurrection be mine, then am I planted together in the likness
of Christ's resurrection; then do I resemble, and am made conformable to Christ
in his resurrection; now if we would know wherein that resemblance is, the
Apostle tells us, that like as Christ was rised up from the dead by the glory
of the Father, Romans 6.5.
even so we also should walk in newness of life. Our mortification is a
resemblance of Christ's death, and our vivification is a resemblance of Christ's
resurrection. In this ground of our hope concerning our interest in the
resurrection of Christ, I shall propound these questions. --

Romans 6.4.
1. Whether indeed and in truth our souls are vivified?

2. Whether we increase and grow in our vivification?

For the first, the truth and certainty of our vivification will appear by
these rules. --

1. True vivification is general, both in respect of us, and in respect of
Grace.

1. In respect of us, it is diffused throughout the whole man; the very God of
peace sanctify you wholly (says the Apostle) and I pray God that your whole
spirit, 1 These. 5.23.
soul, and body may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And. 2. In respect of Grace, it is in every Grace; I know it is a
question, whether all Graces are so connexed and chained together, that
possible they cannot be severed? but I suppose it is truly answered, that in
respect of habit they cannot be severed, though in respect of the act or
exercise they may be severed; some Graces are more radical than others, as
faith and love, and therefore they first appear; but as a man lives first the
life of a plant, then of sense, then of reason, though all were radically there
at first; so it is in graces; experience tells us that some Christians are
eminent in some graces; and some in other graces; some have more love, and some
more knowledge, and some more patience, and some more self-denial; but all that
are true Christians have each of these graces in some measure or other; or at
least they have them in habit, though not in the act; if vivication be true,
there is a whole work of grace both in heart and life; as the light in the air
runs through the whole hemisphere, so the whole work of grace runs through, and
is diffused through the whole man, soul, body, and spirit. O my soul, this may
put thee to thy study, because of the several constitutions or tempers of
graces; thou may find this or that grace, this or that image of Christ
clearly stamped on thy heart; but thou can not find such and such graces; in
this case, fear not, for if in truth and sincerity thou have but one grace,
thou have the whole chain of graces. But to speak to some graces in particular.

Gal. 2.20.
2. True vivification is a new life acting upon a new principle of Faith. The
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. They
are the words of a man pursued by the law unto Christ; Paul seeing he was dead
by the law, he speaks for a better husband; the law finds him dead, and leaves
him dead, Nevertheless I live (says Paul) what means he? a natural life? why
so? he lived before now; no, no, it is a better life than a natural life; such
a life is no contentment to a soul pursued by the law; very heathens and
infidels have such a life, and in that respect are as happy as the best of
Saints; Paul's life is a spiritual life, and the Spring of his life is the Son
of God; Jesus Christ is esscentially, radically, fundamentally life it self,
and by his incarnation, passion, resurrection, he is life for his Saints; they
live by him, and in him, and for him, and through him; he is the heart and
liver of their Spiritual life. But as from the heart and liver there must be
arteryes, and vains for maintenance of life and conveyance of blood throughout
all the body; so from Christ there must be some conveyance to bring this to
life unto us, and this is by faith; I live by the faith of the Son of God. O my
soul, do thou live this life of faith on the Son of God? can thou make use
of Christ in every state, and in every condition? As for instance; in thy
particular calling, do thou look to Christ for wisdom, success, blessing,
ability? do thou say, if I have ill success, I will yet go to Christ; it is
he that set me here, and it is he will enable me? in case of provision, do
thou run to Christ, and do thou hang upon him for all things needful? do
thou say; If I want means, God will create means; he commands all means, and he
can suddenly do whatsoever he will? In case of protection, do thou look unto
Jesus to be thy shield and protector? do thou mind the word of God to
Abraham, Fear not Abraham, for I am God all-sufficient, Genesis 15.1.
thy buckler and thy exceeding great reward? In case of thy Children, go
thou to Christ, saying, Are not my Children thy Children, and will thou not
provide for thy own? it is true, thou must do what thou can, but for the
rest, despair not; cast thy burden upon him, who has commanded thee in
nothing to be careful, Phil. 4.6. Phil. 27.10.
but in all things to make thy suits known with prayer and supplication; when
my Father and Mother forsake me, God will take me up, says David. He is a
Father to the Fatherless, he provided for them in the womb, he provided breasts
for them ere they saw the Sun, and therefore how should he but have care, and
compassion over thy Children? in case of prosperity, do thou see Christ's
love in that state? do thou set him in the first place, receiving all, and
joining in all as coming from him? is this it that makes thy prosperity sweet,
because, thou know and believe that thy sins are pardoned? otherwise what
is thy silver, and gold, so long as thy pardon is not sealed in the blood of
Jesus Christ? if a prisoner condemned to dye should abound in all outward
plenty, what comfort could he have, so long as his pardon were not sealed? it
is the life of faith that sweetens prosperity; who are better Christians than
they! who know they enjoy these things with God's favor and blessing; faith
sees Gods love in all, and so is abundantly thankful; faith makes a man to eat,
and drink, and sleep, and to do all in Christ; as it cost Christ dear to
purchase our liberty to the creatures, so faith ever sets Christ in the first
place; it receives all as coming from him, it returns all as to the glory of
him: in case of disgrace, do thou commit thy credit to Jesus Christ? do
thou look up to Jesus, and desire no more good name, repute, or honor than
Christ will afford thee? or in case of death, do thou like Stephen resign up
thy soul to Christ? do thou see death conquered in the resurrection of
Christ? do thou look beyond death? do thou over-eye all things betwixt thee
and glory? O the sweet of this life of faith on the Son of God! if thou know
what this means, then may thou assure thy self of thy vivification.

3. True vivification is a new life acting upon a new principle of hope of
glory. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again to a lively
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you.
By Christ's resurrection we have a lively hope for our resurrection unto glory;
is not Christ our head? and if he be risen to glory, John 18.22.
shall not his members follow after him? certainly there is but one life, one
Spirit, one glory of Christ and his members; The glory which thou gave me, I
have given unto them said Christ. The soul that is vivified has a lively hope
of glory on several grounds. As, 1. Because of the promises of glory set down
in the word; now on these promises hope fastens her anchor; if Christ has
promised, how should I but maintain lively hope? 2. Because of the first fruits
of the Spirit; there are sometimes fore tastes of the glory, drops of heaven
poured into a soul; whence it comfortably concludes, if I have the earnest and
first fruits, surely in his time Jesus Christ will give the harvest. 3. Because
of Christ's resurrection unto glory; now he rose as a common Person, and he went
up into heaven as a common Person; whence hope is lively, saying, why should I
doubt, or despair, seeing, I am quickened together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.5, 6.
and raised up together with Christ, and am made to sit together with Christ,
in heavenly places? Try, O my soul, by this sign: Art thou lively in the hope
of glory? does thy heart leap and rejoice within at a thought of thy
inheritance in heaven? in a lively fountain the waters thereof will leap and
sparkle; so if thy hope be lively, thou will have living joys, living speeches,
living delights; amidst all thy afflictions thou will say, these will not
endure for ever; I my self shall away ere long, Glory will come at last. O the
sweet of this life of hope! if thou feel these stirrings it is an argument
of thy vivification.

4. True vivification acts all its duties upon a new principle of love to
Christ; men not enlivened by Jesus Christ may do much, and go far in outward
service, yea they may come to sufferings, and yet without love to Christ all is
lost, all comes to nothing. 1 Cor. 13.1.
Though I speak with tongues of men and Angels -- though I have the gift of
Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, -- though I bestow
all my goods to feed the poor; Ver. 2.3.
and though I give my body to be burnt, and have not love, it profits me
nothing. All the rest may be from the flesh, and for the flesh, and fleshly
ends; but a true Gospel-love is from Christ, and tends to the Glory of Christ:
For Love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows God.
1 John 4.7.
But how may we know that all our actings are out of love to Jesus Christ? I
answer. --

1. If we act by the rule of Christ. If ye love me keep my commandments. -- He
that has my Commandments and keeps them, 1 John 14.15, 21.23, 24.
he it is that loves me. -- If any man love me, he will keep my commandments.
He that loves Christ, he will look upon every act, every service, every
performance, whether it be according to the rule of Christ, and then on he goes
with it.

2. If we act to the honor of Christ. We may pray, and hear, and preach, and
act self more then the honor of Jesus Christ; whiles Christ showed miracles,
and fed his followers to the full, they cried up Jesus, and none like Jesus;
but when Christ was plain with them, ye seek me, not because ye saw the
miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, John 6.26. Ver. 66.
and were filled; when he pressed sincerity upon them, and preparation for
sufferings, from that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more
with him. Its no news for men to fall off when their ends fail; only they that
love Christ look not at these outward things in respect of the honor of Jesus
Christ; and hence it is that in all their actings they will carry on the design
of the Father in advancing the honor of the Son, whatever it cost them. O my
soul apply this to thy self; if thou live the life of love, if in all thy
actings, duties, services, thou art carried on with a principle of love to
Jesus Christ, it is a sure sign of thy vivification.

For the second question, whether we increase and grow in our vivification? we
may discover it thus. --

1. We grow, when we are led on to the exercise of new Graces; this the Apostle
calls adding of one Grace unto another: 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.
add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance,
and to temperance patience, and to patience Godliness, and to Godliness
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity. At first a Christian
does not exercise all Graces, though habitually all Graces may be planted in
him, yet the exercise of them is not all at once, but by degrees. Thus the
Church tells Christ, at our Gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and
old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved; Cant. 7.13.
she had all manner of fruits which she had reserved for Christ; new and old:
she had young converts, and more seetled professors; or she had new and old
Graces, as others; she added Grace to Grace, she was led on from the exercise
of one Grace, unto another new Grace: As wicked men are led on from one sin to
another, and so grow worse and worse; so godly men are led from one Grace to
another; Romans 5.3, 4.
and so they increase, knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope.

2. We grow, when we find new degrees of the same Grace added; as when love
grows more fervent, when knowledge abounds, and has a larger apprehension of
spiritual things; when faith goes on from man's casting himself on Christ, to
find sweetness in Christ; and so to plerophory, or full assurance of faith:
when Godly sorrow proceeds from mourning for sin, as contrary to Gods holiness;
to mourn for it, is as contrary to him who loves us; which usually follows
after assurance; when obedience enlarges its bounds, Rev. 2.16.
and we abound more and more in the work of the Lord. I know thy works (said
Christ to the Church of Thyatyra) I know thy works, and the last to be more
than the first.

3. We grow when the fruits and duties we perform grow more ripe, more
spiritual, and more to the honor of Christ: it may be we pray not more, nor
longer than sometimes we used; it may be our prayers have not more wit, or
memory, than sometimes they had; yet they are more savory, more spiritual, and
more to Christ's honor than sometimes they were: Now we must know that one
short prayer put up in faith, with a broken heart, and aiming at the honor of
Christ, argues more of growth in grace, than prayers of a day long, and never
so eloquent, without the like qualifications. In every duty we should look at
their ends, and ayms; for if we debase our selves in the sense of our own
vileness, and emptiness, and inability; and if we aim at God's honor, and
power, and praise, and glory, it is a good sign of growth; we call this
spiritual part of duty, when it is from God, and through God, and to God.

4. We grow when we are more rooted in Christ; so the Apostle describes it,
Ephesians. 4.15.
a growing up unto him in all things. This is Scripture phrase; growth of grace
is usually expressed by growing into Christ, but now in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. As if to grow in grace without
him, were nothing, as indeed it is not. 2 Pet. 3.18.
Philosophers, moral men, and others, may grow in virtues, but not in Christ.
Come then, search, and try whether we are more rooted in Christ: when a young
plant is new set, the roots are a small depth in the earth, one may pull them
up with his hand; but as the tree shoots up in height, so it strikes the root
deep and deeper downward, that no force can move it; so it is with us, we have
not for degree so firm and near a conjunction with Christ, at our first union;
but the more we live with him, like good trees spreading in the sight of all
men, and bringing forth the fruits of righteousness, the more we come to root
downwards by a more firm faith, and firm confidence. Our union is answerable to
that which uniteth us; now at the first, faith is but weak, like a smoking
wick, or a poor bruised reed; but whiles faith is drawing the Spirit away from
Christ, the more it exercises, the more it is strengthened; even as in babes,
their powers every day, at first are feeble; but the more they feed and
exercise, by so much the more they put forth their strength in all their
operations: time was, that Peter's faith was so weak, that at the voice of a
Damosel, Peter was shaken; but by walking, while in Christ he was so rooted,
that neither threatenings, whippings, imprisonment, conventings before great
powers, nor any other thing could shake him: you may object, if we are not at
first rooted in Christ, a weak faith may be quite overthrown; we may then fall
away; true, if we be not rooted in any manner; but this we are at our first
setting into Christ by faith; only this I speak of is of an higher degree of
rooting, which does not only shut out falling away, but very shaking and
tottering, in a good measure: surely this is not the state of every believer;
no, no, it is only the condition of such, who have long walked in Christ, and
are grown in grace, holiness, vivification.

O my soul, try now the growth of vivification by these few signs; art thou led
on to the exercises of new graces, adding grace to grace? do thou find new
degrees of the self same grace? is thy love more hot, thy faith more firm? all
thy boughs more laden and filled with the fruits of righteousness? are all thy
duties more spiritual? are thy ends more raised to aim at God, to sanctify
him, and to debase thy self? art thou more rooted in Christ? in all thy duties,
graces and gracious actings; have thou learnt habitual to say, I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me? do thou interest Christ more and more in all thou
do? do thou know and affect Christ more and more? Oh when would an
ambitious courtier be weary of being graced by his Prince? when would a
worlding be weary of having the world come in upon him? why should thou O my
soul be weary of insinuating thy self by faith and affection into Christ; come,
scearch, try; it may be little winds have formerly shaken thee, but so it is,
that insencibly, and thou know not how, thy root is struck lower and lower
into Christ; and now thou art not so soon shaken with every wind; surely thy
hope is well grounded; thou have a part in Christ's resurrection; it is thine,
even thine.

SECT. V. Of believing in Jesus in that respect.
5. LEt us believe in Jesus as carrying on the great work of our Salvation for
us in his resurrection. This is one main article of our faith, the third day he
rose again from the dead, and this now I propound as the object of our faith; O
let us believe it, let us believe our part and interest in it. And to that
purpose let us look on Jesus as a common Person; whatever consideration he
passed under, it was in our stead, and in that respect we are to reckon our
selves as sharers with him. Scrupulous souls may object, is it possible that
Christ should rise, and that I should rise with him, and in him? is it possible
that Christ should dye as a common Person for my sins? and that Christ should
rise, and by his resurrection should be justified as a common person in my
room? O the Mystery of this redemption! without Controversy great is the
Mystery of Godliness, which is God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
justified in the Spirit: it is a mystery beyond my fathoming, that Christ, who
is God in the flesh, should be justified in the Spirit for my justication; that
Christ should dye in my stead as a condemned man, and when he had finished his
work, that he should rise again in my stead as a righteous Person. These
passages are past fathoming, and beyond believing; O what shall I do? I find it
hard, very hard to believe this point.

Luke 24.26.
Scrupulous souls! throw not away your confidence; ought not Christ to have
suffered these things and to enter into his Glory? was not satisfaction and
justification, payment of debt, and discharge of bonds required of him, and of
necessity for us? O believe, and that I may persuade to purpose, I shall lay
down, 1. Some directions; and, 2. Some encouragements of faith.

1. For directions of faith in reference to Christ's resurrection, observe
these particulars. --

1. Faith must directly go to Christ.

2. Faith must go to Christ, as God in the flesh.

3. Faith must go to Christ, as God in the flesh made under the Law.

4. Faith must go to Christ, not only as made under the directive part of the
Law by his life, but under the penal part by his death; of all these before.

5. Faith must go to Christ as God in the flesh, made under the directive and
penal part of the Law, and as quickened by the Spirit. He was put to death in
the flesh (says Peter) and quickened by the Spirit. 1 Pet. 3.18.
And accordingly must be the method, and order of our faith; after we have
looked on Christ as dead in the flesh, we must go on to see him as quickened by
the Spirit; 1 Cor. 15.17.
if Christ was not raised, or quickened (says the Apostle) your faith were in
vain; q. d. to believe in Christ as only in respect of his birth, life, death,
and to go no further, were but a vain faith; and therefore shore up your faith
to this pitch, that Christ who dyed, is risen from the dead; to this purpose
all the Sermons of the Apostles represented Christ, not only as crucified, but
as raised; In that first Sermon after the mission of the holy Ghost, ye have
crucified Christ (said Peter to the Jews) and then it follows, whom God has
raised up, having loosed the pains, or chains of death, Acts 2.23, 24.
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. In that next
Sermon Peter tells them again, ye have killed the Prince of life; and then it
follows, whom God has raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses. In the
next Sermon after this, be it known unto you all (said Peter) and to all the
people of Israel, Acts 3.15.
that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazzareth, whom ye crucified, and whom God
raised from the dead, -- is this man whole. And in the next Sermon after this,
the God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree. Acts
4.10.
And as thus he preached to the Jews, so in his first Sermon to the Gentiles,
he tells them, we are witnesses of all things which Jesus did, both in the land
of the Jews, Acts 5.30
and in Jerusalem, whom they slew, and hanged on a tree; him God raised up the
third day, and showed him openly. And as thus Peter preached, so in that first
Sermon of Paul at Antioch, Acts 10.39, 40. Acts 13.30.
he tells them of the Jews crucifying Jesus, and then it follows, but God
raised him from the dead. -- And as concerning that he raised him up from the
dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give
you the sure Mercies of David, Ver. 34, 35.
and thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. And after this,
Paul, as his manner was, went into the Synagogue at Thesalonica, and three
Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and alleging
that Christ must needs suffer and rise from the dead. This was the way of the
Apostles preaching; they told them an history (I speak it with reverence) of
one Jesus Christ, that was the word of God, and that was become man, Acts 17.2,
3.
and how he was crucified at Jerusalem, and how he was raised from the dead;
and all this in a plain, simple, spiritual way and manner; and while they were
telling those blessed truths, the Spirit fell upon the people, and they
believed, and had faith wrought in them. Faith is not wrought so much in the
way of ratiocination, as by the Spirit of God, coming upon the souls of people
by the Relation or representation of Jesus Christ to the soul. And this our
Lord himself hints, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so
must the Son of man be lifted up, John 3.14.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
When the people were stung, God so ordered, that the very beholding of the
brazen Serpent should bring help (though we know not how) to those that were
wounded and stung by those fiery Serpents; so God has ordained in his blessed
wisdom that the discovery of Jesus Christ, as crucified and raised, as humbled
and exalted, should be a means of faith; come then, set we before us, Christ
raised; not only Christ crucified, but Christ raised, is the object of faith;
and in that respect we must look up to Jesus.

6. Faith in going to Christ is raised from the dead, or as quickened by the
Spirit, it is principally, and mainly to look to the end, purpose, intent, and
design of Christ in his resurrection; very devils may believe the history of
Christ's resurrection, Jam. 2.19.
they believe and tremble; but the Saints and people of God are to look at the
meaning of Christ, why he rose from the dead; now the ends are either supreme,
or subordinate. 1. The supreme end was God's Glory, and that was the meaning of
Christ's prayer, Father, John 17.1. Romans 6.4.
the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee; with
which agrees the Apostle, he rose again from the dead to the glory of the
Father. 2. The subordinate ends were many; As, 1. That he might tread on the
Serpents head. 2. That he might destroy the works of the Devil. 3. That he
might be the first fruits of them that sleep. 4. That he might assure our faith
that he is the word, and that he is able to keep that which we have committed
to him against that day. 5. That he might be justified in the Spirit; as he was
begotten in the womb by the Spirit; led up and down in the Spirit, offered up
by the eternal Spirit, so he was raised from the dead by the Spirit, and
justified in the Spirit at his resurrection. Christ was under the greatest
attainder that ever man was, he stood publicly charged with the guilt of a
world of sins, and if he had not been justified by the Spirit, he had still
lain under the blame of all, and had been liable to the execution of all; and
therefore he was raised up from the power of death, that he might be declared
as a righteous person. 6. That he might justify us in his justificaon; when he
was justified, all the elect were vertually and really justified in him; that
act of God which past on him, was drawn up in the name of all his Saints: as
whatever benefit or privilege God meant for us, he first of all bestowed it on
Christ; thus God meaning to sanctify us, he sanctified Christ first, and God
meaning to justify us, he justifies Christ first; so whatever benefit or
privilege he bestowed on Christ, he bestowed it not on him for himself, but as
he was a common Person, and one re-resenting us. Thus Christ was sanctified
instead of us, for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be
sanctified through thy truth: and thus Christ was justified in stead of us, for
as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all for condemnation, even so by
the righteousness of one, the free gift came on all men unto justification.

7. That he might regenerate us, and beget us anew by his resurrection; Joh.
17.19.
blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again -- by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. And this he does, Romans 15.18.
two ways. 1. As our pattern, platform, Idea, or exemplar; like as Christ was
raised from the dead, -- even so we also should walk in newness of life: 1 Pet.
1.3.
and likewise reckon ye also your selves to be alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. 2. As the efficient thereof, for when we were dead in sin, he
has quickened us together with Christ; Romans 6.13,
and ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. Ver. 11.
O the power of Christ's resurrection in this respect! if we saw a man raised
from the dead, how should we admire at such a wondrous power? but the raising
of one dead soul is a greater work than to raise a Churchyard of dead bodies.
Ephesians. 2.5. Col. 2.12.


8. That he might sanctify us, which immediately follows after the other, --
but yield your selves unto God as those that are alive from the dead, Romans 6.13.
and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. In our regeneration
we are risen with Christ, and it is the Apostles argument, Col 3.1, 2.
if ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, -- set
your affections on things above, and not on things on the earth. We usually
reckon two parts of Sanctification, viz. Mortification, and Vivification; now
as the Death of Christ has the special influence upon our Mortification, so
the Resurrection of Christ has the special influence on our Vivification; Ephesians.
2.5, 6.
he has quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up together with
Christ.

O my Soul, Look to this main design of Christ in his rising again; and if thou
have any faith, O set thy Faith on work to draw this down into thy Soul. But
here is a question, how should I manage my Faith? or how should I act my Faith
to draw down the virtue of Christ's resurrection for my Vivification; I answer.

1. Go to the Wellhead, look into the resurrection of Jesus Christ. This one
act contains in it these particulars; As, 1. That I must go out of my self to
something else; this is that check that lies upon that work of Grace, to keep
out pride, that Faith sees the whole good of the soul in a Principle
extraneous, even the springs of Jesus Christ. Alas! if this Vivification were
in me, or in my power, what swellings and excrescencies of pride should I
quickly nourish? God therefore has placed it in another, that I may be kept
low; and that I may go out of my self to seek it where it is. 2. That I must
attribute wholly, Gal. 2.20.
freely, joyfully, all that I am, to Jesus Christ, and to the effectual working
of his Grace. 1 Cor. 15.10.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And by the Grace of God I am what
I am; and, I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace
of God which was with me. The life of grace springs only from the life and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, and therefore as I must deny my self, so I must
attribute all to him from whom it comes. 3. I must lie at his feet with an
humble expectation of, and dependency upon him, and him alone for the supplies
of grace; this was the Apostles practice: O that I may be found in him! O that
I may know him, and the power of his resurrection! O that by any means I might
obtain unto the resurrection of the dead! he lay at Christ's feet with an humble
expectation to feel the Power of Christ's resurrection, in raising him first
from the death of sin to the life of grace, and after from death of nature to
the life of glory.

2. Lay to these springs thy mouth of Faith; it is not enough to have all the
treasuries of grace, all the actings of Christ for thee, laid before thee, but
thou must act thy faith upon that object; O then go to Christ's resurrection
and believe, make a particular application of those glorious effects of
Christ's resurrection upon thy soul. Say, Lord thou dyedst that I might dye to
sin, and thou wast raised from the death that I might be raised to newness of
life. Come Lord, and quicken my dying sparks, give me to lay hold on Christ's
resurrection, give me to adhere to it, and to rest upon it, and to close with
it; I see without faith I am nere a whit the better for Christ's resurrection;
and thy commands are upon me; open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it: why
Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. This faith is necessary to our
vivification as well as Christ. Psalm 81.10.
Christ is the fountain of life, but faith is the means of life; Mark. 9.24.
the power and original of life is entirely reserved to Jesus Christ, but faith
is the radical band on our part, whereby we are tied unto Christ, and live in
Christ; and thus says Christ himself, I am the resurrection and the life. Is
that all? no, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet he shall live.
And I am the bread of life. Is that all? Joh. 11.25.
no; he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall
never thirst. John 6.35.


Isa. 66.11.
3. Suck and be satisfied, milk out and be delighted. Christ's resurrection is a
breast of consolation; there is in it abundance of life and glory, and therefore
we should not believe a little, but much; the word suck, is as much as to exact
on Christ; draw hard from Christ; the more we exercise faith, the more we have
of Jesus Christ and of Vivification; there is a depth in Christ's resurrection
that can never be fadomed; when the soul has as much as its narrow hand can
grasp, whole Christ is too big to be enclosed in mortal arms; only the longer
our arm of faith is, the more we shall grasp of him; and therefore suck, and
pull, and draw hard. And to this purpose --

1. Pray for an increase of faith, complain to Christ of the shortness of thy
arm, tell him thou can not believe as thou would, thou can not get in so
much of Christ into thy soul as thou desire, thy Vivification is very poor
and small; Oh when Christ hears a soul complain of drawfishness in faith and
grace, then is he ready to let out of his fullness even grace for grace.

2. Act thy faith vigorously on Christ's resurrection for a further degree of
quickening, activity, and lively abillity of grace. Christ is an ever-flowing
fountain, and he would have believers to partake abundantly of what is in him;
he cannot abide that any should content themselves with a present stock of
grace; Christ is not as a stream that fails, or as a channel that runs dry;
Christ is not as water in a ditch, which has no living spring to feed it; no,
no; Christ is the fountain of life, he is the chief ordinance of life that ever
God set up. I know there are other means of Christ's appointment, but if thou will live at the spring, and dri^^ in there, yea drink abundantly according to
the overflowings of this fountain, O the life, and growth of life that would
come in! Oh the virtue of Christ's resurrection that (Christ's Spirit meeting
and assisting) would flow into thy soul for thy vivification.

Thus for directions; now for the encouragements of our faith to believe in
Christ's resurrection.

1. Consider the excellency of this object. A sight of Christ in his beauty and
glory would ravish souls, and draw them to run after him: the wise Merchant
would not buy the pearl, till he knew it to be of excellent price; great things
are eagerly sought for; Christ raised, Christ glorified, is an excellent
object; O who would not sell all to buy this pearl? who would not believe?

2. Consider of the power, virtue, and influence of this object into all that
golden chain of privileges; if Christ be not raised, you are yet in your sins;
1 Cor. 15.17; 18.
then they also which are fallen a sleep in Christ are perished. From the
resurrection of Christ flows all those privileges, even from justification to
salvation. The first is clear, and therefore all the rest.

3. Consider that Christ's resurrection and the effects of it are nothing unto
us, if we do not believe; it is faith that brings down the particular sweetness
and comforts of Christ's resurrection unto our souls: it is faith that puts us
in the actual possession of Christ's resurrection; whatsoever Christ is to us
before faith, yet really we have no benefit by it until we believe; it is faith
that takes hold of all that Christ has done for us; and gives us the actual
enjoyment of it, oh let not the work stick in us! what, is Christ risen from
the dead? and shall we not eye this Christ, and take him home to our selves by
faith? the Apostle tells us that he that believed not, has made God a liar, 1 John 5.10.
because be believes not the record that God has given of his Son: Unbelief
belyes God in all that he has done for us. O take heed of this, without faith
what are we better for Christ's resurrection.

4. Consider of the tenders, offers, apparitions that Christ raised makes of
himself to our souls? when first he arose (to confirm the faith of his
Disciples he offers himself, and appears to Mary Magdalen, to the other women,
to Peter, Thomas, and all the rest; and all those apparitions were on this
account that they might believe, Joh. 29.31.
these things are written that ye might believe. In like manner Christ at this
day offers himself in the Gospel of grace; and by his Spirit he appears to
souls. Methinks we should not hear a Sermon of Christ's resurrection, but we
should imagine as if we saw him, whose head and hairs are white like wool, as
white as snow, Rev. 1.14, 15.
whose eyes are as a flame of fire; whose feet are like unto fine brass, as if
they burned in a furnace; whose voice is as the sound of many waters: or if we
are dazzled with his glory, methinks at least we should hear his voice, as if he
said, fear not, I am the first and the last, I am he that lives, and was dead;
and behold I am alive for evermore. Amen. q. d. Come, Ver. 17, 18.
cast your souls on me; it is I that have conquered sin, death, and hell for
you; it is I that have broke the serpents head, that have took away the sting
of death, that have cancelled the bond of the handwriting against you, that
have in my hands a general acquittance and pardon of your sins; come, take it,
take me, and take all with me; see your names written in the acquittance, that
I tender; take out the copy of it in your own hearts; only believe in him who
is risen again for your justification. -- O my soul what say thou to this
still sweet voice of Christ? shall he who is the Savior of men, and glory of
Angels desire thee to believe, and will thou not say Amen to it? Oh how should
I blame thee for thy unbelief? what aspersions does it cast on Christ? he has
done all things well, he has satisfied wrath, fullfilled the Law; and God has
acquitted him, pronounced him just; faith is contented, he can desire no more;
but thou say by unbelief that Christ has done nothing at all, unbelief
professes Christ is not dead, or at least not risen from the dead; unbelief
professes that justice is not satisfied, that no justification is procured,
that the wrath of God is now as open to destroy us as ever it was. Oh that
Christ should be crucified again in our hearts by our unbelief; come, take
Christ upon his tenders and offers, embrace him with both arms.

SECT. VI. Of Loving in Jesus in that Respect.
6. LEt us love Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us in
his resurection; surely if we hope in Christ, and believe in Christ, we cannot
but love Christ; if Christ's resurrection be our justification, and so the
ground both of our hope and faith, how should we but love him, who has done
such great things for us? she that had much forgiven her, loved much; and if by
virtue of Christ's resurrection we are Justified from all our sins, how should
we but love him much? but that I may let down some cords of Love, whereby to
draw our loves to Christ in this respect, let us consider thus. --

Love is a motion of the appetite, by which the mind unites it self to that
which seems good to it. You may object that Christ is absent, how then should
our souls be united to him? but if we consider that objects, though absent, may
be united to the powers by their species and images, as well as by their true
beings, we may then be said truly to love Christ as raised, though he be absent
from us; come then, stir up thy appetite, bring into thy imagination the Idea
of Christ as in his resurrection; present him to thy affection of Love, in that
very form wherein he appeared to his Disciples; as gazing upon the dusty beauty
of flesh, kindles the fire of carnal love, so this gazing on Christ, and on
the passages of Christ in his resurrection will kindle this spiritual love in
thy soul: Draw near then, and behold him; Is he not white and ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousands? is not his head as the most fine gold? are not
his locks bushy, Cant. 5.10, 11, 12, 13.
and black as a raven? are not his eyes as the eyes of doves by the rivers of
water, washed with milk, and fitly set? are not his cheeks as a bed of spices,
as sweet flowers? thus I might go on from top to toe? but that thou may not
only see his glory and beauty wherein he arose, but that thou may hear his
voice; does he not call on thee, as sometimes he did on Mary, on Thomas, on
Peter, or on the twelve? Luke 24.6.
As the Angel said to the woman, remember how he spoke, when he was yet in
Galilee: so say I to thee, remember how he spoke while he was yet on earth;
surely his lips like Lillyes dropped sweet smelling myrrh. As thus. --

1. In his apparition to Mary, Jesus says unto her, woman, why weepest thou?
whom seek thou? John 20.15.
were not these kind words? and have not thou had the like apparition? have not
thou heard the like sweet words from Jesus Christ? how often has thy heart
sobbed and fighed out complaints, O where is he whom my soul loves? I charge
you O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him I am sick
of love? And then was not Christ seen in the mount? was not thy extremity his
opportunity to do thee good? Cant. 5.8.
did not he bespeak thy comforts with these words, Sweet soul, why weepest
thou? whom seek thou? what would thou have that I can give thee? And what
do thou want that I can give thee? If any thing in heaven or earth will make
thee happy, it is all thy own; would thou have pardon? thou shall have it, I
freely forgive thee all the debt; would thou have my self? Why, behold I am
thine, thy friend, thy Lord, thy husband, thy head, thy God. Were not these thy
Lords reviving words? were not these melting, healing, ravishing, quickening,
passages of Christ his love?

John 20.19.
2. In his Apparition to the ten, Jesus stood in the midst, and says unto them,
peace be unto you. Lo here more words of love: in the midst of their trouble
Christ stands in the midst, speaking peace to their souls; and has not Christ
done the like to thee? have thou not many and many a time bin lapt into
troubles, that thou knew not which way to turn thee? have thou not felt the
contradictions of men, raylings of Rabshecka's? and have thou not sometimes
shut the doors upon thee for fear of such Jews? and then, even then, has not
Christ come to thy spirit with an olive branch of peace? saying to thy restless
soul, peace, and be still? has he not wrought wonders in the sea of thy
restless thoughts? has he not made a calm; and more then so, has he not
filled thee with joy and peace in believing? has he not sent thee away from
thy prayers and complaints with a piece of heaven in thy soul? so that thou
wast forced to conclude.

John 20.27.
In his Apparition to the Eleven, Jesus says to Thomas, Reach hither thy
finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my
side, and be not faithless, but believing. O sweet condescending words! how
far? how low would Jesus stoop to take up souls? and O my soul, are not these
the very dealings of Christ toward thee? he that called Thomas to come near,
hark how he calls on thee, Come near poor trembling, wavering, wandering soul;
come, view the Lord thy Savior, and be not faithless, but believing; peace be
unto thee fear not, it is I. He that called on them who passed by to behold his
sorrow in the day of his humiliation, does now call on thee to behold his glory
in the day of his exaltation; look well upon him, do thou not know him? why
his hands were pierced, his head was pierced, his side was pierced, his heart
was pierced, with the stings of thy sins, and these marks he retains even after
his resurrection, that by these marks thou might always know him; is not the
passage to his heart yet standing open? if thou know him not by the face,
the voice, the hands; if thou know him not by the tears, and bloody sweat,
yet look nearer, thou may know him by the heart; that broken healed heart is
his, that dead revived heart is his, that soul-pitying melting heart is his;
doubtless it can be none but his, love and compassion are its certain
signatures. And is not here yet fuel enough for love to feed upon? does not
this heart of Christ even snatch thy heart, and almost draw it forth of thy
breast? can thou read the history of love any further at once? does not thy
throbbing heart here stop to ease it self? if not go on, for the field of love
is large.

4. In this Apparition to the seven, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Son of Jonas,
love thou me more than these? -- And he said to him the second time, Simon,
Joh. 21 15, 16, 17.
Son of Jonas love thou me? -- he said to him the third time, Simon Son of
Jonas love thou me? Oh the loves of Christ in drawing out man's love unto
himself! how often O my soul has Christ come to thy door, and knocked there
for entrance? how often has he sued for Love, and begged love, and asked thee
again and again, Ah soul, do thou love me, more than these? come, tell me,
do thou love me, love me, love me? come, will thou take me for thy Lord? will thou delight in me as thy Treasure, thy happiness, thy all? O fie! shall Christ
raised, a glorious Christ, thus woo, and sue, and call, and will thou not
answer as Peter did, Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. -- Yea Lord thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee? Nay, art thou not grieved
that Christ should ask the third time for thy love? art thou not ashamed out of
thy stupidity, and forced to say, O my blessed Lord, I have been too proud, too
peevish, but thy free grace, and undeserved love, has beaten me out of all my
pride, so that now I fall down at thy footstool, and lay my self flat before
thee; at first I wondered to hear Preachers talk so much of Christ, and I was
bold to ask thy friends, what was their beloved more than another beloved? but
now I wonder that I could be so long without thee, truly Lord, I am thine, only
thine, ever thine, all that I am is at thy command, and all I have is at thy
disposing, be pleased to command both it, and me?

I might thus go on to consider other passages in other Apparitions, but are
not these enough to draw thy love? Oh what love was this! Oh what humility was
this? that Christ after his resurrection should converse with men during the
space of forty days; worthy he was after so many sorrows, sufferings,
reproaches, after so cruel ignominious, and bitter a death, immediately to have
rid his triumph to glory; And for the confirmation of his Disciples faith, he
might have commanded the Angels to have preached his resurrection; oh, no, he
himself would stay in person, he himself would make it out by many infallible
proofs that he was risen again; he himself would by his own example learn us a
lesson of love, of meekness, of patience, in waiting after sufferings for the
reward.

Methinks a few of these passages should set all our hearts on a flame of love;
we love earth, and earthly things; we dig into the veins of the earth for thick
clay; but if Christ be risen set your affections on things above; and not on
things on the earth. Oh if the love of Christ were but in us, Colos. 3.1, 2,
as the love of the world is in base worldlings, it would make us wholly to
despise this world, it would make us to forget it, as worldly love makes a man
to forget his God; Nay it would be so strong and ardent, and rooted in our
souls, that we should not be able voluntary and freely to think on any thing
else but Jesus Christ; we should not then fear contempt, or care for disgrace,
or the reproaches of men; we should not then fear death, 1 Cor. 15.55, 57.
or the grave, or hell, or devils; but we should sing in triumph, O death,
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? -- now thanks be to God which
gives us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

SECT. VII. Of joying in Jesus in that respect.
7. LEt us joy in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us
in his resurrection. This is the great Gospel-duty, we should rejoice in the
Lord, and again rejoice; Phil. 4.4.
yea, rejoice evermore. A Christian estate should be a joyful and comfortable
estate, none have such cause of joy as the Children of Zion, sing O daughter of
Zion, 1 These. 5.16.
shout O Jerusalem, be glad and rejoice with all thy heart O daughter of
Jerusalem. Zach. 3.14.
And why so? a thousand reasons might be rendered; but here is one; a prime one,
Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleep.
A commemoration of Christ's resurrection has ever been a means of rejoicing in
God. 1 Cor. 15.20.


Some may object, what is Christ's resurrection to me? indeed if thou have no
part in Christ, the resurrection of Christ is nothing at all to thee; but if
Christ be thine, then art thou risen with him, and in him; then all he did was
in thy name, and for thy sake.

Others may object, supposing Christ's resurrection mine, what am I better?
how? do not all the privileges of Christ flow from the power and virtue of his
resurrection, as well as death? tell me what is thy state? what possibly can be
the condition of thy soul, wherein thou may not draw sweet from Christ's
resurrection? As --

1 Pet. 3.21.
1. Is thy conscience in trouble for sin? the Apostle tells thee, the answer of
a good conscience toward God, is by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead.

Romans 4.25.
2. Art thou afraid of condemnation? the Apostle tells thee he was delivered for
our offenses, and he was raised again for our justification.

1 Pet. 1.3.
3. Do thou question thy regeneration? the Apostle tells thee he has begotten
us again by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

4. Art thou distressed, persecuted, troubled on every side? the Apostle tells
thee wherein now consists thy confidence, comfort, courage; to wit, in the life
of Christ, in the resurrection of Christ. 2 Cor. 4.10, 11.
We always bear about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life
of Jesus might also be made manifest in our body; for we which live are always
delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made
manifest in our mortal flesh. And thus Beza interprets those following words,
knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise us up also by Jesus?
14.
(i.e.) unto a civil resurrection from our troubles; Paul was imprisoned, and
in part martyred, but by the virtue of Christ's resurrection he foresaw his
enlargement. And this interpretation Beza grounds on the word following, and
foregoing, wherein Paul compares his persecutions to a death, and his
preservation from them to a life; as he had done before also, chap. 1. v. 9, 10.

5. Art thou afraid of falling off, or of falling away? why, remember, that the
immutable force and perpetuity of the new covenant is secured by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Isa. 55.3.
I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David;
this the Apostle applies to the resurrection of Christ; as the bottoming of
that sure covenant, and as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, he
said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David.

Act. 13.34.
6. Art thou afraid of death, hell and the power of the grave? why, now remember
that Christ is risen from the dead, and by his resurrection death is swallowed
up in victory; 1 Cor. 15.55, 57.
so that now thou may sing, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy
victory? now thanks be to God which has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ. It is the voice of Christ, thy dead men shall live together, with
my dead body shall they arise; Isa. 26.19.
awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out the dead: David was so lifted up with this
resurrection, Psalm. 16.9, 10.
that he cries it out, therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, my
flesh also shall rest in hope; for thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither
will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Job 19.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
But especially Job was so exceedingly transported with this, that he breaks
out into these ecstasies, O that my words were now written, O that they were
printed in a book! that they were graven with an iron pen and lead, in the rock
for ever! for I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin worms shall destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. No
man ever since Christ did speak more clearly of Christ's resurrection and his
own, than Job did here before Christ. Observe in it, O my soul, Job's wish, and
the matter wished: his wish was, that certain words which had been cordial to
him, might remain to memory; and this wish has three wishes in one. 1. That
they might be written. 2. That they might be registered in a book, enrolled upon
record, as public instruments, judicial proceedings, or whatsoever is most
authentical. 3. That they might be engraven in stone, and in the hardest stone,
the rock; records might last long, yet time might injure them, and these words
he would have last for ever; O that they were graven in the rock for ever!
Moses and Job are said to have lived at one time; now Moses writ the Law in
stone, and considering that these words were Gospel, there was no reason the
Law should be in tables of stone, and the Gospel in sheets of paper; no, no; it
were fit that this should be as firm and durable as that; Oh that my words were
written, Oh that they were printed in a book, etc.

2. The matter wished, or the words he would have written, are these, I know
that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall live again. Here Is first his Redeemer
and his rising. 2. His own rising and his seeing God. O this was the matter of
his joy, his Redeemer must rise again; and he must rise too, and see his
Redeemer; it was a point that exceedingly ravished and revived Job, and
therefore he iterates the same thing over and over, I shall see God, and I
shall see him for my self, and I shall see him with my eyes, Job. 8.56.
and not with others. As Christ said of Abraham, Your father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. So it appears of his Servant Job, he
saw Christ's day; both his first day, and his latter day, and he rejoiced and
was glad.

Away, away all scrupulous doubtful, dumpish thoughts! consider what joys
were of old, at the foresight of Christ's resurrection; but especially what joy
was all the World over when he rose again from the dead; Greg. hom. in. pasca.
Job 20.20. Luke 24.41. Apostoli die dominico exhilirati, non solum ipsum
festivissimam esse voluerunt, verum etiam per omnes hebdomadas frequentandum
esse duxerunt. Juno cent. 1 Epist. ad Decent 11. 4.
then came the Angels from heaven, and appeared in white; then the Sun danced
for joy, (so it is storyed) or shone sooner, and brighter than ever it did
before, then I am sure the Diciples were exceeding glad, when they saw the
Lord; yea so glad that they believed not for joy; it is worthy our observing,
to see how all the primitive Saints were affected with this news; and because
of it, with the very day on which Christ arose, some call it, The first day of
joy and gladness; and because of the joy occasioned on this day, the Apostles
(say they) devoted the first day of the week to the honor and service of Jesus
Christ. Augustine applies the words of the Psalm unto this day, This is the day
which the Lord has made, let us be glad, and rejoice in it, Psalm. 118.24.
Ignatus who lived in the Apostles age, and was John's Disciple, calls it the
Queen, the Princess, the Lady Paramount among the other weekly days.
Chrysostom calls it a Royal day, and Gregory Nazianzen orat. 42. says, it is
higher than the highest, and, with admiration, wonderful above other days.
Certainly the Lord's day was in high esteem with the ancient Church, and the
principle motive was because of Christ's resurrection from the dead. O that on
these days we could rejoice in the Lord, and again rejoice; it is observed,
that, Many Christians look upon broken-heartedness, and much grieving and
weeping for sin, as if it were the great thing that God delights in, and
requires of them; Baxters method for a settled Peace.
and therefore they bend all their endeavors that way, they are still striving
with their hearts to break them more, and they think no Sermon, no Prayer, no
Meditation, speed so well with them as that which can help them to grieve or
weep; but O Christians understand, and consider, (says my Author) that all
your sorrows are but preparatives for your joys, and that it is an higher and
sweeter work that God calls you to, and would have you spend your time and
strength in. Delight thy self in the Lord, psalm. 37.4.
and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. -- Never take your hearts
to be right, till they be delighting themselves in their God: when you kneel
down in Prayer, labor so to conceive of God, and bespeak him, that he may be
your delight? do so in hearing, and reading, and meditating, and in your
feasting on the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ at his Supper. Especially
improve the happy opportunity of the Lords day, wherein you may wholly devote
your selves unto this work. O spend more of this day in spiritual rejoicing,
especially in commemoration of Christ's resurrection (yea and of the whole work
of redemption) or else you will not answer the institution of the Lord.

SECT. VIII. Of Calling on Jesus in that Respect.
8. LEt us Call on Jesus; that is to say --

1. Let us pray that Christ's resurrection may be ours, and that we may be more
and more assured of it. Phil. 3.10.
Let us say with the Apostle, O that I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection; O that I may find the working of that power in my soul, which was
showed in the resurrection of Christ from the dead; O that the Spirit of
holiness, which quickened Christ from the dead; would by the same glorious
power beget holiness, and faith, and love, and all other graces in my poor
soul, O that Christ would by his resurrection apply his active, and passive
obedience to me; O that he would be to me the Lord of the living, and the
Prince of life, that he would overcome in me the death of sin, and that he
would regenerate, quicken, renew, and fashion me by the power of godliness to
become like himself. O that all the virtue, power, privileges, and influences
of Christ's resurrection might be conferred on me, and that I might feel them
working in me every day more and more.

2. Let us praise God for Christ's resurrection, and for all the privileges
flowing from Christ's resurrection into our souls, 1 Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us
again by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Christ is risen, by
his resurrection he has justified, sanctified, quickened, saved our souls; and
therefore, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; surely God
requires a thousand thousand Hallelujah's, and that we should bless him upon a
thousand-stringed instrument: here is fuel enough, the Lord kindle a great
fire in every one of our hearts, to burn out all our lusts, and to inflame all
our hearts with a love to Jesus Christ. Can we ever too much praise him for all
his actings in our behalf? are not all God's creatures called upon to rejoice
with us, and to bless God for his redeeming of us? Sing O ye heavens, for the
Lord has done it, shout ye lower part of the earth, Isa. 44.23.
break forth into singing ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein, for
the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel. This is the duty
we shall do in heaven, and I believe we are never more in heaven (whiles on
earth) then when we are in this exercise of praising God, and blessing God for
Jesus Christ. Come, let us praise God for Christ, and especially on this day,
called therefore the Lord's day, because of the resurrection of Jesus Christ:
it is the design of God, to glorify Christ redeeming us, as much, or more than
he glorified himself creating us; and therefore he purposely unhinged the
Sabbath from the last day to the first day of the week, that it might be spent
as a weekly day of praise and thanksgiving for the more glorious work of our
redemption; that love might not only be equally admired with power, but even go
before it. It is the advice of a godly Divine, that we should improve the happy
opportunity of the Lord's day wholly to devote our selves to his work. And he
advises Ministers and others, that They spend more of those days in praise and
thanksgiving, Baxters method of peace and comfort.
and be briefer in their confessions and lamentations; -- that they would make
it the main business of their solemn assemblies on those days to sound forth
the high praises of their Redeemer, and to begin here the praises of God and
the Lamb: which they must perfect in heaven for ever. -- That they would spend
a greater part of those days in Psalms, and solemn Praises to their Redeemer:
-- and that some Hymns and Psalms might be invented as fit for the state of the
Gospel Church, and worship to laud the Redeemer, come in the flesh, as expressly
as the work of grace is now expressed. O that these directions were but in
practice? O that our Churches, and Families would make our streets to resound
with the Eccho's of our praises! O that this were the burden of each duty on
these days. Now blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead.

SECT. IX. Of conforming to Jesus in that respect.
9. LEt us conform to Jesus in respect of his resurrection. --

In this particular I shall examine these Queries. 1. Wherein we must conform?
2. How this conformity is wrought? 3. What are the means of this conformity as
on our parts?

For the first wherein we must conform? I answer in a word, in our
vivification. There is a resemblance of our vivification to Christ's
resurrection; and if we would know wherein the Analogy, or resemblance of our
vivification to Christ's resurrection does more especially consist; the
Apostle's answer is very express, Romans 6.4.
Like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father; even so
we also should walk in newness of life. Christ's resurrection was to newness of
life; it was a new life, a life different from that which he lived before, and
so is our vivification a new life; it is a life of a new principle; of new
actings, of a new state, of a new relation, of a new income, and of a new kind,
or manner.

1. It is a life of a new principle, before vivification our principle was the
flesh, or word, or devil; In time past ye walked according to the course of
this world, Ephesians. 2.2.
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience; but now we have a new principle, a Spirit of
holiness, or sanctification, the Spirit of God; even the same spirit which
dwelt in the humane nature of Christ, and raised him; If the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you; Romans 8.11.
it is an in-dwelling Spirit; even as the soul dwells in the body, so does the
holy Ghost dwell in the soul of a regenerate person, animating, and actuating,
and enlivening it. This is the new principle that God puts in us after
vivification.

2. It is a life of new actings. According to our principle, so be our actings;
Romans 8.5.
They that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that
are of the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. If some men hear of a good bargain
they mind it, they find their souls going on with much activity, there is
something in them proportionable to that which is propounded; but if they hear
of Divine love, and of the riches of Grace, they find their souls flat,
unmovable, and dead, they mind no such things; now on the other side, they
that are vivified, according to their principle, they put forth their power
more or less; if they hear of the glorious things of the Gospel, they find
inward workings (unless it be under a temptation) they find their souls drawn
out to close with the goodness of the thing propounded: They mind the things of
the Spirit, (i.e.) they muse, and meditate, and think on these things; they
affect them, and love them, and like them, they care for them, and seek after
them with might and main; they live in the Spirit, they walk in the Spirit,
they are led by the Spirit, Gal. 5.26. Romans 8.1.14. Romans 7.6.
they serve in newness of the Spirit. How might we try our vivification even by
these actings of our principle within? what? do we mind the things of the
Spirit? do we find things heavenly and spiritually to be sweet, and savoury,
and best pleasing to us? is the Sabbath our delight; do we long for it before
it come? do we rejoice in it when it is come? do we consecrate it as glorious
to the Lord? Isa. 58.13.
do we come to the exercises of Religion, whether public or private, with much
delight, and with cheerfulness, as to a feast? what is this but the life of
God? but if these things be harsh and unpleasant, if the Sabbath be a burden,
if holy exercises be irksome and tedious, Psalm. 41.4.
if in attending on the Word we are heavy and drouzy, and we find no relish, no
sweet, no savor in the ointments of Christ's, no goings out of the soul with an
activity to the things propounded, O then deceive not our selves, we have no
good evidence of our vivification.

3. It is a life of a new state; before vivification we are in an unjustified
estate; sins are unpardoned, we are unreconciled; And such were some of you
(said the Apostle to his Corinthians) but now ye are washed, now ye are
sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11.
now ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit
of our God. This justification denotes a state, and is universal and
unalterable. I know Arminians deny such a state, for as by their Doctrine no
man can be absolutely Elected till he die, so neither absolutely justified; for
(say they) he may fall into such sins, as that though formerly justified, yet
now he may be condemned; yea, to day he may be justified; and to morrow thrown
out of that estate. But against this we hold, that those that are once
justified, are never again cast out of God's favor. As Christ once died, but
rose again never to die more, death has no more power over him; so a justified
man once allied to God through Jesus Christ does from that time forward as
necessarily live, as Christ himself by whom he does live; there is an immortal
and indissoluble union betwixt Christ the Head, and every Believer; our
justification depends not on our own strength, but it is built on Christ
himself, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; and hence it is
that a justified man can no more cease to live in this state of justification,
than Christ can cease to live in Heaven.

4. It is a life of new relations; this immediately follows our state: if once
we are justified; then we are related to God, and Christ, and to the Covenant
of Grace. 1. To God. Before we were vivified, God and we stood at a distance,
God was our enemy, and we were his enemies; At that time (says the Apostle) ye
were without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.13.
but now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were afar off, are made near by the
blood of Christ. God that was a stranger, stands now in near relation, he is a
Friend, a Father, a God Alsufficient to us. 2. We are related to Christ; before
vivification we were a Christless people, Ephesians. 2.12.
At that time ye were without Christ; but now we are united to Christ, and
(which is more) now we make use of Christ with the Father: O the comfort of
this relation! A troubled spirit looks on his sins, and they thrust him away
from God, What communion has light with darkness? but then comes the Lord
Jesus, and takes him by the hand, and leads him to the Father, and says, Come
soul, come along with me, and I will carry thee to the Father, will thou make
use of me? Ephesians. 1.18. 1 Pet. 5.18.
It is the Apostles saying, that through him we have an access by one spirit
unto the Father; we have a leading by the hand; Christ has once suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. By nature we are
severed from God, and if he manifested himself, Isa. 59.2.
he is dreadful to us, Your iniquities have separated between you and your God,
and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear; but in Christ
we approach boldly before him, because Christ has took away our sins which are
the mountains of separation; in Christ we have boldness and access with
confidence by the faith of him. Ephesians. 3.12.
Here is the difference betwixt a man related to Christ, and a mere stranger;
the stranger knows not how to go to God; God stands as a Judge, he is as a
Malefactor, the Law an Accuser, Sin his Indictment; and what is the issue?
Every mouth is stopped, Romans 3.19.
and all the world is guilty before God. But he that is related to Christ,
Christ takes him by the hand, and so he goes with boldness and confidence, and
pleads his righteousness before the Father; Romans 8.34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect, it is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dies, yea rather that
is risen again? In the very matter and cause of justification, wherein no man
can stand, or dare to appear, or show his face; a Christian coming with Christ
his Advocate, he dares to appear, and to plead his case, and to stand upon
interrogatories with God himself, yea, and to ask God himself (humbly and with
reverence) what he has to lay to his charge? what more he will, or can in
justice require for satisfaction, than his Surety has done for him? -- 3. We
are related to the Covenant of Grace; before vivification we had no such
relation; Ephesians. 2.12.
At that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise; But now the Covenant is
ours, that fountain or bundle of promises is ours, God is our God, and we are
his people. Psalm. 144.15.
O the blessedness of this privilege! Happy is the people that be in such a
case, yea happy is the people whose God is the Lord. The Covenant is reckoned
all happiness; it contains in its bowels all benefits in Heaven, or under
Heaven; as a man may say of any thing he has in possession, This is mine; so
may they who are in covenant with God, say, He is mine, I have God himself in
my possession. How might we try our vivification even by this communion we have
with God, and Christ, and the Covenant of Grace? Christians! look into your own
hearts, have you not felt in your approaches to God some raisings or workings
of the Spirit of the Lord, concluding the pardon of your sins? has not Christ
taken you by the hand, and led you to the Father? it may be your own guilt made
you afraid, but the discovery of Jesus your righteousness made you bold to go
to God; you felt boldness coming in on this ground, because all your approaches
or drawings near to God were bottomed on Jesus; has not God married you to
himself? has he not conveyed himself (through his holy Spirit) into your own
hearts by way of covenant? Has he not sometimes whispered to your souls, Thou
art mine? and have not your souls ecchoed back again unto the Lord, Thou art
mine? much of the truth of all this would appear, if Christians would but daily
observe the movings of their own hearts; for as he that has the Spirit of
Satan, shall ever find him putting on and provoking to evil, so he that has
the Spirit of God shall most-what (or at least frequently) find and feel it
active, and stirring in the heart, to the reforming of the whole man; the holy
Spirit is not idle, but he rules, and governs, and maintains his Monarchy in
us, and over us, in spite of the power of Satan's, and privy conspiracy of a
man's own flesh.

5. It is a life of a new in-come; I mean of a saving in-come, as of Grace,
Power, Light, etc. Before vivification there was no such in-come; A man before
his conversion might hear, and pray, and do all duties; but alas! he feels no
sweet, no power, no virtue, no communion with Christ. If I might appeal unto
such, I beseech you tell me, you have been often at prayer, what have you
gotten there? what in-come has appeared? if you answer truly, you cannot but
say I went to prayer, and I was satisfied that I had prayed; I never observed
whether I had got any power, or strength, any thing of mortification, or
vivification; I never found any lively work of God on my soul, either in prayer
or after prayer; or you have been often at this Ordinance of hearing the Word,
what have you gotten there? what in-come has appeared? Why truly nothing at
all; it may be a little more knowledge, but nothing that I can say was a saving
work of God; some one that sat with me in the same seat found much stirings of
God? Oh what meltings, chearings, warmings of the spirit had such a one? and
such a one? the Word was to them as honey, and as the honey comb, but to me i^
was as dry bread; I found no sweet, I got no good at all. Or you have been
often tossing the Bible, and you have observed this or that promise; but O what
in-come has appeared? Surely nothing at all; I wonder at Saints that tell of
so much sweetness, and comfort, and ravishing of heart, that with joy they
should draw water out of these Wells of salvation, Whereas I find therein no
joy, no refreshing at all: Ah poor soul, thou art in a sad case, thou art not
yet vivified, thou have not the life of God in thee. After vivification thou will in the use of Ordinances (at least sometimes, if not frequently) feel the
saving in-comes of God. In prayer thou will feel the spirit breathing in, and
carrying up thy soul above it self, plainly declaring there is another power
than thy own, which makes thee not only to exceed others, but thy self also; in
hearing of the Word thou will see the Windows of heaven set wide open, and all
manner of spiritual comforts showred down upon thee; thou will hear the rich
treasury of everlasting glory and imortality unlocked and opened, so that thou
may tumble thy self amidst the mountains of heavenly pearls, and golden
pleasures, joys that no heart can comprehend but that which is weaned from all
worldly pleasures, As it is written, Romans 10.15.
how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things? In meditation of the promises, or of Divine love,
thou will find meltings, quickenings, encouragings, filling thy heart with
gladness, and glorying, and thy mouth with praises and songs of rejoycings: O
What fountains of life are the promises to a living man, to a soul that is
vivified? what food? what strength? what life is a thought of Christ, of
Heaven, and of God's love to a spiritual man? whereas all these glorious things
of the Gospel are to the natural man but as a withered flower, a sealed book, a
dry and empty cistern; he has no use of them.

6. It is a life of another kind, or manner. Before vivification our life was
but death, because we our selves were but dead in sin even whilst alive. 1 Timothy 5.6. Col 2.13.
She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives; and you were dead in
your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh. But after vivification we
live, how live? a spiritual life, Gal. 2.20. Phil. 3.20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God; an heavenly life, for our conversation
is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ;
an immortal life, Romans 6.9, 11.
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion
over him; -- likewise reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. John 11.26.
You know the meaning of Christ; Whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall
never dye; he shall never dye a spiritual death, never come under the dominion
of sin, never totally fall away from grace; Romans 8.10
that incorruptible seed by which he is regenerate shall abide in him for ever.
If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life
because of righteousness; the body indeed is subject to corporal death, through
the remainders of sin, but the Spirit it life, even that little spark of grace,
through the most perfect righteousness of Christ imputed, is life here, and
shall be life hereafter, even for ever. And herein is our vivification
answerable to Christ's resurrection; like as Christ was raised up from the dead
by the glory of the Father, Romans 6.4.
raised up to a new life, even so we also should walk in the newness of life.

For the second question, how is this conformity or vivification wrought? I
shall answer only to the state, and so our vivification is usually wrought in
us in this manner. As first, in the understanding. Secondly, in the will.

First, the understanding lets in the verity and truth of what the Gospel has
recorded. John 1.4. John 6.35. John 11.25.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men. -- I am the bread of life,
he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall
never thirst. -- I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live. I am the way, John 14.6. 1 John 5.11,
12.
the truth, and the life. -- And this is the record that God has given to us,
eternal life, and this life is in his Son; he that has the Son, has life, and
he that has not the Son, has not life.

2. This light let in, the understanding thence infers as to a man's own
self, that by the assistance of the Spirit of holiness, who raised up Jesus
from the dead, it is possible for him to attain this life; Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.
others have attained it, and why not he? You has he quickened who were dead
in traspasses and sins; here is a president for a sin-sick soul; In time past ye
walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the
power of the air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of disobedience;
this was the state of the Ephesians. But were they all? no, no; ye, and we,
also, among whom also we had all our conversation in times past. -- But God who
is rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were
dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, -- that in ages to come
he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us
through Christ Jesus. Mat. 8.2. -- 9, 21. Ezekiel. 37.4, 5.
Christ's dealings with some are as flags and patterns of m^rcy hung forth to
tell, and to bring others in: whence the understanding infers, it is possible
for a dead soul, yea for my dead soul to live; others have lived, and why may
not I? I discover in those Scriptures, even in these presidents a door of hope
to my self; why Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean; -- yea, if I may
but touch thy garment, I shall be whole; if thou would but say, O ye dry
bones hear the word of the Lord, then breath would enter into me, and I should
live; surely if Christ be risen again from the dead, there is no impossibility
but I may rise; if others have been raised by the virtue of Christ's
resurrection, why may not I? However, this may seem to be little or nothing,
yet considering the soul in a mourning, dark, disconsolate frame, under deep
apprehensions of sin, guilt, and wrath; full of confusions, distractions,
despondences, staggering and sinking terrors; Mat. 11.28.
it will find it something, yea it will look on it as a glorious work to
discover, but the morning Star, through so much darkness any thing of life, in
such a valley and shadow of death.

3. The understanding has yet some brighter believing beams; it confidently
closes with this truth, that it is the will of the Lord that he should come,
and live, and believe, and lay hold on Christ; it apprehends the particular
designs of mercy to him, and does really principle the soul with this, that God
does particularly call, invite, and bid him come to Christ the Fountain of
life, for life. Now the understanding takes in general Gospel-calls in
particular to himself. It is my poor languishing soul which the Lord speaks to,
when he says, come to me all yea that are weary, and I will give you rest. --

Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light. Surely this is a great work when set home by the Lord, that the soul
acts in its addresses to Christ in the strength of a particular call from God.

2. And now the answer to this call, is wrought up in the renewed will; as
thus. --

1. The will summons all its confidences, and calls them off from every other
bottom, to bestow them wholly upon Christ; and this consists in our voluntary
renouncing of all other helps, excepting Jesus Christ alone; now the soul says
to Idols, Get ye hence, Hos. 14.3.
Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any
more to the works of our hands, ye are our Gods. Ashur shall not save us. Not
only cannot, but shall not save us; now as the soul is dissatisfied in
Judgment, as to the resting on any thing but Christ alone, so the heart and
will is disaffected to all other helps but Christ alone; now it renounceth its
own righteousness, and worthyness; not only because of their inability to save,
but mainly because their glory is swallowed up in that unmatchable excellency,
which appears in the way of life and salvation by Jesus Christ. It calls home
dependence from every other object.

2. Hereupon there is a willing and cheerful receiving of Christ, and
resignation of our selves to his actual dispose, to quicken us, and save us in
his own way. A great part of the answer of Faith to the call of Christ lies in
this; for as Faith sees life and salvation in the hands of Christ, so it
considers it to be given forth in the methods of Christ; and so believing lies
not only in assent, but consent of heart, John 1.1^.
that Christ shall save us in his own way; this is called A receiving of
Christ; As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of
God. Many a soul would be saved by Christ, that sticks and boggles at his
methods; they will not pass to happiness by holiness; nor set him up as a King
and Lord, whom they could consent to set up as a Savior: Oh but now Christ
that stood at the door, and knocked, Rev. 3.10.
is received in; consent has made up the match, and the door is opened that
never shall be shut again.

3. Upon this follows the souls resting and relying; the souls confidence and
dependence upon Jesus Christ for life and for salvation; this closes up the
whole business of believing unto righteousness; those various expressions used
in Scripture of committing our way and selves to God; of casting our care upon
God, of rolling our selves on him, of trusting in him, of hoping in his mercy,
etc. wrapped up faith in this affiance, dependence, not without some mixture of
confidence, and resolved resting upon Jesus Christ: a clear beholding of God in
Christ, and of Christ in the promises, does present such variety and fullness of
Arguments to bear up hope and affiance, that the heart is resolved: and so
resolved that we commit our selves, and give our souls in charge to Christ, I
know whom I have believed, 1 Pet. 4.19. 2 Timothy 1.12.
and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that day.

4. The upshot of all, is this, that the same close which the soul makes in
believing with Jesus Christ as to justification, and righteousness, is not
fruitless to this effect of conveying life and virtue from Jesus Christ as to
grace and holiness; for that union which then and thereby comes to be enjoined
with Christ, is such an union as is fruitful in begetting a quickening power
and principle in the heart; and this is that which we ordinarily intend by
saying, saving faith to be operative; James 2.16.
that faith which brings forth nothing of holiness, what is it but a dead
faith? As the body without the Spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead
also. Justification and sanctification are twins of a birth; and hence it is,
that vivification (which is one part of sanctification) is wrought in the soul
after the self-same manner: As first, the understanding is illighttened. 2. The
will is changed. 3. All the Affections are renewed. 4. The internals being
quickened, there ensues the renewing of the body with the outward actions,
life, and conversation. And now is fulfilled that saying of Christ in a
spiritual sense, John 5.25.
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live. Now is the soul vivified, now it begins
to live the life of God, now it feels the power of Christ's resurrection, and
is made conformable to it: And immediately upon this, joy is made in heaven by
the Angels, Luke 15.24.
God himself applauding it, For this my Son was dead, and is alive; he was
lost, and is found.

Thus is the state of vivification wrought. I know it is not in all men after
one manner for every circumstance; the methods of God are exceeding various;
and we cannot limit the holy one of Israel: I have sometimes concerning this,
desired the communication of other thoughts, whom I looked upon as such, who
had more than ordinary communication with Christ's Spirit; and from one of such
I received this answer, I must profess to you, I have in all my speculations in
divinity found dissatisfaction in the writings of men in nothing more, than is
the work of clear and distinct conceptions concerning regeneration; which yet
is of such a Cardinal importance, is, that the great doors of heaven move upon
the hinges of it; the Lord enlighten us more, for we see but in part, and
prophecy but in part.

For the third question, what are the means of this conformity, or vivification
which we must use on our parts? I shall answer herein both to the state, and
growth of our vivification. As --

1. Wait and Attend upon God in the ministry of the word, this is a means
whereby Christ ordinarily effects this vivification. By this means it was
that those dead bones were quickened in Ezekel's prophecy, viz. by the
Prophets prophesying upon them. And he said unto me, son of man, -- prophecy
upon these bones, Ezekiel 37.4.
and say unto them, O ye dry bones hear the Word of the Lo^d; And by this means
it is that dead souls are quickened; the Ministry of the Word is the Trumpet of
Jesus Christ, when that sounds, who knows but he may quicken the dead? hearken
therefore to this Word of God.

2. Act says upon the Lord Jesus as to justification. As is the clearness and
fixedness of our souls in bottoming our selves on Christ for righteousness, so
will be our quickness, Luke 7.47.
and successful pr^gress in the work of holiness; because Mary's sins which
were many were forgiven her, therefore she loved much; but to whom little is
forgiven, the same loves little. Many a soul loses much of vivification, for
want of clearness in its justification, or for want of setledness, and stronger
measure of acting faith. Oh what life would be raised as to holiness? what
working, binding, filling the laws of love, retribution, thankfulness would
there be, when we see our selves clearly reconciled with God, and wrapped up in
the foldings of everlasting love?

3. Trace every Ordinance, and every duty for the appearings of the Son of God.
Be much in Prayer, hearing, reading, fellowship with the Saints, living in the
fullness of Sacraments; be much in secret conversings with God, in meditation,
exp^s^ulation, enquiries searchings; and (which is a precious work) be much in
diligent watching of, and hearkening and listening to the movings, workings,
hints, int^mations of the Spirit of God; be much in observing the methods, and
interpreting the meanings and language of God in all his secret dispensations
with the soul. Certainly there will be abund^nce of the life of God conveyed to
him that walks in these paths. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, might
David well say; and one Reason is pertinent to this case, Luke 15.17.
because, In our fathers house is bread enough, and to spare: while the
Prodigal that goes out from it shall feed upon husks, and with Ephraim swallow
up the East Wind. Oh for a Spirit of Prayer, Meditation, etc. Oh for a Spirit
even swallowed up in communion with God! Isa. 64 5.
Thou meetest him that works righteousness, and those that remember thee in
thy ways.

4. Look much at Christ raised, Christ Glorified; Christ's Resurrection was the
beginning of his glory, and therein is comprehended both the glory that draws
desires toward Christ, Psalm. 34 5. Psalm. 123.1, 2.
and the grace and power that establishes faith in its depen^ancy; They looked
unto him, and were lightened -- unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that
^wettest in the heavens; behold as the eyes of the servants look unto the hand
of their Mast^rs, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so
our eyes wa^te upon the Lord our God. It is said of Moses, Heb. 11.27.
that he endured affliction, as seeing him who is invisible: Oh could we keep
our hearts in a more constant view, and believing meditation of the glory of
Christ, our faces would certainly bring some beams of Divinity with them from
the Mount; 2 Cor. 3.18.
We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory. The very beholding of Christ
has a mightty conforming and assimilating virtue to leave the impressions of
glory upon our Spirits.

5. See our own Personal vivification linked unseparably unto, and bottomed
unremoveably upon the resurrection of Christ; when we can by faith get a sight
of this, it is not to speak how courageously and successfully the soul will
grapple in the controversies of the Lord against the Devil, and our own
deceitful hearts; with what strength could Joshua, Gidion, etc. go on, when
backed with a promise, and their Spirits settled in the persuasion of it? and
what use will the promises be in this kind? and (more than all) the life and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, when we can clearly and steadfastly rest upon
this, that there is an inseparable connection betwixt the resurrection of
Christ and our personal holiness, and perseverance to the end? Oh that I could
act my faith more frequently on Christ's resurrection, so that at last I could
see it by the light of God to be a destinated principle of my vivification in
particular! what a blessed means would this be?

6. Walk as we have Christ Jesus for an example. This example of Christ, though
it be not ours, as it is the Socinians totum Christi, yet certainly it yields
much to our vivification; who can deny but that acting with the pattern ever in
ones eye is very advantageous? come then, and if we would live the life of God,
let us live as Christ lived after his resurrection. But how is that; I answer.
--

1. See that we return to the grave no more; take heed of ever returning to our
former state; you may say, what needs this Caveat? has not Christ said, He
that lives and believes in me shall never dye? or never fall away? I answer
it is true, they shall never totally and finally fall away, yet they may fall
foully and fearfully; they may lose that strength and vigor, that sense and
feeling which sometimes they had; they may draw so nigh to the grave, as that
both by themselves and others they may be accounted amongst them that go down
to the pit, free among the dead, Psalm. 88.5.
as Heman says of himself. The Apostle says something that might even startle
Christians; he tells of some who have been once enlightened (by the Word) and
have tasted of the heavenly gift (some flashes of inward joy and peace) and
were made partakers of the holy Ghost (the common gifts and graces of the
Spirit) and have tasted the good Word of God (have found some relish in the
sweet and saving Promises of the Gospel) and the powers of the world to come
(have had some ravishing apprehensions of the joys and glory in Heaven) and
yet fall away (by a total Apostasy.) Christians! Heb. 6.4.5, 6.
how far goes this? I know it is said only of such who have a name to live, and
no more; but surely it gives a warning to us all that we come not nigh the
verge, the brink of the grave; again, let us not give way to any one sin, so as
to live in it.

2. Let us evidence our resurrection; Christ being raised, he showed himself
alive by many infallible proofs; so let us evidence our vivification by many
infallible proofs; (i.e.) Let us yield up our selves unto God; as those that
are alive from the dead; Romans 6.13. Col. 3.2.
let us walk as men of another world. If ye be risen with Christ seek the
things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God; let us
serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life; surely this
is the end for which we are delivered out of the hands of our enemies, sin,
death, and hell. Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were sometimes da ^n^ss (during your abode in the grave of sin) but now
(being risen) ye are light in the Lord, walk therefore as children of light.
Walk] (i.e.) bestir your selves in the works of God; Arise, shine, for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. When God does let
the Sun of Righteousness arise, Isa. 60.1.
it is fit we should be about the business of our souls. We see that the night
is dedicated to rest, and therefore God that does order all things sweetly, he
draws a curtain of darkness about us, as which is friendly to rest; like a
Nurse, that when she will have her little one sleep, she casts a cloth over
the face, and hides the light every way; but when this natural Sun arises,
then men go out to their work: so must we, though in the darkness of the night
we shorted in sin, yet now we must bestir our selves, seeing the Sun of the
spiritual world is risen over us.

And yet when all is done, let us not think that our vivification in this life
will be wholly perfect: as it is with our mortification, in the best, it is but
an imperfect work; so it is with our vivification; it is only gradual, and
never perfected till grace be swallowed up of glory. Only let us ever be in the
use of the means, and let us endeavor a further renovation of the new man,
adding one grace to another, To faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge
temperance, to temperance patience, 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6. Romans 7.1.
to patience godliness, etc. till we perfect holiness in the fear of God, till
we shine with those Saints in glory at perfect day.

Thus far we have Looked on Jesus as our Jesus in his resurrection, and during
the time of his abode on earth. Our next work is to Look on Jesus carrying on
the great work of our Salvation in his ascension into Heaven; and in his
session at God's right hand; and in his mission of the holy Spirit. LOOKING
UNTO JESUS In his Ascension, Session, and Mission of his Spirit. The Eight
Book. PART VIII.
CHAP. I.
Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus -- who is set down at the right hand of the
Throne of God.
SECT. I. Of Christ's Ascension, and of the manner how.
THUS far we have traced Jesus in his actings for us, until the day in which
he was taken up. Acts 1.2.
That which immediately follows, is his Ascension, Session at God's right hand,
and Mission of his holy Spirit; in prosecution of which, as in the former, I
shall first lay down the object, and secondly direct you how to look upon it.

The object is threefold. 1. He ascended into Heaven. 2. He sat down at Gods
right hand. 3. He sent down the holy Ghost.

1. For the Ascension of Christ, this was a glorious design, and contains in it
a great part of the salvation of our souls. In prosecution of this, I shall
show first that he ascended. 2. How he ascended. 3. Whither he ascended. 4. Why
he ascended.

1. That he ascended. 1. The types prefigure it, Then said the Lord to me,
Ezekiel. 44.2, 3.
this gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened; -- it is for the Prince, the
Prince he shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord, he shall enter by the
way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by the way of the same. As the
gate of the Holy of Holies was shut against every man but the High Priest; so
was that gate of Heaven shut against all, so that none could enter in by their
own virtue and efficacy but only our Prince and great high Priest, the Lord
Jesus Christ, indeed he has opened it for us, and entered into it in our place
and stead, Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an high
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. 2. The Prophets forsaw it,
Heb. 6.20. Dan. 7.13, 14.
I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came to the ancient of days, Mark 16.19. Luke. 24.31.
and they brought him near before him, and there was given him dominion, and
glory, and a Kingdom. 3. The Evangelists relate it, He was received up into
heaven. -- He was carried up into heaven. 4. The eleven witness it, For while
they beheld he was taken up, Acts 1.9. Acts 1.10, 11.
and a cloud received him out of their sight. 5. The holy Angels speak it, For
while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold, two men
stood by them in white apparel, which also said, ye men of Galilee, why stand
ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. Ephesians. 4.8,
10. 1 Pet. 3.22.
6. The blessed Apostles in their several Epistles, ratify and confirm it,
When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men,
-- he that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens.
-- Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels and
Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him.

2. How he ascended. The manner of his Ascension is discovered in these
particulars. -- 1. Luke 24.51.
He ascended, blessing his Apostles, While he blessed them he was parted from
them, and carried up into heaven. It is some comfort to Christ's Ministers that
though the world hate them, Christ does bless them; yea he parted with them in
a way of blessing; as Jacob leaving the world, blessed his Sons; so Christ
leaving the world, blessed his Apostles, and all the faithful Ministers of
Christ, unto the end of the world. Some add, that in these Apostles, not only
Ministers, but all the elect to the end of the world are blessed: The Apostles
were then considered as common persons receiving this blessing for all us, and
so those words uttered at the same time are usually interpreted, Mat. 28.20.
Lo, I am with you always even to the end of the world. This was the last thing
that Christ did on earth, to show that by his death he had red^emed us from the
curse of the Law, Ephesians. 1.3.
and that now going to heaven he is able to bless us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places.

Acts 1.19.
2. He ascended visibly in the view of the Apostles; while they beheld he was
taken up; he was not suddenly snatched from them, as Elija was, nor secretly
and privily taken away, as Enoch was; but in the presence of them all, both his
Apostles and Disciples, he ascended up into Heaven; but why not in the view of
all the Jews, that so they might know that he was risen again and gone to
Heaven? surely this was the meaning; God would rather that the main points of
faith should be learned by hearing, than by seeing; however Christ's own
Disciples were taught the same by sight, that they might better teach others
which should not see; yet the ordinary means to come by faith is hearing; Romans
10.14, 17, 18.
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? -- so then, faith
comes by hearing; and hearing by the word of God. And as for the Jews (says
the Apostle) have they not heard? yes verily, their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the end of the world.

3. He ascended principally by the mighty power of his Godhead; thus never any
ascended up into heaven but Jesus Christ; for though Enoch and Elijah were
assumed into heaven, yet not by their own power, nor by themselves, it was
God's power by which they ascended, 2 Kings 2.11.
and it was by the help and Ministry of Angels: there appeared a chariot of
fire, and horses of fire; and Elijah went up by a Whirl-wine into Heaven.

Acts 1 9.
4. He ascended in a cloud, While they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud
received him out of their sight. Hereby he shows that he is Lord of all the
creatures; he had already trampled upon the earth, walked upon the sea,
vanquished hell or the grave, and now the clouds received him, and the heavens
are opened to make way for this King of Glory to enter in. Mat. 24.30. Mat.
26.4.
When Christ shall come again, it is said that he shall come in the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory. -- Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man
sitting at the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Which
verifies that saying of the Angel, Acts 1.11.
This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. He went up in clouds, and he shall
come again in clouds.

5. He ascended in the found of a trumpet; not on earth, sounding Hosanna, but
in Heaven, Psalm. 47.5.
crying Hallelujah. So the Psalmist, God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with
the sound of a trumpet. Certainly great joy was in heaven at Christ's ascending
thither: the very Angels struck up their Harps, and welcomed him thither with
Hymns and Praises.

6. He ascended in triumph, as a Roman Victor ascended to the Capitol, or as
David ascended after his conquest up to Zion. Now we read of two triumphal Acts
in Christ's Ascension, whereof the first was his leading of his captives, and
the second was the dispersing of his gifts: the Apostle and the Psalmist join
both together, Psalm 68.18 Ephesians. 4.8.
When he ascended up on high he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.
1. He led them captive who had captivated us. Death was led captive without a
sting, Hell was led captive as one that had lost her victory, the Law was led
captive, being rent and fastened to his Cross (as it were) Ensign wise; the
Serpents head being bruised, was led before him in triumph, as was Golias's
head by David returning from the victory; and this was the first Act of his
triumph. 2. He gave gifts unto men: this was as the running of Conduits with
wine, or as the casting abroad of new Coin, or as the shutting up of Christ's
triumph in his ascension up to heaven: what these gifts were we shall speak in
the Mission of the holy Ghost; only thus much for the present.

SECT. II. Of the place whither he ascended.
3. WHither he ascended, the Gospel tells us into heaven; only Paul says, that
he ascended far above all heavens. But the meaning is, Ephesians. 4 10.
he went above all these visible Heavens into those heavenly Mansions, where
the Angels, and the Spirits of the just have their abode. Or if the highest
heavens be included, I see no absurdity in it; the highest Heaven, we usually
call The Kingdom of Heaven; which is either Heaven material, or heaven
s^iritual; and first for the material Heaven, in some sense he may be said to
ascend above that, both in respect of his Body, because the Body of Christ is
more glorious than any material Heaven. And in respect of his soul, because the
Soul of Christ is more blessed than all things else whatsoever. And 2, For the
spiritual Heaven (i.e.) all Angelical or Heavenly perfections, he is said to
ascend above them all, both in respect of his humiliation, because he has
vilified himself below all things, and therefore he is worthily exalted above
all things; and in respect of his perfection, because the humane nature of
Christ is more excellent than any creature, it being joined to the Godhead by
an hypostatical union. Some there are that understand this place of Christ's
ascending far above all Heavens, not so much by a l^cal motion, as by a
Spiritual mutation and exaltation of his person; as earth heightened unto a
flame changes not its place only, but form and figure; so the person of our
Savior was raised to a greatness and glory vastly differing from, and
surmounting any image of things visible or invisible in this Creation; so it is
fitly expressed, Heb. 7.26.
He was made higher than the Heavens, he was heightened to a splendour, enlarged
to a capacity and compass above the brightest, and beyond the widest Heavens:
he transcended all in the spirituallity of his Ascension: but I shall not much
insist on that.

SECT III. Of the Reasons why he Ascended.
4. WHy he ascended, the Reasons are: 1. On Christ's part, that through his
Passion he might pass to glory. Luke 24.26.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his
glory? I shall not insist on that controversy, whether Christ merited for
himself, this is without controversy, that by his Passion (I will not say he
properly merited, but) he obtained glory, because he humbled himself so low,
God exalted him above the Grave in his Resurrection, above the Earth in his
Ascension, and above the Heavens in placing him at his right hand. And he
ascended, that all those Prophesies which were foretold of Christ might be
accomplished. Thou have ascended on high. And his feet shall stand in that day
upon the Mount of Olives, Psalm. 68.18. Zach. 14.4.
which is before Jerusalem on the East. The types of this were Enoch's
translation, Elijahs's ascension, Sampson's transportation of the gates of
Gezza into an high mountain, the high Priests going into the Holy of Holies,
Seeing that we have a great high Priest, Heb. 4.14.
that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God. Why all these
prophesies, types, figures, must needs be accomplished, and therefore on his
part it was necessary that Christ must ascend, and go into Heaven.

2. The Reasons on our part are. --

1. That in our stead he might triumph over sin, death, and hell. In his
Resurrection he conquered, but in his Ascension he triumphed; now it was that
he led sin, death, and devil in triumph at his Chariot wheels. And this is the
meaning of the Psalmist, and of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.8.
When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive: He vanquished and
triumphed over all our enemies; he overcame the world, he bound the devil, he
spoiled hell, he weakened sin, he destroyed death, and now he makes a public
triumphal show of them in his own Person; he led the captives bound to his
chariot-wheels, as the manner of the Roman triumphs was, Col. 2.15.
when the conqueror went up to the Capitol. It is to the same purpose that the
Apostle speaks elsewhere, Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in himself; it is a manifest allusion
to the manner of triumphs after victories amongst the Romans; first, they
spoiled the enemy upon the place, ere they stirred off the field; and this was
done by Christ on the Cross; and then they made a public triumphal show, they
rid through the streets in the greatest state, and had all their spoils carried
before them, and the Kings and Nobles whom they had taken, they tied to their
chariots, and led them as captives; and this did Christ at his Ascension; Then
he openly triumphed (...) in himself, (i.e.) in his own Power and strength;
other Conquerors do not thus; they conquer not in themselves, and by
themselves, but Jesus Christ conquer^d (...) himself, and therefore he
triumphed in himself. And yet though he triumphed in himself, and by himself,
it was not for himself only, but for us; which made the Apostle to triumph in
his triumph, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? the sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to God which gives
us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. If I may speak out, what I think was
this victory of Christ, I believe it was that honor given to him after his
Resurrection by the conversion of enemies, by the amazements of the world, by
the admiration of Angels, and especially by his sitting down at the right hand
of Majesty on high; for therein is contained both his exaltation, and his
triumph over all his enemies to the utmost.

2. That he might lead us the way, and open to us the doors of glory. It is a
question whether ever those doors of Heaven were opened to any before Christ's
Ascension? Christ tells us, John 14.2, 3.
In my Fathers house are many mansions, if it were not so, I would have told
you, but I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, ye may
be also. Some infer hence, as if there should be many outer courts, and many
different places or states in glory; and yet there is one place whither the
Saints should arrive at last, which was not then ready for them, and was not to
be entered into, until the entrance of our Lord had made the preparation. Again,
the Apostle tells us, that the Fathers received not the promises, Heb. 11.40.
God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not
be made perfect. Whence some infer that their conditions after death was a
state of imperfection; and that they were placed in an outer court on this side
Heaven, called Paradise, or Abraham's bosom; and thither also Christ went when
he dyed, and was attended with the blessed Thief. For my part I shall not join
with such who think all souls of Saints shall go to paradise, where they must
remain till the day of judgment, and then, and not till then must enter into
that heaven, called the third heaven, or the Kingdom of Heaven. Indeed some of
the ancients make heaven, and the immediate receptacles of souls to be destinct
places, both blessed, but hugely differing in degrees: And a modern writer is
very confident, Dr. Tail. great Exemplar. Multas dicit non varias aut dispares,
sed quae pluribus sufficiant, acsi diceret non sibi uni, sed omnibus etiam
discipulis locum illic esse. Calvin. i. loc. Heb. 6.20.
That no soul could enter into glory before our Lord entered; by whom we hope to
have access; and to that purpose he cites those texts, John 14.2, 3. Heb.
11.40. But I see no ground, why the souls of Saints should be excluded heaven,
either before or after Christ. As for that text of John 14.2. Christ says, In
my Fathers house are many mansions, not many outer courts, nor many different
states; and as for the Fathers mentioned, Heb. 11.40. Surely they without us
shall not be made perfect, and we without them shall not be made perfect in
some sense until the day of judgment. But our Perfection is not in respect of a
more glorious place, but in respect of that perfection whereof all the
faithful shall be made partakers as well in body as in soul, at the
resurrection of the just. Thus far I grant, that no soul ever entered into
Heaven but by the virtue and power of Christ's Ascension, and that no soul and
body jointly ever ascended (except Christ's types) before Christ himself opened
those doors and lead the way; and in this respect he is called, The forerunner
of his People.

3. That he might assure us that now he had run through all those Offices which
he was to perform here on earth for our redemption. He that has entered into
his rest, Heb. 4.10
has also ceased from his own works, as God did from his. He was first to
execute his Office, and then to enter into his rest; Though he were a Son, Heb.
5.8, 9.
and so the inheritance were his own, yet he was to learn Obedience, by the
things which he suffered, before he was made perfect, and so to become the
Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. This was the argument
which Christ used when he prayed to be glorified again with his Father, I have
glorified thee on the earth, John 17.4, 5.
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: And now O Father glorify
thou me with thy own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was. This was the order of the dispensation of Christ's Offices; his first work
was a work of ministry, and Service in the Office of obedience and suffering
for his Church; and this next work was the work of power and majesty in the
protection and exaltation of his Church. and there was a necessity in this
order. 1. In respect of God's Decree who had so fore-appointed it, Acts 2.23,
24.

2. In respect of God's justice, which must first be satisfied by obedience
before any entrance into glory, Luke 24.26. 3. In respect of Christ's infinite
Person, which being equal with God could not possibly be exalted without some
preceding decent and humiliation: Ephesians. 49.
That he ascended (says the Apostle) what is it but that he descended first
into the lower parts of the earth? 4. In respect of our evidence and assurance;
this is the sign that Christ has finished the work of our redemption upon the
earth; first, he was to act as our Surety, and then he was to ascend as our
Head, our Advocate, as the first fruits, the Captain, the Prince of life, the
Author of salvation, the forerunner of his people.

4. That he might thoroughly convince the world of believers of their perfect
righteousness, The Spirit when he comes (says Christ) shall convince the world
of sin, and righteousness, and of judgment -- of sin, because they believe not
on me; -- of of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no
more. John. 16.8, 9, 10.
If Christ had not fulfilled all righteousness, there had been no going to
heaven for him, nor remaining there; certainly God would have sent him down
again to have done the rest, and the disciples should have seen him with shame
sent back again; but his ascension to heaven proclaims openly. 1. That he has
completely finished the work he had to do for us here, that no more was to be
done in this world for us, that the satisfactory work to justice was in it self
finished. 2. That God was well pleased with Jesus Christ, and with what he had
done and suffered for us; yea, God was so infinitely taken with him, and his
oblation after his sufferings, as that he thinks it not fit to let him stay
above forty days longer in this world; he cannot be without him in heaven, but
he takes him up into glory, and gives him a name above every name. 3. That we
have our share in heaven with him; he went not up as a single person, but
vertually, or mystically he carried up all the Elect with him into glory: or
otherwise how should the Spirit convince the world by his ascension of their
righteousness? or otherwise how should the Son of God convince his Father by
his Ascension of his righteousness? I look upon Jesus Christ going into Heaven,
as a confident Debtor after payment going into a Court, and saying, Who has
any thing to lay to his charge? all is paid, let the law take his course; when
Christ entered into heaven, he seemed thus to challenge Justice, Make room here
for me and mine, who should hinder? has the law any thing to say to these poor
souls for whom I dyed? if any in heaven can make objection, Rev. 8.1.
here I am to answer in their behalf. Methinks I imagine a silence in heaven
(as John speaks) at this speech; only Mercy smiles, and Justice gives in the
Acquittance, and God sets Christ down at his right hand. 4. That he has a new
design to be acted in heaven for us: he is taken up into glory that he may act
gloriously the second part of out righteousness, I mean that he might apply it,
and send down his Spirit to convince us of it. He acted one part in the flesh,
in the habit of a beggar, clothed with rags; but now he is gone to act the
person of a Prince in robes of glory, and all this to manage our salvation in
the richest way that may be. Three great things Christ acts for us now in
glory. First, he is in place of an advocate for us, He lives to intercede for
us. Heb. 7.25.
He is always begging of favor and love for us, he lies there to stop whatever
plea may be brought in against us by the devil, or Law; yea, he is there to get
our fresh pardons for new sins. Secondly, he is the great provider and caterer
for us; John 14.2.
he is laying in a great stock and store of glory for us against we come there;
In my Fathers house are many mansions. -- I go to prepare a place for you.
Jesus Christ went before to take up God's heart for us, and now he is drawing
out the riches of love from God his Father, and laying them in bank for us,
Phil. 4.19.
which made the Apostle say, My God shall supply all your need according to his
riches in glory by Christ Jesus. Thirdly, he sends down his Spirit to convince
us that Christ's righteousness is ours: indeed the means of procuring this was
the life and death of Christ, but the means of applying this righteousness are
those following acts of Christ's Resurrection, Ascension, Session,
Intercession, etc. By his death he obtained righteousness for us, but by his
Ascension he applies righteousness to us; now it is that in especial manner he
convinces us of righteousness, Because he is gone to his Father, and we shall
see him no more.

5. That he might receive his Kingdom over us in the place appointed for it;
look as Kings are crowned in the chief Cities of their Kingdoms, and keep their
residence in their palaces near unto them, so it was decent that our Savior
should be Crowned in Heaven, and there sit down at Gods right hand; which
immediately follows after his Ascension, to which we now come.

SECT. IV. Of God's right hand, and of Christ's Session there.
2. FOr the Session of Christ at God's right hand, which is a consequent
following after his ascension into Heaven, I shall examine. 1. What is God's
right hand? 2. What is it to sit there? 3. According to what nature does Christ
sit there? 4. Why is it that he sits at the right hand of God his Father in
Glory?

1. What is this right hand of God? I answer, 1. Negatively, it is not any
Corporal right hand of God; if we speak properly, God has neither right hand,
nor left hand; for God is not a body, but a spirit or spiritual substance. 2.
Positively, the right hand of God is the Majesty, Dignity, Dominion, Power, and
^l^^y of God. The right hand of the Lord is exalted, Psalm. 118.15. Exodus 15.6.
Psalm. 89.13. Isa. 48.13.
the right hand of the Lord does valianity. -- Thy right hand, O Lord, is
become glorious in Power; thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed in pieces the
enemy. Thou have a mighty arm, Strong is thy hand and high i^ thy right hand.
-- Mine hand has laid the foundations of the earth, and my right hand has
spanned the Heavens. I know some of our Divines make this right hand of God
something inferior to God's own power, but others speak of it as every way
equal, and I know no absurdity to follow on it.

2. What is it to sit at the right hand of God? I answer, it is not any
corporal Session at Gods right hand, as some picture him with a crown of gold
on his head sitting on a Throne, as if he had no other gesture in Heaven but
sitting still; which Stephen contradicts, Acts 7.56.
saying, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right
hand of God. The words sitting or standing are both metaphorical, and borrowed
from the custom of Kings, who place those they honor, an^ to whom they commit
the Power of government, at their right hand; more particularly, this sitting
at Gods right hand implies two things. 1. his glorious exaltation. 2. The
actual administration of his Kingdom.

Phil. 2.9.
1. Christ is exalted, Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him
a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow; this
Session is the supreme dignity and glory given by the Father unto Christ after
his Ascension; this Session is the peerless exaltation of the Mediator in his
Kingdom of glory. But how was Christ exalted? I answer, 1. In regard of his
divine nature; not really, or in it self. Impossible it was that the divine
nature should receive any intrinsecal improvement, or glory, because all
fullness of glory essentially belonged unto it; but declaratory, or by way of
manifestation; so it was that his D^vinity, during the time of his humiliation,
lay hidden and overshadowed, as the light of a candle is hidden in a dark and
close lanthorn; but now in his Session that Divinity and Glory which he had
always with his Father was showed forth and declared, Romans 1.4.
He was declared to be the Son of God with Power, both at his resurrection and
at his Session. 2 I^ regard of his humane nature; and ye^ that must be
understood soberly, for I cannot think that Christ's humane nature was at all
exalted in regard of the grace of Pers^nal union, or in regard of the habitual
perfections of his humane soul, because he possessed all these from the
beginning; but in regard of those interceptions of the beams of the Godhead,
and Divine glory; and in respect of the restraints of that sense and sweetness,
and feeling opperations of the beatifical Vision, during his humiliation; in
these respects Christ was exalted in his humane nature, and had all the glory
from the Diety communicated to it which possibly in any way it was capable of.
There was a time, when the Office which Christ undertook for us made him a man
of sorrows, but when he had finished that dispensation, then he was filled with
unmatchable glory which before his Session he enjoyed not; there was a time
when the natural consequence and flowings of Christ's glory from that personal
union was stayed and hindered, by special dispensation, for the working of our
salvation; but when that miraculous stay was once removed, and the work of our
redemption fully finished, then he was exalted beyond the capacity, or
comprehension of all the Angels of heaven, Heb. 1.13.
To which of the Angels said he at any time, sit at my right hand? in this
respect it is said that God highly exalted him; exalted he was in his
Resurrection, Ascension, but never so high as at his Session; in his
Resurrection he was exalted with Jonah from the lower parts to the upper parts
of the earth; in his Ascension he was exalted with Elijah above the Clouds,
above the Stars, above the Heavens; but in his Session he was exalted to the
highest place in Heaven, even to the right hand of God, Far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things. Ephesians. 4.10.


2. Christ reigns, or actually administers his glorious Kingdom; and this is
the principal part of Christ's sitting at God's right hand. So the Psalmist,
Psalm. 110.1, 2.
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool; the Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of
Zion, rule thou in the midst of thy enemies. The Apostle is yet more large, God
set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23.
far above all principallity, and power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come;
and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all. Some describe this Session at Gods right hand to be all one with his
reigning in equal power and glory with the Father, but the Son has always so
reigned, and the holy Ghost has always so reigned, who yet is not said in
Scripture to sit at the right hand of the Father, I believe therefore there is
something in this Session or Reign of Christ which does difference it from that
reigning Power and Glory of the Father, and of the Son as only God, and of the
holy Ghost; and if we would know what that is; I would call it an actual
administration of his Kingdom, or an immediate executing of his Power and Glory
over every creature as Mediator. There is a natural, and a dispensatory Kingdom
of Jesus Christ; for the first, the Father reigns immediately by the Son, but by
the holy Ghost the Father does not reign immediately, but through the Son; the
same order is to be kept in their power, which is in the Persons; the Father
reigns not by himself, but of himself, because he is of none; the Son reigns
by himself, not of himself, because he is begotten of the Father; the holy
Ghost reigns by himself, but from the Father and the Son, from whom he does
proceed. And as in the natural, so in the dispensatory Kingdom, the Father
reigns immediately by the Son as Mediator; and hence it is that the Son as
Mediator is only said to sit at Gods right hand, because the right of actual
administration, or immediate execution of the Sovereign power is appropriate
and peculiar to the Son, as Mediator betwixt God and man. And this made Christ
to say, The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the
Son, John. 5.22.
as Mediator. You may object, Christ was Mediator immediately after his
incarnation, but he did not actually administer his Kingdom then. I Answer, it
is true; Christ for a time did by a voluntary dispensation empty himself, and
laid aside the right of actual administration of his Kingdom; but immediately
after his Ascension, the Father by voluntary dispensation resigned it to the
Son again; Come now, says the Father, and take thou power over every creature,
till the time that all things shall be subdued under thee. This right the one
relinquished in the time of that humiliation of himself, and this right the
other conferred at the time of the exaltation of his Son.

SECT. V. Of the two Natures wherein Christ sits at God's right hand.
3. ACcording to what Nature is Christ said to sit at the right hand of God? I
answer; according to both Natures; first he sits at God's right hand as God;
hereby his Divinity was declared, and his Kingdom is such, that none that is a
pure creature can possibly execute; Psalm. 110.1.
The Lord said to my Lord, says David, sit thou on my right hand. The Lord
said to my Lord] (i.e.) God said to Christ: now Christ was not David's Lord
merely as man, but as God. And 2. He sits at God's right hand as man too;
hereby his Humanity was exalted, and a Power is give to Christ as man, He has
given hiw power to execute judgment, John 5.27.
in as much as he is the Son of man. In the administration of his Kingdom the
manhood of Christ does concur, as an Instrument working with his Godhead.
Hence this Session at God's right hand is truly and properly attributed to
Christ, as (...); and not only to the one nature of Christ, whether Divine or
Humane, Or it is attributed to Christ as Mediator; in which respect he is
called an high Priest, Heb. 8.1.
We have such an high Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the
Majesty in the heavens. -- And in which respect he is called a Prince, Acts
5.31.
Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince, and a Savior. Now
Christ is not a Priest and a Prince merely according to one Nature, whether
Divine or Humane. I deny not but Christ had a natural Kingdom with his Father
as God, before the foundation of the world; but this Kingdom as God-man Christ
had not before his Asension into heaven. So then Christ sits at the right
hand of God by a mediatory action, which he executes according to both
natures, the word working what pertains to the word, and the flesh what
appertains to the flesh; Christ is Mediator as God and man, and glory has
redounded unto him as God and man, and living in this glory he rules and
governs his Church as God and man, he ascended indeed into heaven in his
humanity only, but he sits at the right hand of God as Mediator in respect
of both natures. The Lutherans attribute this Session at God's right hand only
to the humane nature of Christ; they say this Session is nothing else but the
elevating of his humane nature to the full and free use of some of the divine
properties, as of omnipotency, omniscience, omnipresence; the ground of this
error is, that they suppose upon the union of the two Natures in Christ, a real
communication of the divine properties to follow; so that the humane nature is
made truly omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, not by any confusion of
properties, nor yet by any bare communion and concourse of it to the same
effect, each nature working that which belongs to it with commuion of the
other, (for this we grant) but by a real donation, by which the divine
properties so become the properties of the humane nature, that the humane
nature may work with them, no less than the Divine nature it self, for the
perfecting of it self. Against this opinion we have these Reasons; 1. The union
cannot cause the humane nature to partake more in the properties of the Divine,
than it causes the Divine to partake in the properties of the humane. 2. If a
true and real communication did follow of the Divine Attributes, it must needs
be of all the Attributes, as of eternity, and infiniteness seeing these are the
Divine Essence, which can no way be divided. 3. Infinite perfections cannot
perfect finate natures, no more than reasonable perfections can make perfect
unreasonable creatures. 4. To what end should created gifts serve, which Christ
has received above measure, if now more noble properties should enter and be
conferred on Jesus Christ? other reasons are given in, but I willingly decline
all controversal points.

SECT. VI. Of the Reasons why Christ does sit on God's right hand.
4. WHy does Christ sit at the right hand of God his Father in glory? I answer.

1. On Christ's part, that He might receive power and dominion over all the
creatures: Math. 28.18.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth; he speaks of it as done,
because it was immediately to be performed; Christ at his Session received a
power imperial over every Creature; that he has Power over the Angels is
plain, both by the reverence they do him, and by their obedience toward him,
at the name of Jesus every knee must bow; good Angels, and evil Angels must
yield signs of subjection to Jesus Christ; if the Saints shall judge the
Angels, how much more shall Christ? Oh what Power has Christ himself this way?
and as for the excellencies on earth, they all receive their power from Christ,
and are at his dispose; it is Jesus Christ that is Crowned with Glory and
Honor, and all things are put under his feet. Heb. 27.8.
And hence it is that when the Apostle speaks of Christ's session at the right
hand of God, he tells us, he is far above all Principalities and Powers on
earth, Ephesians. 1.21.
and Mights and Dominions in Heaven: yea, that Angels and Authorities, 1 Pet.
3.22.
and Powers are made subject unto him.

2. On our part many reasons may be given. As --

1. That he might be the Head of his Church, I mean, not head in a large sense,
for one who is in any kind before another; for so Christ is the head of Angels,
and God is the head of Christ; and to this we have spoken before. But in a
strict sense, for one that is in a near and communicative sort conjoined with
another, as the Head is conjoined with the Body and Members; and so is Christ
the head of his Church. Look as the King has a more intimate and amiable
Superiority over the Queen then over any other of his Subjects; so is it here
in Christ our King, he is more amiably tempered, and more nearly affected to
his Spouse and Queen, the Church of God, then to any other whomsoever. And to
this purpose he sits at Gods right hand, that having now fullness of Grace and
Glory in himself, he might be ready to communicate the same to his Church who
are as the members of his body, that he might give them Grace here, and Glory
hereafter; when he shall deliver up his Kingdom to his Father, and be all in
all.

2. That he might be the object of divine adoration, then especially it was
said and accomplished, Let all the Angels of God Worship him: Heb. 1.6.
and let all men Honor the Son as they Honor the Father. After Christ's
Session, John 5 23.
Stephen looken up into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on
the right hand of God, and then he Worshipped; and called upon God saying, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit. It is true, Acts 7.59.
that the ground of this divine adoration is the Union of the two natures of
Christ, and therefore the Magi worshipped him at his Birth, and as soon as ever
he came into the World the Angels of God Worshipped him; but because by his
Session at God's right hand, the Divine Nature was manifested, Heb. 1.6.
and the Humane Nature was exalted to that dignity and glory which it never had
before, therefore now especially, and from this time was the honor and dignity
of Worship communicated to him as God and man. And hence Divines usually make
this one ingredient of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, viz. That
Christ, God, and Man, is the object of Divine adoration. O it is a great thing,
and admirable, and full of wonder, that the man Christ should sit above at God
's right hand, and be adored of Angels and Archangels. Chry. Hom. 5: in Heb.
Before this was the grace of Union conferred on Jesus, and so he was adored
before he suffered; but after he had humbled himself, and was made obedient
unto death, even to the death of the Cross, then (yea and therefore) God highly
exalted him and gave him a Name, Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11.
which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of
things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth, and that
every tongue shall confess that Jesus is Lord to the glory of God the Father.
He was Lord before, in that he is the Son of God, but now he is Lord again by
virtue of his humiliation and Session at God's right hand. Trouble not your
selves with their objection who say, That if adoration be due to Christ as God
and man, that then the humane nature is to be adored: the Person adored is man,
but the humanity it self is not the proper object of that Worship. There is a
difference betwixt the concrete and the abstract; though the man Christ be God,
yet his manhood is not God, and by consequence not to be worshipped with that
worship which is properly and essentially Divine. Certainly, if adoration agree
to the humanity of Christ, then may his humanity help and save us; but the
humanity of Christ cannot help and Save us, because omnis actio est suppositi,
whereas the humane nature of Christ is not suppositum, a subsistence or
personal being at all.

3. That he might intercede for his Saints. Heb. 8.1, 2.
Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the Sum; we have such an
high Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the
Heavens, and a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched and not men: he is set on the right hand of God as an high Priest,
or Minister to intercede for us. For as Christ is not entered into the holy
Place made with hands which are the Figures of the true, Heb. 9.24.
but into Heaven it self now to appear in the presence of God for us. This
appearing is an expression borrowed from the custom of human Courts; for as in
them, when the Plaintiff or Defendant is called, their Attorney appears in
their names, so when we are summoned by the justice of God to answer the
complaints which it prefers against us, we have an Advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the righteous, John 2.1. Exodus 28.9, 10 11, 12.
and he stands up, and appears for us: or it may be this appearing has a
respect to the manner of high Priests in the time of the Law; for as they used
to go into the most holy place with the names of the Children of Israel written
in precious stones, for a remembrance of them, that they might remember them to
God in their Prayers; so Jesus Christ being gone up to Heaven, he there
presents to his Father, the Names of all his chosen, and he remembers them to
his Father in his Intercessions. Certainly, Christ is not gone to Heaven, and
advanced to the right hand of God, only to live in eternal joy himself, but
also to procure happiness for his Saints: it is to excellent purpose, and to
the great good of his Church that he sits at the right hand of his Father, for
thereby he governs and protects his people, and he continually executes the
Office of his Priesthood, presenting himself, and the sacrifice of himself, and
the infinite merit of that sacrifice before the eyes of his Father in their
behalf.

4. That true Believers may assuredly hope by virtue of Christ's Session to sit
themselves in the Kingdom of Glory. Heb. 1.5.
It is true that Christ, and only Christ has his seat at the right hand of
God; to which of the Saints, or of the Angels did he ever say, sit thou at my
right hand? It is a prerogative above all Creatures; and yet there is something
near it given to the Saints, Rev. 3.21.
for him that overcomes, I will grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I
also am set down with my Father in his Throne. There is a proportion, though
with an inequality; we must sit on Christ's Throne, as he sits on his Fathers
Throne; Christ only sits at the right hand of God, but the Saints are to sit at
the right hand of Christ, Psalm. 45.9.
and so the Psalmist speaks, upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in Gold of
Ophir. It is enough to greaten the Spirits of Saints; how should they tread on
earth, and contemn the World, when they consider that one day they shall judge
the World? 1 Cor. 6.2.
do you not know, that the Saints shall judge the World? nay, 2 Timothy 2.12
when they consider that one day they shall reign with Christ? if ye suffer
with him, ye shall reign with him. Christ sitting in Heaven is a very Figure of
us; Christ's person is the great model and first draught of all that shall be
done to his Body the Saints; therefore he is said to be the Captain of our
Salvation that leads us on, he is said to be our forerunner into Glory; he
breaks the clouds first, he appears first before God, he sits down first, and
is glorified first, and then we follow; Christ wears the Crown in Heaven as our
King, and he is united and married to God as our proxy.

And yet there is another ground of hope; not only shall we sit with Christ in
Glory, but even now do we sit with him in Glory: Christ is not only gone to
heaven to prepare a place for us, but he sits in Heaven in our room, and God
looks on him as the great picture of all that body whereof he is Head, and he
delights himself in seeing them all Glorified as in his Son. To this purpose
the Saints are said to sit down with Christ at very present, Ephesians. 2.6.
he has made us to sit together with him in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
Christ in our nature is now exalted: this is that admirable thing which carried
up Chrysostom into an ecstasy, that the same nature of which God said dust thou
art, and to dust thou shall return, should now sit in Heaven at God's right
hand: but not only the human nature, but Christ in person sits there, as a
common person in our stead; he is in his Throne, and we sit with him in
supercelestial places. O what structures and pillars of hope are raised up here?

5. That he might defend the Church against her enemies; and at last destroy
all the enemies of the Church. Such is the power of Christ's Session, that by it
he holds up his Saints in the midst of their enemies, so that the gates of hell
shall not prevail against them; true indeed, that many times they are used as
Lambs amongst Wolves, but so Christ orders that the blood of Martyrs should be
the Seed of the Church; hereby his Church like a tree settles the faster, and
like a Torch shines the brighter for the shaking. And as for the enemies of his
Church, there is a day of reckoning for them, he that sits in the Heavens
shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. The day is a coming that he
will speak unto them in his wrath, and vex him in his sore displeasure. Psalm.
2.4, 5.
In the mean while Christ is galling and tormenting them by the Scepter of his
Word, and at last he will put them all under his feet. The Lord said to my
Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make my enemies thy footstool. Psalm.
110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25.
-- For he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet: that the
enemies of Christ must be made his footstool notes the extreme shame and
confusion which they shall everlastingly suffer: in victories amongst men the
party conquered goes many times off upon some honorable terms, or at worst if
they are led captive they go like men; but to be made a stool for the conqueror
to insult over, this is extremity of shame; and as shame, so it notes burden
which the wicked must bear; the footstool bears the weight of the body, so
must the enemies of Christ bear the weight of his heavy and everlasting wrath;
such a weight shall they bear that they would gladly exchange it for the weight
of rocks and mountains, rather would they live under the weight of the heaviest
creature in the world, then under the fury of him that sits upon the Throne.
And withal it notes an equal and just recompense to the wicked; the Lord uses
often to fit punishments to the quality and measure of their sins committed; he
that on earth denied a crumb of bread, was in hell denied a drop of water; and
thus will Christ deal with his enemies at the last day; here they trample upon
Christ in his Word, in his ways, in his members; Isa. 51.23. Heb. 10.29. Isa
63.18. Heb. 6.6.
they make the Saints bow down for them to go over, yea they have laid their
bodies as the ground, and as the street to them that went over; they tread
under foot the Son of God, the blood of the Covenant; they tread down the
sanctuary; and put Christ to shame: and therefore their own measure shall be
returned into their own bosom, they shall be constrained to confess with
Adoni-hezek, as I have done, so God has requited me; yea, Judge. 1.7.
this shall they suffer from the meanest of Christ's members whom they here
insult over; the Saints shall be as Witnesses, and as it were co-assessors with
Christ, to judge the wicked both men and Angels, and tread them under their
feet; they shall take them captives whose captives they were, and shall rule
over their oppressors; Isa. 14.2.
all they that despised them shall bow themselves at the soles of their feet.

6. That he might send down the holy Ghost; to this purpose Christ told his
Disciples whiles he was yet on earth, that he must ascend into heaven, and
Reign there: it is expedient for you, that I go away, for if I go not away,
John 16.7.
the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him to you.
Christ is now in heaven, and sits at Gods right hand, that he may send us his
Spirit, by whose forcible working we seek after heaven, and heavenly things,
where now Christ sits. But on this I shall insist larger, it being our next
subject.

SECT. VII. Of the time when the holy Ghost was sent.
3. FOr the mission of his Spirit: no sooner was Christ set down at God's right
hand, but he sends down the holy Ghost. It was an use amongst the Ancients in
days of great joy and solemnity to give gifts, and to send presents unto men;
Nehem. 8.12.
thus after the wall of Jerusalem was built, it is said, that the people did
eat, and drink, and send porti^ns: and at the feast of Purim they made them
days of feasting and joy, Ephesians. 9.22.
and of sending portions one to another, and Gifts to the poor. Thus Christ in
the day of his Majesty and Inauguration, in that great and solemn Triumph, when
he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and did withal give gifts
unto men. Ephesians. 4.8.


Concerning this mission of the Spirit, or these gifts of Christ to his Church,
I shall discover the accomplishment, as it appears in these Texts; And when the
day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place;
and suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, Act.
2.1, 2, 3, 4.
and it filled all the house where they were sitting; and there appeared unto
them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them; and they
were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues as
the Spirit gave them utterance. Out of these words I shall observe these
particulars: the time when; the persons to whom; the manner how; the measure
what; and the reasons why the holy Ghost was sent.

1. For the time when the holy Ghost was sent, it is said when the day of
Pentecost was fully come; this was a Feast of the Jews called (...) from fifty
days; because it was ever kept on the Fiftyeth day after the second of the
Passover. We find in Scripture sundry memorable things reckoned by the number
of fifty. As fifty days from Isreal's coming out of Egypt unto the giving of the
Law. And the fiftyeth year was that great feast of the Jubilee, which was the
time of forgiving of debts, and of restoring men to their first estates; And
fifty days were in truth the appointed time of the Jews Harvest; their harvest
being bounded as it were with two remarkable days, the one being the beginning,
the other the end thereof; the beginning was (...) the second of the Passover;
the end was (...) the fiftyeth day after, Levit. 23.10. Levit. 23.17.
called the Pentecost; upon the (...) they offered a sheaf of the first fruits
of their harvest: upon the Pentecost they offered two wave-loaves, the sheaf
being offered, all the after-fruits throughout the Land were Sanctified; and
the two loaves being offered it was a sign of the harvest finished and ended;
and now we find, that as there were fifty days betwixt (...) and the Pentecost,
so there were fifty days betwixt Christ's Resurrection and the coming down of
the holy Ghost. What was the meaning of this, but to hold harmony, and to keep
correspondency with those memorable things? as on the day of Pentecost (fifty
days after the feast of the Passover) the Israelites came to mount Sinai,
there received they the Law; a memorable day with them, and therefore called
the feast of the Law; so the very same day is accomplished that prophecy, Out
of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; Isa.
2.3.
now was the promulgation of the Gospel called by James the Royal Law, Jam. 2.8.
as given by Christ our King, and written in the hearts of his servants by this
holy Ghost; it seems to shadow out the great difference betwixt the Law and the
Gospel; the Law was given with terror, in lightning and thunder; it discovers
sin, declares God's Wrath, frights the Conscience; but the Gospel is given
without terror, there was no lightning and thunder now: no, no; the holy Ghost
slides down from heaven with grace, and gifts; and with great joy sits on the
heads, and in the hearts of his Saints. 2. On the Jubilee, or fiftyeth year,
was a great feast; whence some observe that the Latins made their word Jubilo,
to take up a Merry Song; though the word be derived from the Hebrew Jobel,
which signifies a Rams horn; for then they blew with Rams horns, as when they
gathered the people to the Congregation they blew their Silver Trumpets. There
were many uses of this feast; 1. For the general release of Servants. 2. For
the restoring of Lands unto their first owners who had sold them. 3. For the
keeping of a right chronology, and reckoning of times; for as the Greeks did
reckon by their Olimpiads, and the Latin, by their Lustra, so did the Hebrews
by their Jubilees; this falls fit with the proclaiming of the Gospel, which is
an act or tender of Gods most gracious general free pardon of all sins, and of
all the sinners in the World; now was the sound of the Gospel made known unto
all, Acts 2.5.
out of every Nation under heaven; now was that spiritual Jubilee which
Christians enjoy under Christ; now was the remission published which exceeded
the remission of the Jubilee, as for as the Jubilee exceeded the remission of
the Seventh year (i.e.) not only seven times, but seventy times seven times.
Mat. 18.22. Lev. 23.17, 20
3. On the day of Pentecost they offered the two wave-loaves called the bread
of the first fruits unto the Lord. In like sort this very day (the Lord of the
harvest so disposing it) the Apostles by the assistance and effectual working
of the Spirit offered the first fruits of their harvest unto the Lord; Act.
2.41.
for the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. We see
the circumstance of time has its due weight, and is very considerable; when
the day of Pentecost was fully come, then came the holy Ghost.

SECT. VIII. Of the persons to whom the holy Ghost was sent.
2. FOr the persons to whom the holy Ghost was sent; it is said, to all that
were with one accord in one place; Act. 2.1.
who they were it is not here expressed; yet from the former chapter we may
conjecture, Acts 1.13, 14.
they were the twelve Apostles, together with Joseph called Barsabas, and the
Women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and his brethren; these all continued with
one accord in one place, for so was Christ's command, that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, says he,
ye have heard of me. This promise we read of in the Evangelists, Act. 1.4.
when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, John
15.26.
even the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, he will testify of
me. Luke 21.49.
-- And behold I send the promise of the Father upon you, but tarry ye in the
City of Jerusalem until you be endued with power from on high. It was the great
promise of the Old Testament, that Christ should partake of our humane Nature,
and it was the great promise of the New Testament, that we should partake of
his divine Nature; he was clothed with our flesh according to the former, and
we are invested with his Spirit according to the latter promise. For this
promise the Apostles and others had long waited, and for the accomplishment
they were now fitted and disposed. 1. They had waited for it from the Ascension
day, till the feast of Pentecost; he told them at the very instant of his
Ascension that he would send the holy Ghost, and therefore bid them stay
together till that hour; upon which command they waited, Isa. 28.16.
and continued waiting until the day of Pentecost was fully come. He that
believes shall not make have, says Isaiah; surely waiting is a Christian
duty, for the Vision is yet for an appointed time, Hab. 2.3.
but at the end it shall speak and shall not lie, though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry. Well may we wait, and wait for
him, if we consider how God and Christ have waited for us and our conversion;
and especially, if we consider that the Comforter will come; and when he comes,
that he will abide with us for ever. But 2. John 14.16.
As they waited for the Spirit, so they were rightly disposed to receive the
Spirit, for they were all with one accord in one place. Mark here the
qualifications of these persons; they were all with one accord, etc. To those
that accord in the Spirit given; where is nothing but discord, jars, divisions,
fractions, there is no Spirit of God; for the Spirit is the Author of concord,
peace, unity, and amity; he is the very essential unity, love, and love-knot of
the two persons, the Father, and the Son: even of God with God: and he was sent
to be the union, love, and love-knot of the two natures united in Christ, even
of God with man; and can we imagine that essential unity will enter but where
there is unity? can the Spirit of unity come or remain but where there is unity
of Spirit? verily there is not, there cannot be a more proper and peculiar, a
more true and certain disposition to make us meet for the Spirit, then that
quality in us that is likest to his nature and essence; and that is unity,
love, concord: do we marvel that the spirit does scarcely pant in us? Alas we
are not all of one accord; the very first point is wanting to make us meet for
the coming of the holy Ghost upon us. We see the persons to whom the holy Ghost
was sent: they were they that were together with one accord in one place.

SECT. IX. Of the manner how the holy Ghost was sent.
3. FOr the manner how he was sent, or how he came to these Apostles; we may
observe these particulars. --

1: He came suddenly; which either shows the Majesty of the Miracle that is
gloriously done, which is suddenly done; or the truth of the miracle, there
could be no imposture or fraud in it, when the motion of it was so sudden; or
the purpose of the miracle, which was to awake and affect them to whom it came;
usually sudden things startle us, and make us look up. We may learn to receive
those holy motions of the spirit, which sometimes come suddenly, and we know
not how; I am persuaded the man breathes not amongst us Christians, that
sometimes feels not the stirrings, movings, breathings of the spirit of God; Oh
that men would take heed of despising present motions! Oh that men would take
the wind while it blows, and the water while the Angel moves it; as not knowing
when it will, or whether ever it will blow again!

2. He came from heaven; the place seems here to commend the gift; as from
earth earthly things arise, so from heaven heavenly, spiritual, eternal things.
And this is one sign to distinguish the spirits: Beloved, believe not every
spirit, 1 John 4.1.
but try the spirits whether they are of God. If our motions come from heaven,
if we fetch our grounds thence, from heaven, from Religion, from the sanctuary,
it is the spirit of God; or if it carry us heavenward, if it make us heavenly
minded, if it wean us from the world, and if it elevate and set our affections
on heavenly things, if it form and frame our conversations toward heaven, we
may then conclude the motions are not from below, but from above. O that
Christians would be much in observation of, and in listening to the movings,
workings, hints, and intimations of that Spirit that comes from heaven.
Certainly that Spirit is of God that comes down from heaven, and that lifts up
our Souls toward heaven.

3. He comes down from heaven like a wind; The comparison is most apt; of all
bodily things the wind is least bodily; it is invisible, and comes nearest to
the nature of a Spirit: it is quick and active as the Spirit is. But more
especially the holy Ghost is compared to a wind in respect of its irresistible
workings; as nothing can resist the wind, it goes and blows which way soever it
will; so nothing can resist the Spirit of God, wheresoever it has a purpose to
work efficaciously; I will not say, but the heart of a man may resist and
reject the work of the Spirit in some measure, Act. 7.51. 2 Cor. 10.5.
and in some degrees; Stephen told the Jews, they had always resisted the holy
Ghost; and the Apostle tells of strong holds, and of every high thing that
exalts it self against God; so there is a natural contrariety, a constant
enmity, and active resisting of Gods Spirit by our spirits; we must therefore
distinguish between a prevalent and a gradual resisting; the spirit in
conversion so works, that he takes away the prevalent, but not the gradual
resisting; A man before he be converted is froward, and full of cavils and
prejudices, he is unwilling to be saved, he cannot abide the truth, he does
what he can to stifle all good motions: yet if he belong to the election of
grace, God will at last over-master his heart, and make him; of unwilling,
willing; he will omnipotently bow and change the will, and work on his soul by
his mighty power efficaciously, insuperably, and irresistably. Again, the holy
Ghost is compared to wind, John 3.8.
in respect of its free actings; the wind blows where it lists (says
Christ) and so the Spirit blows where it lists; who can give any reason why
the Spirit breathes so sweetly on Jacob, and not on Esau? on Peter, and not on
Judas? is it not the free grace and good pleasure of God? springs it not from
the mere freedom and pure arbitrariness of his own only workings? to you it is
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven (says Christ) but to them
it is not given. Mat. 13.11.
And I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, Mat. 11.25, 26
and have revealed them unto babes; even so Father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight. These, and the like Texts, are as so many hammars to beat in pieces
all those Doctrines of free will, and of the power of man to supernatural
things; grace makes no gain of man's work; free will may indeed move and run,
but if it be to good, it must be moved, and driven, and breathed upon God's
free grace. The Spirit blows where it lists.

4. He came like a rushy mighty wind; as the wind is sometimes of that strength
that it rends and rives in sunder Mountains and Rocks, it pulls up trees, it
blows down buildings; so are the operations of the holy Spirit; it takes down
all before it, it brings into captivity many an exalting thought; it made a
Conquest of the World, beginning at Jerusalem, and spreading it self over all
the earth; it is mighty in operation, able to shake the stoutest and the
proudest man, and to break in pieces the very stoniest heart; indeed our words
without this spirit are but weak wind, we may spend our selves, and never waken
Souls; but if the Spirit blow, he will amaze the consciences of the stoutest
peers, and drive away our sins, as the wind drove away the Grasshoppers and
Locusts that overspread the land of Egypt. Some Analogy there is betwixt this
vehement wind, and the spirits workings; the spirit first comes as a spirit of
bondage, and then as a spirit of Adoption; the spirit of bondage is as a
vehement wind that terrifies, to show that we are not fit to receive the grace
of God, unless the door be first opened by fear and humiliation; others say
that the vehement rushing of this wind showed how irresistably the Apostles
should proceed in preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ; they had a Commission
to go into all the World, and to teach all Nations, and they had a promise that
though many might oppose, yet the gates of hell should not prevail against the
Church; the spirit should go along with them, and he in them, and they in him,
should prevail mightily like a rushing mighty wind.

5. He filled all the house where they were sitting; there were none there that
were to filled with the holy Ghost; this room contained a congregation of none
but Saints. All the men and women (an hundred and twenty, as some think) in
this room were visited from on high; for the holy Ghost came upon them, and
dwelt in them; well might David say, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
Tents of wickedness. They that abode in this house were under a promise that
the Spirit should come, and now was the promise accomplished; for it filled all
the house where they were sitting. I say where they were sitting, to signify,
that all the other houses in Jerusalem felt none of this mighty rushing wind:
there was no assembly of Saints in any part of the City, but only in this
house; or if any other assembly might be, this Spirit blew upon none of them
where these men were not; that, and only that house is filled, where they were
sitting. And this point of blowing upon one certain place is a property very
suitable to the Spirit of God; the wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, John 3.8.
but can not tell whence it comes, nor whether it goes; so is every one
that is born of the Spirit. The Spirit blows where it will, and upon whom it
will, and they shall plainly feel it, and others about them not one jot: have
we not sometimes the experiences of this in our very congregations? one sound
is heard, one breath does blow, and it may be one or two, and no more hears the
sound, or feels the breath inwardly, savingly; it may be one here, and another
there shall feel the Spirit, shall be affected and touched with it sensibly;
but twenty on this side them, and forty on that side them sit all becalmed, and
go their way no more moved, than when they came into Gods presence. Oh that
this Spirit of the Lord would come daily and constantly into our congregations!
Oh that it would blow through them, and through them! O that it would fill
every soul in the assembly with the breath of heaven! come holy Spirit? awake O
North Wind, Cant, 4.16.
and come thou South Wind, and blow upon our Gardens, that the spices thereof
may flow out.

6. He came down in the form of Tongues. As one says well, This Wind brought
Tongues, even a whole shower of Tongues. The Apostles were not only inspired
for their now benefit, but they had gifts bestowed on them to impart the
benefit to more their themselves. But why did the holy Ghost appear like
Tongues? I answer, 1. The Tongue is a symbol of the holy Ghosts proceeding
from the Word of the Father; as the Tongue has the nearest affinity with the
word, and is moved by the word of the heart, to express the same by the sound
of the voice; so the holy Ghost has the nearest affinity that may be with the
Word of God, and is the expresser of his voice, and the speaker of his will. 2.
The Tongue is the sole instrument of Knowledge which conveighs the same from
man to man; though the Soul be the Fountain from whence all wisdom springs, yet
the Tongue is the Channel and the conduit-pipe whereby this Wisdom and
Knowledge is communicated and Tansferred from man to man: in like manner the
holy Ghost is the sole Author and Teacher of all Truth; though Christ be the
Wisdom of God, yet the holy Ghost is the Teacher of this Wisdom to men; And
hence it is that the holy Ghost appeared in the form of Tongues.

And yet not merely in the form of Tongues, but thus qualified. 1. They were
Cloven Tongues; to signify that the Apostles should speak in diverse Languages;
if there must be a calling of the Gentiles, they must needs have the Tongues of
the Gentiles wherewith to call them; if they were debtors not only to the Jews,
Rom 1.14.
but to the Grecians; nor only to the Grecians, but to the Barbarians also,
then must they have the tongues not only of the Jews, but of the Grecians and
Barbarians to pay this debt, and to discharge this duty of go, and teach all
Nations. Mat. 28.19.
Surely this gift was bestowed for the propagating of the Gospel far and wide;
The tongues were cloven that the Apostles might speak all Languages, and that
all Nations of the World whithersoever they came, might hear them, and
understand them speaking in their own Tongues. 2. They were fiery Tongues; to
signify that there should be an efficacy, or fervor in their speaking; the
World was so overwhelmed with ignorance and error, that the Apostles lips had
need to be touched with a coal from the Altar; Tongues of flesh would not serve
the turn, nor words of air, but there must be fire put into the Tongue, and
Spirit of life into the words they speak; with such a tongue Christ speak
himself, when they said of him, did not our hearts burn within us, Luke 24.32.
while he spoke unto us by the way? and with such a tongue Peter spoke at this
time, Acts, 2.73.
something like fire fell from him on their hearts, when they were pricked in
their hearts, and said, men and brethren what shall we do? Oh that we of the
Ministry had these fiery Tongues! O that the Spirit would put his live-coal
into our speeches! Oh that our Sermons were warming Sermons! may we not fear
that the Spirit is gone whiles the people are dead, and we are no more lively
in our Ministry? it is said of Luther, that when he heard one preach very
faintly, cold, cold, says he, this is cold preaching, here is no heat at all to
be gotten; Oh when the Spirit comes, it comes with a tongue of fire; instead of
words, sparks of fire will fall from us on the hearts of hearers.

3. These cloven tongues sat upon each of them; to signify their constancy
and continuance; they did not light, and touch, and away, after the manner of
butterflies; but they sat, they abode still, they continued steady, without
any stirring or starting. This was the privy sign by which John the Baptist
knew Jesus to be Christ; upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and
remaining on him, John 1.33.
the same is he which Baptiseth with the holy Ghost. It was not only the
Spirits descending, but the Spirit's remaining on him, Psalm. 51.10.
that was the Sign. The Spirit of God is a constant Spirit; it abides on the
Soul to whom it is given; and therefore the Psalmist describes these great
Transactions of Christ to this very end, that the Spirit might dwell with us;
thou have ascended on high, Psalm. 68.18.
thou have led Captivity Captive, thou have received gifts for men, yea for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them. Not only that he
might stay and lodge for a night as a way-fairing man, that comes to his Inn,
and then is gone in the morning; no, no; but that he might take up his
residence, and dwell in them. I know it is a question, whether the holy Ghost
may be lost? but certainly of the Elect he is never totally, or wholly lost;
only I dare not say, but as touching many gifts, he may be lost even of the
Elect themselves: David after his sins, was forced to cry, Psalm. 51.11, 12.
cast me not away from thy presence O Lord, and take not thy holy Spirit from
me; restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free
Spirit; we find here that in respect of some gifts even of regeneration, the
Spirit is sometimes lost, but that the godly should retain no remnants of the
Spirit in their worst declinings, I cannot imagine: John teaches expressly,
whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, 1 John. 3.9.
(a sin unto death) for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because
he is born of God. David in his fall lost the joy of his heart, the purity of
his conscience, and many other gifts which he desired to have restored to him;
but the holy Ghost he had not utterly lost; for if so, how could he have
prayed, cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from
me? I have done with the manner of the Spirits mission.

SECT. X. Of the measure of the Holy Ghost now given.
4. FOR the measure, what or how much of the Spirit was now given? this
question is necessary, because we bring in the Spirits mission after Christ's
ascension, as if the holy Ghost had not been given before this time. That this
was the time of the coming of the holy Ghost, is very plain; but that the holy
Ghost was not given before this time, we cannot say; certainly the Prophets
speak by him, and the Apostles had him, John 20.22.
not only when they were first called, but more fully when he breathed on them,
and said unto them, receive yea the holy Ghost. So that if ye study the
reconciliation of these things, I know not any way better than to put it on the
measure, or degrees of the Spirits mission. -- I know some go about to
reconcile it thus, that the holy Ghost was given before secretly with grace,
but now he was given in a visible shape with power. Others thus, that the holy
Ghost was before given in respect of Grace and Ministerial gifts, but now he
was given in respect of virtue, or Ghostly ability to work Wonders, and to
speak with diverse Languages. But we find that the Prophets and Apostles before
this had not only Grace, and Ministerial gifts, but a miraculous virtue, even
the Spirit of powerful and extraordinary operation: only here was the
difference, that before this, the Spirit was but sprinkled (as it were) upon
them, but now it was poured upon them; before this they were gently breathed
on, and refreshed with a small gale, but now they were all blown upon with a
mighty wind; without controversy a difference there is in the Spirits mission;
And that some lay down chiefly in these three things. --

As --

1. In the manner of the Spirits mission: to the old Church the Spirit came
usually in dreams, or visions, or in a low still voice, or in some latent ways;
but now he came in power, in evidence and demonstration; and therefore it is
called, Ephesians 1.17. 1 King. 19.11, 12.
the spirit of revelation and knowledge; At the apparition of God to Elijah, it
is said, that the Lord passed by; and a great, and strong wind rent the
mountains, and break in pieces the rocks before the Lord, but the Lord was not
in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the
earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire;
and after the fire a still small voice, and then Elijah wrapped his face in his
mantle, as knowing the Lords presence was therein: the Spirit came not of old,
save in a vision, or dream, or in a still small voice; but now the Spirit came
in a rushing mighty wind, in fiery tongues, in earthquakes, in so much, Acts
4.31.
that the place was shaken where they were assembled, and they were all filled
with the Holy Ghost: the Spirit now made choice to come in such apparitions, as
should have in them a self-discovering property, which would not be hidden; and
here is one difference.

2. Another difference is in respect of the Subjects unto whom he was sent;
before now he came only upon the enclosed garden of the Jews, but after the
assension of Christ, The Spirit was poured upon all flesh; now every believer
is of the Israel of God, every Christian is a Temple of the holy Ghost; now we
receive the Spirit too, or else it is wrong with us; for If any man have not
the spirit of Christ, he is none of his; Romans 8.9. Act. 10.44, 45.
At Peter's Sermon to Cornelius, it is said, that the holy Ghost fell on all
them which hear the Word; and they of the Circumcision which believed were
astonyed, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy
Ghost. It was some wonder at first, even to the Apostles themselves, but in
this Sermon Peter acknowledges, Act 10.34, 35.
Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation
he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. Mark, In
every Nation, upon all flesh, I will pour out my spirit: Here Is another
difference.

3. One difference more is in the measure of his mission. At first he was sent
only in drops and dew, but now he was poured out in showers and abundance; The
holy Ghost (says Paul) was shed on us abundantly through Jesus our Savior.
Tit. 3.6.
As there are degrees in the wind, aura, ventus, procella; a breath, a blast, a
stiff gale; so we cannot deny degrees in the Spirit, the Apostles at Christ's
resurrection received the Spirit, but now they were filled with the Spirit;
then it was but a breath, but now it was a mighty wind. And indeed never was
the like measure of the Spirit given to men as at this time; the Fathers before
this, and we and our Fathers since this, have but (as it were) a hint of the
Spirit to their Epha; such a pentecost as this, never was but this, never the
like before or since; it was Christ's Coronation-day, the day of placing him in
his throne, when he gave these gifts unto men, and therefore that day was all
magnificence showed above all other days; Thus for the measure of the Spirit
now given to the Church of Christ.

SECT II. Of the Reasons why the Holy Ghost was sent.
5. FOR the Reasons why the Holy Ghost was sent; they are several: As -- 1.
That all the prophesies concerning this mission might be accomplished. Isa.
32.15.
Isaiah speaks of a time when the spirit should be poured upon us from on high,
and the wilderness should be a fruitful field. And Zachary Prophesies, Zach.
12 10.
that in that day I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, Joel 2.28, 29.
the spirit of grace and supplication. And Joel prophesies yet more expressly,
It shall come to pass, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy: your old men shall dream dreams, your
young men shall see visions; and also upon the servants and upon the handmaids
in those days I will pour out my spirit, and they shall Prophecy. This very
Prophecy was cited by Peter in his first Sermon after the Spirits mission,
Act. 2.17, 18. In which we read of two pourings of the Spirit, one upon their
sons, and the other upon his servants; the former concerned only the Jew, they
should have Prophesies, Visions, and Dreams, the old way of the Jews; but the
latter concerns us, we are not of their sons, but of his servants, to whom
visions and dreams are left quite out; and therefore if any now pretend to
those visions and dreams, we say with Jeremy, Jer. 23.28.
The prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream, but he that has my Word,
let him speak my Word Faithfully, what is the Chafe to the wheat? But of all
the prophesies concerning the mission of the Holy Ghost, our Savior gives the
clearest and the most particular; two great Prophesies we find in the Bible,
the one is of the Old Testament, and the other of the New; that of the Old
Testament was for the coming of Christ, and this of the New Testament was for
the coming of the Holy Ghost: and hence we say, that the coming of Christ was
the fulfilling of the Law, and the coming of the Holy Ghost is the fulfilling
of the Gospel. In this respect let us search and see those Prophesies of Christ
the great Prophet in the New Testament. I will pray the Father, Joh. 14.16, 17.
John 15.26. Luke 24.49. John 16.7.
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,
even the Spirit of truth. -- But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send
unto you from the Father, he shall testify of me -- And behold I send the
pr^mise of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye
be endued with Power from on high. It is expedient for you that I go away; for
if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will
send him unto you. Why it was of necessity that all these Prophesies, and
promises must be accomplished, and therefore was the Holy Ghost sent amongst us.

2. That the holy Apostles might be furnished with gifts and graces suitable to
their estates, conditions, stations, places. To this purpose, no sooner was the
Spirit sent, Acts 2.3.
but they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance. They were filled with the Holy
Ghost; not that they were before empty, but now they were more full of the
spirit than ever they were before; and they speak with other tongues; other
than ever they had Learned; probably they understood no Tongue but the Syriack
till this time, but now on a sudden they could speak Greek, Latin, Arabic
Persian, Parthian, and what not? the Wisdom and Mercy of God is very observable
herein, that the same means of diverse Tongues which was the destroying of
Babel, should be the very same means here conferred on the Apostles to work the
building of Syon; that the curse should be removed, and a blessing come in
place; that confusion of Tongues should be united to God's Glory; that this
should be the issue of Tongues, that neither Speech nor Language should be upon
all the Earth, but his praise, and glory, and the Gospel should be heard
amongst them. And here is something more observable, in that they spoke with
other Tongues, As the spirit gave them utterance; the word utterance is in the
Original (...); you have heard of Apothegmes, (i.e.) wise, and weighty
sententious speeches; now such as these the spirit gave them to utter; magnalia
Dei, v. 11.
(as in the eleventh verse) the wonderful works of God; they spoke of those
singular benefits God offered to the world by the death of his Son; they spoke
of the work of our Redemption, of the merits of Christ, of the glory and riches
of his Grace, of the praises due to his Name for all his Mercies; others add
that they spoke of those admirable works of the Trinity, as of our Creation,
Redemption, and Sanctification; and of whatsoever generally concerned the
Salvation of mankind: their speeches were not crudities of their own Brain
trivial, base, or vulgar stuff; but magnalia, great and high Points, Apothegmes
or Oracles, as the spirit gave them utterance. But these reasons are remote to
us.

3. That he might fill the hearts of all the Saints, and make them Temples and
receptacles for the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19.
know you not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you,
which ye have of God: and ye are not your own? It is said here, that after the
mighty rushing Wind and cloven fiery Tongues, Acts 2.4.
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost: and began to spoke with other
Tongues. First, they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and then they spoke with
other Tongues; the Holy Ghost begins inward, and works outward; it first alters
the mind, before it change the speech; it first works on the Spirit, before on
the phraze or utterance; this was the first work of the Spirit, it filled them.
And thus for the daily ministration, such must be appointed as were full of the
Holy Ghost; Acts 6.3. Acts 7.55. Acts. 11.24.
and Stephen is said to be full of the Holy Ghost; and Barnabas is called a
good man, and full of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is usually said to fill
the Saints; only whether it be the person of the Holy Ghost, or the impressions
of the Holy Ghost, is a very great question; for my part I am apt to incline to
their mind, who say, not only the impressions of the spirit, the qualities of
holiness, the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, or as some think, habitual
grace in a special manner; but that the Holy Ghost himself does fill, and
dwell, and reign in the hearts of all regenerate men. And this seems clear to
me: 1. By Scriptures. 2. By Arguments.

1. The Scriptures are such as these, He that believes on me, as the Scripture
says, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water; but this spoke he of
the Spirit, John 7.38, 39
which they that believe on him should receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified; for those words, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water; by living water, is meant grace; by
rivers of living water, is meant the manifold graces of the Spirit; by the
flowing of these rivers, is meant the abounding and communicating of those
graces from one to another; and by the belly out of which those rivers should
flow, is meant the heart endued or filled with the Holy Ghost. Now the spring
and rivers, the fountain and streams are diverse things, and to be
distinguished: the one is the cause, and the other the effect; the one is the
tree, and the other the fruit; it is the holy Ghost filling the hearts of
beleivers, that is the spring and fountain whence all those rivers of living
waters flow: And therefore says the Evangelist expressly, This spoke he of the
Spirit, which they that believe should receive; of what Spirit? even, of the
Holy Ghost, which in full measure was not yet given, because that Christ was
not yet glorified; it is the same spirit which believers receive, whence all
these rivers of living waters flow; but those rivers flow not from habital
grace, nor from any of the graces of the Holy Ghost, but from the Holy Ghost
himself.

Again, When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth,
John 16.1^.
-- and he will show you things to come. Now the habits of grace cannot guide
or teach, or show a man things to come; the habits of grace cannot speak, and
hear; as it is there written, He shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak. This can be no other than the spirit in his
own Person, this is the Comforter, that hears, and speaks, and guides into all
truth, and shows us things to come.

Again, The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is
given unto us. Besides, the grace of the Spirit, which is the love of God; the
Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.
or the Spirit it self, is said to be given unto us.

And, Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. Romans 8.9.
If so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Here Is a plain distinction
betwixt the new man, our being in the Spirit, and the Spirit dwelling in us;
Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, (i.e.) the same holy Spirit which
dwells in our head and Savior Jesus Christ, he is none of his. -- But if the
spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead dwell in you, v. 11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies,
by his Spirit that dwells in you. This Spirit cannot be meant of habitual
grace, for habitual grace did not raise up Jesus from the dead; no, no, it was
the same Spirit that dwelt in Christ, and that dwells in us.

Again, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16. 1 Cor. 6.19
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? -- And know ye not that your body
is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you? now gifts and graces are not
properly said to dwell in Temples; this, belongs rather to persons than
qualities; and therefore it is meant of the holy Ghost himself; Ye are the
Temples of the living God: surely graces are not the living God? 2 Cor. 6.16.
But ye are the Temples of the living God; as God has said, I will dwell in
them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

2. The arguments to confirm this, are such as these;

1. Actions are ascribed to the Holy Ghost, as given unto us, or dwelling in
us, Joh. 16.8, 13. Romans 8.15, 16
When the spirit is come, he will reprove the World of sin. -- And when the
spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. -- And yea have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry, Abba Father: -- And this
spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the Children of God. These
actions are usually given to the Holy Ghost, I mean to that Holy Ghost which we
receive, and dwells in us; it reproves, it guides, it helps, it satisfies, it
witnesses; now, actiones sunt suppositorum; actions are of persons, and not of
qualities; habitual grace cannot reprove, or guide, or teach, or help our
infirmities: these are the actions of the Spirit himself, in his own person.

2. The spirit it self is the bond of our mistical union with Jesus Christ, and
therefore it is the Spirit it self that dwells in us. Look as it is in our
body, there is head and members, yet all are but one natural body, because they
are animated and quickened by one and the self-same soul; so it is in the
mistical body, Christ is our head, and we are his members, and yet both of us
are but one mystical body, by reason of the self-same Spirit dwelling in both.
And hence it is said, that Christ dwells in us by his spirit; 2 Cor. 13.5.
John 6.26.
Know ye not that Christ Jesus is in you except ye be reprobates? -- he that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him. -- And I
live (says Paul) yet not I, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me. How in me? not corporally, for in that sense, The
Heavens must receive him until the time of the restitution of all things; but
spiritually according to the testimony of the Apostle, Acts 3.21.
because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your
hearts. Gal. 4.6.
This is the mystery that should be known among the Gentiles, the glorious
mystery, yea the rich and glorious mystery; Col. 1.2.
the Apostle gives it all these Epithetes, the riches of the glory of this
mystery, which is, Christ in you the hope of glory.

3. As Satan keeps his residence in wicked men, working them unto all manner of
sin, and holding them captive to do his will; so the spirit of God coming and
thrusting him out of possession, dwells in us, leading us into all truth,
replenishing us with all graces, and enclining us to all holy Obedience. There
is little question but whilst men remain in the state of infidelity, the
strong man Satan keeps possession, and dwells in them, though not after a
gross, and sinsible manner, as in Demoniacks; yet invisibly and spiritually,
ruling and reigning in them, and making them his slav^ to do his will; and
therefore by the same reason, when a stronger than he comes, even the good
spirit of God, he casts him out, and takes possession, and dwells, and reigns,
and rules in our souls and bodies.

If the spirit it self dwell not in us, then how would there be three that bear
witness? the Apostle tells us, 1 John 5.8.
There are three that bear witness in earth (or in our hearts the Spirit, the
water, and blood; now by water is meant sanctification, it is our
sanctification that bears witness with us that we are the Children of God; and
this sanctification consists either in the habit of grace, or in the actings of
grace; if therefore the spirit of Christ in a believer were nothing else but
grace, then it were all one with the testimony of water; but there are three
that bear witness, there is the testimony of the spirit, of blood, and of water;
not only justification, and sanctification, which are but two witnesses, but
the spirit is superadded, and that also bears witness in our Consciences, that
we are the Children of God, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
Christians! think me not tedious in these proofs; these are not speculative
notional points, that tend not to edification, but are exceeding profitable.
Only concerning the manner of the indwelling of this spirit in us, it is most
difficult to conceive. Certainly it dwells not in us as in Christ, viz. bodily,
Col. 2.9. unmeasurably, Joh. 3.34. Originally, 2 Cor. 3.17. the spirit is in
Christ, as light in the sun; but the spirit is in us as light in the air; In
Christo ut lux in sole, in nobis ut lumen, in aere. Ezekiel. 36.27. -- 37.14.
neither dare I affirm, that the spirit is in us more essentially than in any
other men or creatures, for the essence thereof is indivisible and omnipresent:
But this I say, that the spirit is in the faithful above all others. 1. In
respect of Covenant, the Saints have the spirit by God's free Grace and
Covenant; I will put my spirit within you, says God in the Covenant, which is
not only to be understood of the gifts and graces of the spirit, but also of
the spirit it self. 2. In respect of intimate familiarity, and near
acquaintance, the spirit is in the faithful like an inmate or coinhabitant,
comforting, directing, ruling, strengthening, and cherishing them; in which
respect they are said to be his houses, and Temples, in which he dwells;
whereas contrariwise worldlings and infidels to all these purposes are mere
strangers unto him, the world cannot receive him (says Christ) because it
sees him not, neither knows him, John 14.17.
but ye know him; for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. 3. In respect
of virtue and efficacy; the spirit works efficaciously in his Saints; he
chooses them for his own people, he possesses them as of his own right, he
rules in their hearts as in the chief seat of his Kingdom, he purges and
purifieth them from their sins, he replenisheth and fills them with his
saving graces, he guides and directs them in the way of holiness, and never
leaves them till he brings them to his Kingdom. 4. In respect of union; it was
an old error of the heathens, that the soul remains in the body after Death;
which opinion of theirs, though false, because it contradicts the Word, yet the
thing it self is possible, and does not contradict reason; for the soul may
have its local being in the body, and yet not give life to the body; for it is
not the souls being in the body, but its being united to the body which makes
the body live; so it is not the Spirits being locally with the soul, but being
mystically united to the soul that gives it spiritual life. Now in all these
respects, the spirit is in the faithful above all others.

I know the objections, As 1. If the Spirit be united to a believers soul, and
so made one with him, then may a believer say, I am the spirit; or I am equal
with God in respect of the spirit in me, though not as Peter, Thomas, etc.

But I answer, this follows not; for though the spirit be really united to a
believers spirit, so that he may say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.17.
He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, or has one spirit; yet first,
this union is a voluntary act, and not a natural act; and in that respect the
Spirit may unite himself to the soul so far as he pleases, and no further: And
certainly thus far he is not pleased to unite himself to a believer, as that a
believer should say properly, I am the Spirit; or I am equal with God in
respect of the spirit; for then a believer might be worshipped with Divine
worship. 2. This union is by way of application, and not by way of mixture; if
an heap of Wheat and a stone should be joined together, there is an union, they
make both one heap; but the Wheat cannot say, I am a stone; nor can the stone
say, I am wheat; because this union is only by way of Application: but if Wine
and Water should be joined together, then every part may say, I am Water, and I
am Wine; because this union is not only by application, but by way of mixture.
Certainly there is a great union betwixt the Spirit and a believers soul, yet
cannot the believer say properly, I am the Spirit, or I am equal with God,
because their union is only by way of application, and not by way of mixture.

2. Object. No more was the union of Christ as God, with our nature as man, any
union by way of mixture; ye^ could he say, I am God, and I am man. But I
answer, Christ's union was not only spiritual or mystical, but hypostatical or
personal; and in that respect, though there was no mixture, yet there was such
an union as cannot be paralleled in all the world. Our souls union with the
spirit of Christ goes very far, and indeed so far as we cannot express it,
though we had the tongues, and heads, and hearts of men and Angels; yet comes
it short of that union betwixt the second person in the Trinity, and the soul
and body of Christ; his union was personal, but so is not ours: a believer is a
person before he is united to the spirit of Christ; but now Christ's soul and
body were not a person before united to the person of the Godhead. Go we
therefore as far as we can, and I shall easily yield that our union with the
spirit is a true, real, essential, substantial, spiritual, invisible, mystical,
intimate union, yet is it not a personal, or hypostatical union; the spirit
does not assume the soul or body of a believer, as the second person assumed
the soul and body of Christ. Away, away with these cavils and blasphemies,
wherewith too many unstable souls are now infected! I have done with this
Reason.

4. That the holy Ghost might according to his Office, endow men with gifts: no
sooner he bestows his person, but immediately he fills us with his train.

Now the gifts of the Spirit are of these two sorts, some are common to good
and bad, others are proper to the Elect only. Those gifts which are common, are
again twofold; for some of them are given but to certain men, and at certain
times; as the gift of Miracles, of Tongues, of Prophesies, and these were
necessary for the Apostles and the Primitive Church, when the Gospel was first
to be dispersed; others are given to all the members of the Church, and at all
times, as the gifts of Interpretation, Sciences, Arts, Prudence, Learning,
Knowledge, Eloquence, and such like; the former gifts we have not, but these
latter are now given to every member of the Church, according to the measure of
Christ's gift, as the calling and vocation of every member needs. As for
those gifts and saving graces which are proper to the godly, I shall speak of
them anon. Now here is another reason of the spirits mission, Ephesians. 4.8.
that he might give gifts unto men; if you ask, what are those gifts? the
Apostle tells you in one place, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, v. 11.
and some Pastors and Teachers. Three of these gifts are now gone, and their
date is out; but in the same place we find Pastors and Teachers, and them we
have still. Oh how may this teach us to think of such (even of Pastors and
Teachers) as of the special gifts and favors of Jesus Christ; if one special
friend should but send us from a far Country one of his chief servants, would
we not welcome him? Christ now is in Heaven, and he sends us Ministers, as the
stewards of his house; sure if we have any love to Christ, The v^ry feet of
them would be precious, and beautiful, Romans 10.15.
who bring us glad tidings of peace. Again, the Apostle tells us in another
place, that there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit; and
diversities of calling, but the same Lord, or Christ; 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6
and diversities of works, but the same God and Father works all in all.
Christ's errand being done, and he gone up on high, the Spirit came down; and in
Christ's stead established order in the Church; which order or establishment is
here set down, by gifts, callings, and works. Here is first, a Gift; Secondly,
a Calling; Thirdly, a Work Gifts are ascribed to the Spirit, Callings to
Christ, and Works to God, even to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; where
the Spirit ends, Christ begins; and where Christ ends, God begins; if no gift,
we must stay there, and never meddle with the calling; and if no calling, we
must stay there, and never meddle with the Work; first, the Spirit comes, and
bestows the Gift, and then Christ comes, and bestows the Calling, and then God
the Father comes, and sets us to the Work; the gift is for the calling, and the
gift and calling are both for the Work. And if this be the order established by
the Spirit in his Church, Oh what shall we say of them that either have no
gifts, yet step into the calling, as if there were no need of the Holy Ghost;
or that have no calling, and yet will fall upon the work, utterly against the
mind and rule of Jesus Christ? Oh what the poor Church of Christ suffers at
this time in these respects! certainly these men have no commission from the
holy spirit; he was never sent to them that br^ak this order; first gifts, and
then Calling, and then the Work.

But why does the Spirit endow men with gifts? surely says the Apostle, to
this end, 1 Cor. 12.7.
to profit withal. Gifts are given for the good of others, gifts are for
edifying: we should not contemn them, gifts are a blessing of God, and
therefore we a^e to endeavor after them. 1 Timothy 4.15. 1 Cor. 12.31.
Let thy profiting appear to all, and covet earnestly the b^st gifts: And yet
(says Paul) I show unto you a more excellent way: and that was true grace of
which he discourses in the next Chapter; and this brings in another reason of
the Spirits mission.

5. That the Holy Ghost might according to his Office endow men with graces. In
doing this, he first gives the inward principle and habit of grace, and then
the fruit, or actings of grace. 1. He gives a Power, an Habit, a spiritual
Ability, a Seed, a Spring, a principle of Grace; whatsoever we call it, I
cannot conceive it to be a n^w faculty, added to those which are in men by
nature: A man when he is regenerate, has no more faculties in his soul, than
he had before he was regenerate; only in the work of ^egeneration, those
abilities which the man had, are Improved to work spiritually, as before
naturally; as our Bodies in the resurrection from the dead shall have no more,
nor other parts than they have at present; only those which are now natural,
shall th^n by the Power of God be made Spiritual. 1 Cor. 15.44.
Now this Principle is infused, or poured in by the Spirit of God; and hence he
is called The spirit of sanctification. 2. He gives the fruit or actings of
Grace, 2 These. 2.13. Gal. 5.22.23.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering; gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; Some call these the diversifications of
the actings of that spiritual principle within us; certainly the spirit does
not only at first infuse the principles of grace, but he does also enable us to
act, and improve those blessed principles; Phil. 2.13.
he does not only give us power to Holy actions, but he works also the Holy
actions themselves. God works in us not only to will but to do. God has a
twofold grace, psalm. 119.88.
initial and converting; exciting and quickening: in respect of this last, David
prays, Quicken me after thy loving kindness, O Lord, and so shall I keep thy
testimonies. This is the actuating grace that we need every hour, and every
moment, and must pray for more earnestly than we would pray for our daily
bread. Two privileges more especially flow from this; Heb. 4.16.
As -- 1. Hereby the soul will be kept from negligence, and dullness; from gross
and soul sins; the Apostle calls it, grace to help in time of need. Oh this is
admirable, when grace comes in the very nick of need; it may be sometime or
other thou were even falling into such and such a sin, it may be thou were
sometime or other drowning in such and such a wickedness, and this exciting,
quickening grace came in, and kept up thy head above the waters. 2. Hereby the
soul will be kept in a frame for every duty: if the spirit come but with
exciting, quickening grace, then it is ready to say, My heart is prepared, O
Lord, my heart is prepared, I can now do and suffer thy Will; sometimes the
principle of grace lies still within us, and begins to rust; but then comes the
Holy Ghost, and breaths upon our souls, and so it excites, and quickens, and
commands faith, patience, zeal, and other graces to be in exercise; and this is
as it were the file to take off the rust; its the whetting of the edge, its the
stirring up of the coals into a mighty flame. Christians! have you not clear
^xperimental demonstrations of this truth? sometimes you are on the wing of
duty, and sometimes you are dull, and dead; sometimes the least temptation, the
least snare is ready to make you fall; and sometimes again, though strong winds
and tempests blow upon you, yet you are able to stand, like Mount Zion, that
cannot be removed: Oh what is the reason of the difference? surely according to
the incomes of the Spirit of God; this difference comes not from our selves,
but from the Spirit: as this exciting quickening grace is ready, or a far off,
so is our condition: you know what changes David usually found in his own
heart, sometimes he was able to trust in God, and at other times he was so cast
down as if he had no strength within him, and whence all this, but from the
ebbings and flowings of exciting quickening grace? well may we cry, come holy
Spirit: Oh what a comfortable condition would it be, if our Spirits never lay
still, but we were always hungring, thirsting, or moving after God and
goodness.

6. That the holy Ghost might according to his Office comfort his Saints amidst
all their afflictions: this was that which Christ had so often told his
Apostles, John 14.16 V. 18. V. 26. John 15.26.
I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you. -- And I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever -- But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send
in my Name he shall teach you all things. -- But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the spirit of truth which
proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. John 16.17.
-- If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart I
will send him unto you.

But how is it that the spirit comforts Saints? I answer in these particulars.

See at large Dr. Reynolds, on Psalm. 116.
. 1. The Spirit discovers sin, and bends the heart to mourn for sin; and such a
sorrow as this, is the seed and matter of true comfort: as Joseph's heart was
full of joy when his eyes poured out tears on Benjamin's neck, so there is a
certain seed and matter of joy in spiritual mourning; I know they are contrary,
but yet they may be subordinate to each other, as a dark and muddy color may
be a fit ground to lay gold upon. Certainly there is a sweet complacency in an
humble and spiritual heart, to be vile in its own eyes. But especially the
fruit of it is joy, and great joy. John 16.21.
A woman when she is in travail has sorrow, because her hour is come; but as
soon as she is delivered of her Child, she remembers no more the anguish for
joy that a man is born into the World; 22.
and ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.

2. The Spirit does not only discover, but heal the corruptions of the soul,
and there is no comfort, to the comfort of a saved and cured man; the lame man
that was restored by Peter, expressed the abundant exaltation of his heart, by
leaping and praising God, Act. 3.8. and for this cause the Spirit is called the
Oil of gladness, because by that healing virtue that is in him he makes glad
the hearts of men.

3. The Spirit does not only heal, but renew and revive again; when an eye is
smitten with a sword, there is a double mischief, a wound made, and a faculty
perished; and here, though a Surgeon can heal the wound, yet he can never
restore the faculty, because total privations admit no regress, or recovery.
But the spirit does not only heal, and repair, but renew and re-edifie the
spirits of men; as he heals that which was torn, and binds up that which
was broken, so he reviveth and raises up that which was dead before, Hos.
6.1.2. And this the Apostle calls, the renovation of the Spirit, Tit. 3.5. Now
this renovation must needs be matter of great joy, for so the Lord comforts his
afflicted people; O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, Isa. 54.11, 12.
and not comforted; behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay
thy foundations with Sapphires, and I will make thy windows of Agates; and thy
gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. The meaning is,
that all must be new, and new built up as for a goodly, costly, and stately
structure.

4. The spirit does not only renew, and set the frame of the heart aright, and
then leave it to it self, but being thus restored he abides with it to
preserve and support it, and to make it victorious against all tempests and
batteries; and this further multiplyeth the joy and comfort of the heart;
victory is ever the ground of joy, Isa. 9.3.
They joy before thee, -- as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. And the
spirit of God is a victorious spirit. A bruised reed shall he not break, and
smoking flax shall he not quench, Mat. 12.20.
till he send forth judgment unto victory.

5. The spirit does not only preserve the heart which he has renewed, but he
makes it fruitful and abundant in the work of the Lord. And fruitfulness is a
ground of comfort, Sing O barren, thou that did not bear, break forth into
singing, Isa. 54.1.
and cry aloud thou that did not travail with Child; for more are the
Children of the desolate than the Children of the married Wife, says the Lord.

6. The Spirit does not only make the heart fruitful, but gives it the hansel
and earnest of its inheritance, and thereby it begets a lively hope, an earnest
expectation, a confident attendance upon the promises, and an unspeakable peace
and comfort thereupon. Oh when I feel a drop of heavens Joy shed abroad into my
soul by the Holy Ghost, and that I look upon this as a taste of glory, and a
forerunner of happiness, how should I but rejoice with joy unspeakable? in all
these respects the Spirit is our Comforter; and this is another reason why the
Holy Ghost is sent, I will not leave you comfortless, says Christ, no, no; for
I will come unto you by my spirit.

Ephesians. 4.30.
7. That the Holy Ghost might according his Office, seal us unto the day of
redemption. By sealing, is meant some work of the Spirit, by which he assur^s a
believer that he is Gods: it is all one with the spirits witnessing; only under
that notion, I shall speak of it another time.

But all the question is, what is that work of the spirit by which he assures;
I answer, this work is many-fold. As --

1. There is a reflex work of faith, and this is the work of the Spirit too,
assuring our souls of our good estate to Godward, 1 John 5.10.
and Christ-ward, He that believes has the witness in himself; he carries in
his heart the Counterpane of all the promises, this is the first seal, or (if
you will) the first degree of the Spirits sealing; the first discovery of our
election is manifested to us in our believing, as many (says the Text) as were
ordained to eternal life believed. Acts 13.48.


2. There is a work of sanctifying grace upon the heart, and this is a seal of
the Spirit also; 2 Timothy 2.19.
for whom the Spirit sanctifies, he saves. The Lord knows who are his,
says the Apostle, ay, but how should we know it? why, by this seal; as it
follows, Let every one that Names the Name of the Lord depart from iniquity;
none are children of God by adoption, but those that are Children also by
regeneration; none are heirs of Heaven, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.
but they are new born to it; Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ who has begotten us anew -- to an inheritance immortal. This seal of
sanctification leaves upon the soul the likeness of Jesus Christ, even grace
for grace.

3. There is a work of assisting, exciting, quickening grace, or of Gods
gracious concourse with that habitual grace which he has wrought in his
people: now this is various according to the good pleasure of his will; the
Spirit is more mig^^ly present to some than to others, yea more to the same man
at some times, and in some conditions; sometimes the same Christian is as a
burning and shining light, sometimes as a smoking flax; John 3.8.
The spirit blows how it lists; sometimes he fills the soul with fuller
gales, sometimes again she is becalmed; a man has more of the Spirit at one
time than another: now when the Spirit comes in thus by exciting, quickening,
stirring, and inabling us to act; so that we can say, Jer. 20.9.
as sometime the Prophet said, It was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in
my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and could not stay; why then the
spirit seals, and gives assurance to our souls that we are his.

4. There is a work of shining upon, or inlightning those graces which the
Spirit plants in us, and helps us to exercise; this seals to the purpose; and
of this it is that the Apostle speaks. 1 Cor. 2.12.
We have received not the spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God,
that we may know the things that are freely given us of God. The things given
to us may be freely received by us, and yet the receipt of them not known to us;
therefore the spirit for our further consolation does (as it were) put his hand
and seal to our receipts; he shines upon our graces, or he enlightens our
graces, whereby we may know we believe, and know that we live. Indeed this is
rare with Gods own People, sometimes (notwithstanding this seal) we may be in
such a state as Paul and his company were in the ship, Acts 27.20.
When they saw neither Sun nor Star for many days together; so it may be that
for a time we may see neither Sun nor Star, neither light in God's countenance;
nor light in our souls; no grace issuing from God, no grace carrying the soul
to God; yet in this dark condition, if we do as Paul and his company did (i.e.)
if we cast anchor even in the dark night of temptation, and pray still for day,
God will appear, and all shall clear up; we shall at last see light without,
and see light within, surely the day star will arise in our hearts.

5. There is a work of joy and comfort; and this is a super-added seal of the
Spirit; the works of the spirit you may see are of a double kind; either in us
by imprinting sanctifying grace, or upon us by shining on our souls, and by
sweet feeling of joy; habitual grace, or sanctifying grace is more constant,
and always like it self; but this work of comfort and joy is of the nature of
such privileges as God vouchsafes at one time and not at another; and hence
it is that a Christian may have grace and a Christian may know himself to be in
the state of grace, and yet in regard of comfort God may be gone. Thus it was
with Job, he knew his redeemer lived, and he resolved to trust in him though he
killed him; he knew he was no hypocrite, he knew his graces were true;
notwithstanding all the objections and imputations of his friends, they could
not dispute him out of his sincerity, My righteousness I hold fast, Job. 27.6.
and will not let it go; yet for the present he saw no light from heaven, but
he was in a sore and afflicted condition, till it pleased the Lord to reveal
himself in special favor unto him. Now this work of joy usually comes not till
after faith; and many experiences of Gods love, and much waiting upon God.
These are the several works of the spirits sealing.

But why is it that we can neither actually believe, nor can know that we
believe, nor can enjoy peace and joy in believing, without a fresh and new act
of the Spirit?

I answer, because the whole carriage of a soul to heaven is above nature,
where the Spirit makes a stand, we stand, and can go no farther; without the
help of the Spirit we can neither make promises, nor conclude for our selves;
it is the spirit that sanctifies, and witnesses, and seals our souls unto the
day of redemption. Many other Reasons may be rendered, but I shall speak of them
in the end of the spirits mission.

Thus far we have propounded the object, viz. the Ascension of Christ, the
session of Christ at God's right hand, and Christ's mission of the holy Ghost;
our next work is to direct you how to look unto Jesus in these respects. CHAP.
II.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus as carrying on the great work of our salvation in
his Ascension, Session, and Mission of the Spirit.
1. LET us know Jesus carrying on the great work of our salvation for us in his
Ascension into Heaven, in his Session at God's right hand, and in his mission
of the Holy Ghost; these are points of great use, if these transactions had not
been, where had we been? these are points of highest speculation, if these
transactions had not been, where had Christ been? after his humiliation, herein
lay the exaltation of his glorious Person, he was exalted above the Earth,
above the Clouds, above the Stars, above the Heavens, above the Heavens of
Heavens; O the glorious Majesty of our King Jesus, as sitting down at God's
right hand! our salvation is the greatest mystery that ever was, it being made
up of the various workings of the glory of God; for us men, and for our
salvation Christ was incarnate, and came down from Heaven, and for us men and
for our salvation Christ was exalted and went up into Heaven. Here is an object
of admiration indeed, the very Angels at the sight of it stood admiring and
adoring; it took up their heart, astonished their understanding; surely it was
the blessedst sight that ever the Angels did, or could behold; come then, and O
my soul do thou take a view of that which they admire, the design is not so
principally concerning Angels, as thy self; they are in it only as afar off,
and in general; but it concerns thee in special and particular; and therefore
study close this Argument, and know it for thy self. Study first the Ascension
of Christ, how, and whether, and why he ascended. 2. Study the Session of
Christ at God's right hand; O the mines, the riches of that spiritual heavenly
knowledge! 3. Study the mission of the Holy Ghost; not a circumstance in it, but
deserves thy Study; worlds of wealth (ten thousand times better than Gold or
Silver, or Precious Stones, may be found in the diggings of these mines; have
not many Students beat out their brains on lesser subjects? what endeavors
have there been to dive into the secrets of Nature? what volumes have been
written of Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics? and is not this subject
Christ? is not every of these subjects, Christ's Ascension, Christ's Mission of
the holy spirit of more worth, and value, and benefit than all those? come
study that piece of the Bible wherein these are written, there is not a line or
expression of Christ in the Scripture, but it is matter enough for a whole Age
to comment on; thou need not to leave old principles for new discoveries,
for in these very particulars thou might find successive sweetness unto all
eternity.

SET. II. Of considering Jesus in that respect.
2. LEt us consider Jesus, carrying on this work of our salvation for us in
these particulars. We must not only study to know these things, but we must
meditate on them till they come down from our heads to our hearts. Meditation
is the poize that sets all the wheels within a going; it were to small purpose
to bid us, desire, hope, believe, love, joy, etc. if first we did not meditate:
in meditation it is that the understanding works, that the will is inclined to
follow, that devotion is refreshed, that says is increased, hope established,
love kindled; and therefore begin here O my soul; it is a due consideration
that gives both life, and light, and motion to thy actings in all proceedings.

And to take them in order. --

1. Consider of Christ's Ascension into Heaven. Methinks souls should put
themselves into the condition of the Disciples, Acts 1.10.
When they looked steadfastly toward heaven as Christ went up; What, shall he
ascend, and shall not we in our contemplations follow after him? gaze, O my
soul, on this wonderful object, thou need not fear any check from God or
Angel, so that thy contemplation be spiritual and divine. No sooner had Christ
finished his work of redemption here on earth, but on the Mount called Olivet
he assembles with his Disciples, where having given them commands, he begins to
mount; and being a little lifted up into the Air, presently a Cloud receives
him into her lap, Herein is a clear demonstration of his Godhead; Clouds are
usually in Scriptures put for the House, or Temple, or Receptacle of God
himself. How often is it said that The glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud?
Exodus 16.10. -- 19.9.-24.16.-34.5. Isa. 19.1. psalm. 104.3.
And that He came to Moses in a thick cloud? and that he called unto Moses out
of the midst of the cloud? and that the Lord descended in the cloud? Is not the
Cloud God's own Chariot; Behold the Lord rides on a swift cloud; -- and O Lord
my God thou art very great, says David; great indeed, and he proves it thus,
Who makes the clouds his Chariot. Jesus Christ in his ascension to heaven
enters by the way into a cloud; this was his chariot, led by thousands and ten
thousands of his Angels. psalm. 68.17, 18
The Chariots of God are Twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, the Lord is
among them in Sinai in the holy place, thou have ascended on high, thou have
led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men. Some are of opinion,
that not only thousands of Angels led this chariot, but that many of the Saints
which slept, and rose with Christ at his resurrection, now ascended with him,
and compassed about this glorious cloud; English Annotations on Ephesians. 4.8.
whence they give this for the meaning of the text, that when he went up
through the air, and ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, that is, he
led a certain number of captives, namely the Saints that were long held in
captivity of death, whose bodies arose at Christ's resurrection, and now they
accompanied Christ at his triumphant march into heaven. However he was
attended, be not too curious (O my soul in this) the bright cloud that covered
his body discovered his Divinity; and therefore here is thy duty, to look
steadfastly toward heaven, and to worship him in his ascension up into heaven;
O admire and adore! --

But stay not thy contemplation in the cloud, he ascends yet higher, through
the Air, and through the Clouds, and through that sphere, or element of fire,
and through those Orbs of the Moon, Mercury, Mars; of the Sun, Jupiter, Venus
Saturn; and through that azure Heaven of fixed Stars, and through that first
moveable, and through those condence and solid waters of the Christaline
Heaven; nor stood he still till he came to those doors and gates of the
Empyreal Heaven, called The heaven of heavens; in all this triumphant glorious
march some tell us of an heavenly harmony made by those Choristers of Heaven,
Cypr. in Sermon. Ascens. Psalm. 4.5.
the blessed Angels; Some going before, and some going after, they chant his
praises, and sing Hallelujahs: and that is the meaning of the Psalmist, God is
gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet. In this meditation
pass not over thy duty, which immediately follows, Sing praises unto God; Ver.
6. Psalm. 68.^.
sing praises; sing praises unto our King, sing praises. -- Sing unto God, sing
praises to his Name, extol him that rides upon the heavens, by the Name ^ah,
and rejoice before him. Thou have great cause, O my soul, to praise him, and to
rejoice before him, especially if thou considerest that Christ ascended not for
himself, but also for thee; it is God in our nature that is gone up to heaven,
whatever God acted on the person of Christ, that he did as in thy behalf, and
he means to act the very same on thee; Christ as a public person ascended up
to heaven; thy interest is in this very ascension of Jesus Christ; and
therefore do thou consider thy Head as soaring up? O let every Member praise
his Name, let thy Tongue (called thy glory) glory in this, and trumpet out his
praises, that in respect of thy duty it may be verified, Christ is gone up with
a shout, the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet.

And yet stay not by the way, but consider further; Christ being now arrived at
Heavens doors, those heavenly spirits that accompanied him began to say, Psalm.
24.7.
Lift up your heads O ye gates, even lift up your selves, yea everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in! to whom some of the Angels that
were within, not ignorant of his person, but admiring his majesty and Glory,
said again, Who is the King of Glory? and then they answered, The Lord strong
and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle; Ver. 8. Rev. 21.12.
and thereupon those Twelve gates of the Holy City, of new Jerusalem, opened of
their own accord, and Jesus Christ with all his ministering Spirits entered in. O
my soul, how should this heighten thy joy, and enlarge thy comforts, in that
Christ is now received up into glory? every sight of Christ is glorious, and in
every sight thou should wait on the Lord Jesus Christ for some glorious
manifestations of himself. Come, live up to the rate of this great mystery;
view Christ as entering into glory, and thou will find the same sparkles of
glory on thy heart: O this sight is a transforming sight, We all with open face
beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.
even as by the spirit of the Lord.

2. Consider of Christ's Session at God's right hand; no sooner was Christ
entered into Heaven, but he is brought before his heavenly Father; and herein
was the vision accomplished, I saw in the night visions, Dan. 7.13, 14.
and behold one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to
the ancient of days and they brought him near before him, and there was given
him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom. This is that we call his Session at
God's right hand; a dominion was given him above all creatures, yea a dominion
above the Hierarchy of all the Angels: O the glory of Christ at his first
entrance into glory! immediately all the Angels fell down and worshipped him;
immediately his Father welcomed him with the highest grace that ever yet was
shown. Psalm. 110.1.
Come (said he) sit thou at my ri^ht hand until I make thy enemies thy
footstool. One sweetly observes, that usually in the several parts of the
performance of Christ's office, either God is brought in as speaking to Christ,
or Christ is brought in as speaking to his Father; thus when he chose him first
to be our Mediator, God speaks to Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchizedech; and when Christ came to take upon him our nature, Heb.
10.7. Psalm 22.1.
he spoke to his Father, Lo I come to do thy will, a body have thou prepared
for me. Again when Christ hung on the Cross, he spakes to his Father, Acts
13.33. Heb. 1.13.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me? but when Christ rose again from the
dead, God spoke to him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; and
when Christ ascended into heaven, God spoke to him. Son, sit thou down at my
right hand. This was the highest point of Christ, elevated; now was the
prophecy accomplished, He shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high.
The Caldee Paraphrast reads it thus, He shall be exalted above Abraham, Isa.
52.13.
he shall be extolled more than Moses, he shall be very high above the highest
Cherubin, and Saraphin; O my soul meditate on this Session of Christ at God's
right hand, and thence draw down some virtue and sweetness into thy self: what?
was Christ exalted? had he a name given him above every name? walk then as
becomes those that have so glorious a Head: O defile not that nature which in
thy Christ was so highly honored! 1 Cor. 6.15.
it was the Apostles arguing, Shall I take the Members of Christ and make them
the Members of an Harlot? so argue thou, shall I take the Nature of Christ,
that Nature which he in his Person has so highly glorified, and make it in my
Person the Nature of a Devil? O my soul walk worthy of such a Lord, unto all
well-pleasing; since now he is in his Throne at God's right hand, O kiss the
Son! honor the Son with divine worship, reverence, and submission; submit
cheerfully and willingly to the Scepter of his Word, bow to his Name, as it is
written, At the Name, the Person, the Power, the Scepter of Jesus Christ, ^^^l.
2.10.
every knee should bow.

3. Consider of the Mission of the holy Ghost: no sooner is Christ inaugurated
in his Throne, Ephesians. 4.8. John 4.10.
but he scatters his coin, and gives gifts; When he ascended on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. He gave gifts, or the gift of
gifts, the gift of the holy Ghost; If thou knew the gift of God, said Christ
to the Samaritan woman; John 7.39.
that gift was the water of Life, and that water of life was the spirit, as
John, who knew best his mind, gave the interpretation, This speak he of the
spirit. O my soul consider of this princely gift of Christ! such a gift was
never before, but when God gave his Son; God so loved the World, that he gave
his Son; and Christ so loved the world, that he gave his spirit; but O my soul
consider especially to whom this Spirit was given; Isa. 9.6. Romans 5.5.
the application of the gift is the very soul of thy meditation; Unto us a Son
is given, said the Prophet; and Unto us the holy Ghost is given, says the
Apostle: And yet above all, consider the reasons of this gift in reference to
thy self; was it not to make thee a Temple and Receptacle of the holy Ghost;
stand a while on this! admire O my soul, at the condescending, glorious, and
unspeakable love of Christ in this! it was infinite love to come down into our
nature when he was incarnate; but this is more, to come down into thy heart by
his holy Spirit; he came near to us then, but as if that were not near enough,
he comes nearer now; for now he unites himself unto thy person, now he comes
and dwells in thy soul by his holy spirit: O my soul, thou have many in-comes
of the world, though many are above thee, yet many are below thee; but Oh what
little contentment have thou in these outward things? Come! here is that which
will infinitely content thy vast desires; Christ is in thee, realy in thee, by
his Spirit; will not this content the utmost capacity of an heart? surely he is
too covetous whom God himself cannot suffice; if thou have Christ, thou have
all things; and if thou have the spirit of Christ, thou have Christ himself,
not notionally, not by the habit of grace only, but really, essentially,
substantially by his Spirit; it is the very spirit of Christ, the spirit it
self, the holy Ghost it self in his own person that is united to thee, and
dwells in thee; nor only comes he in person, but he brings along with him all
his Train; has he not endowed thee with some gifts? has he not divided a
portion and measure to thee in thy place and calling? take notice, observe it,
and be thankful, if thou have a gift of prayer, of prophecy, of wisdom, of
knowledge, it comes and flows from this holy Spirit; Unto every one of us is
given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7. 1 Cor.
12.11.
Or according to the measure of the spirit; who is the gift of Christ. And all
these works that one and the selfsame spirit, dividing to every man severally
as he will. But besides a gift, has he not endowed thee with his grace? has
he not planted in thy soul the habit, the power, the seed, the spring, the
principle of grace? have thou not felt sometimes the excitings, quickenings,
stirrings of the spirit of God, commanding thy faith, love, zeal, and other
graces to be in exercise? has he not many a time at some dead lift, at some
mighty straight, at some prevailing temptation, when thou wast even ready to
yield to Satan, Heb. 4.16.
come in as betwixt the bridge and water, and given thee grace to help in time
of need? O the sweet in-comes of the Spirit of God! as he is an holy Spirit, so
he makes holy hearts; and if there be any holiness in thy heart, what is it but
an emanation, influence, effect of the Spirit of God? if ever thou had any
flowings of exciting, quickening grace, say, This is above nature, above flesh
and blood, it comes from the holy and blessed Spirit of God. Some other effects
thou may consider of, as of the comforts of the spirit; what? have thou not
sometimes felt the joys unspeakable and full of glory? have thou not sometimes
known a mornings joy after a nights sorrow? an healing of thy broken heart? a
reviving of thy dead Spirit? a drop of heavens joy given thee as the hansel or
earnest of thine inheritance? why all these are but the workings of the
promised comforter: And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter that he may abide with you for ever. John 14.16.
Another effect is the seal of the spirit; and what? have thou not sometimes
had the seal of the Spirit stamped on thee? I will not say this is absolutely
necessary, but have thou not sometimes been assured of thy salvation, by a
reflect act of faith, or by a work of grace habitual or actual? or by an
irradiation of the spirit on thy graces? sometimes the spirit is pleased to
shine with its bright, and glorious, and heavenly beams into our souls, and
then we are assured: hence the Apostle prays for the Ephesians. Ephesians. 1.17.18,
19.
That they might have the spirit of revelation? And to what end? That they
might know what is the hope of his calling; (i.e.) that they might know upon
what certain grounds and foundation their hopes were built; and hence the
Psalmist prays for himself, Psalm. 13.16.
Cause thy face to shine upon thy Servant: and again, God be merciful unto us
and bless us and cause his face to shine upon us. psalm 67.1.
Selah. If the spirit shine upon our graces, then it seals: O consider of this
shining-sealing work, and leave not till the Spirit dart in a spiritual light,
and give thee a revelation, knowledge, and persuasion of thy effectual calling.
Many other reasons are of the spirits mission, but amongst them all, consider O
my soul, and ponder on these few; think over Christ's Ascension, Session, and
Mission of the Spirit; but in every thought be serious, fruitful, and
particular; say, Christ is gone up into heaven for me, and he is sat down at
God 's right hand for me; and he has sent down his spirit into my heart. O
what workings would there be within, if thou were but lively and active in the
meditations of these several passages!

SECT. III. Of desiring after Jesus in that Respect.
3. LEt desire after Jesus carrying on the great work of our salvation for us
in these particulars: who seeing Christ to ascend into Heaven, would not be
glad to ascend up with with him? who seeing Christ to sit down at the right
hand of his Father, would not be glad to sit down with him? who seeing Christ
to scatter his gifts and spirit amongst his Saints, would not cry, Come holy
spirit; O Christ give me thy spirit, thou that give gifts unto me, come and
bestow those gifts on me! even upon me? The believing soul cannot hear of
Christ in any true discovery of his grace and glory, but it must needs send out
many breathings after him, Oh that Christ were mine! Oh that I had any interest
in this transaction! it is true, these transactions are past, but the virtue of
them continues still, and accordingly the virtue, power, and influence of these
transactions must be the object of our desires; now what is the virtue of
Christ's Ascension, but that we might ascend? and what the virtue of Christ's
Session, but that we might sit down with him in his Throne? and what the virtue
of the mission of his Spirit, but that we might partake of the holy Ghost? Oh
let these be the objects of our desires; come let us pant and breath after
these things. As --

1. Let us see Christ ascending, and so desire to ascend with him, when Christ
ascended it was not merely for himself, but also in our stead; he ascended as a
common person; as the high Priest ascending into the Holy of Holies, he carried
all the names of the Twelve Tribes on his breast; so Jesus Christ ascending
into heaven, he carried the names of all Believers in the world on his Breast,
thereby showing that they were likewise to come after him; in this case how
should we long after him, and cry after him, as Elisha after Elijah when he saw
him ascending. My Father, my father, 2 Kings 2.12. Isa. 14.14, 15.
the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof? How should we cry after him,
O my Lord and my God, see that my name be written in thy Breast, O that
vertually I may ascend with thee, and that really and bodily I may at last
ascend after thee! There are many can say in their heart, I will ascend above
the heights of the clouds, Psalm. 14.3, 4.
I will be like the most High: but the prophet tells us, Such shall be brought
down to hell, and to the sides of the Pit. O the desires, and eager pursuits of
men after ambition; what topping and advancing is there, of one over another?
in the mean time the Psalmist's Question is quite forgotten, Who shall ascend
into the hill of the Lord? Isa. 14.12.
he that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto
vanity. Down, O my soul, with thy top and top gallant; strike sail to God and
Christ; know that God resists the proud; How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Lucifer, son of the morning? even he that would exalt his Throne above the
stars of God, is brought down to hell: Come, come! a desire after Christ and
his Ascension is the way to Heaven; if thou will ascend after Christ, set thy
desires upon Christ; if thou will arrive at true glory, breath after Christ
ascending up into his glory; let others ascend up into their heaven upon earth,
but O my soul desire thy interest in Christ's Ascension into the Heaven of
Heavens. O when will it once be that by the virtue of Christ's Ascension I
shall ascend! is Christ gone up, and am I yet behind? is my Head, my Husband,
my Lord in Heaven, and am I a poor member of his body grovelling here on earth?
what, is Christ gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet? are
all the Angels sounding his praise, and bidding him welcome into glory? and am
I sinning here on earth, and by my sins crucifying again and again the Lord of
glory? O that I might ascend with Christ! O that I were now on the wing toward
heaven! Oh what is it that hinders my ascension but this clog of clay? so long
as this body remains a natural body I cannot ascend; oh therefore that the
change were come! Oh that this natural body were spiritual that this
corruptible had put on incorruption, and this mortal had put on immortality!
then could I move upwards as well as downwards; such is the supernatural
property of a glorified body, that it ascends or descends with equal case; or
if this be not possible for my present condition, if this body if mine must
first descend before it ascend, if it must down into the grave, before it go up
into glory: why yet, Oh that my better part were on the wing! Oh that my soul
were mounting upwards! Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver my soul
from this body of death? or if the union be so strong for a while, that neither
soul nor body can really or substantially ascend, Phil. 1.23.
yet O that I were still ascending in a spiritual way! O that my affections
were still on things above, and not on things beneath! yea, I could wish a
nearer union even by a dissolution; why, Christ is ascended, and I would fain
be where Christ is, though it cost me dear; I desire to be dissolved, I desire
to depart, and to be with Christ, which is for better.

2. Let us see Christ sitting down at the right hand of God, and so desire to
sit with him: when Christ sat down, it was not in his own pure Personal right
simply, as it is his inheritance, Ephesians. 2.5, 6.
but with relation to his Saints and Members; He has quickened us together
wtth Christ, and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. I confess Christ's sitting at God's right hand
(as taken for the sublimity of his power) is not communicable unto us, for that
is Christ's own prerogative; to which of the Angels said he at any time, Heb.
1.13.
Sit on my right hand? Yet his sitting in heaven as it is indefinitely
expressed, is in some sort communicable unto us, for he sat down as a common
person, thereby showing that we were to sit down with him in our proportion,
Rev. 3.21.
Him that overcomes, I will grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Christ sits in his
Fathers Throne, and we sit in Christ's Throne; Christ sits at the right hand of
God, and w^ sit at the right hand of Christ: Oh how desirable is this? The
Mother of Zebedees Children understood this mystery very darkly, Mat. 20.21,
22, 23.
yet worshipping Jesus, she desired a certain thing of him; what thing? why,
grant (says she) that these my two Sons may sit the one at thy right hand, and
the other on thy left hand in thy Kingdom: Christ blamed them, because they
know not what thy asked, and yet he tells them, that to sit on his right hand,
and on his left is given to them for whom it is prepared of his Father. O my
soul desire after this, for this is worthy of thy desire: this is a great
thing, an high exaltation, another manner of honor than any that this world
affords; Courtiers desire no more but to sit at the Princes right hand; but O
the virtue of Christ's Session, that thereby thou should sit at the right
hand of God! this is the very height and excellency of heavens glory; only take
heed of apprehending it after a carnal and natural way; this very exaltation
consists in the Image of God, and communion with God; it is the spiritual part,
and power, and glory of heaven: if any thing be desirable above another, surely
this above all; Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
what? that Christ should be exalted above all Principalities, and Powers, and
mights, and dominions, and every thing that is named in this world, and in the
other? what? that Christ should sit down in his Fathers Throne, Ephesians. 4.10.
in the highest part of Heaven, far above all heavens? and that I a poor worm,
dust and ashes should sit with him in Heaven, should be one with him in glory,
should be as near him in honor and happiness, as such a poor creature is
possibly capable of? Oh how should I but hunger and thirst after this? if I
might have a wish, I would not wish low things: why, this is the very top, and
height and quintessence of Heaven, Christ in his Fathers Throne, and I in
Christ's Throne; in desiring this I desire all, and therefore whatever thou
give or denyest, Lord give me this, and I have enough for ever.

3. Let us see Christ's mission of his holy spirit, and so desire a share in
that gift: we cannot expect to sit with Christ, but we must first have the
spirit of Christ; and therefore as we would have that, let us desire after
this. The greatest gift we can expect in this world is the spirit of Christ.
Consider O my soul, all things here below are either temporal or spiritual
things; and of things spiritual this is the sum, the in-dwelling of the Spirit.
O Lord give me thy self, and that contains all gifts; O give me the spirit,
Psalm. 4.6.
and thou can not but with him give me all things; there be many that say
(says the Psalmist) Who will show us any good? earthly things are desired of
many; but is any thing on earth to be compared with this gift from heaven? if
it were only the beauty of holiness, it were certainly a most desirable thing;
if we rightly understand it, holiness (though but one effect of the spirit) is
a most rare thing; holiness fills the soul with joy, peace, quietness,
assurance; holiness entertains the soul with feasts of fat things and of
refined wines; holiness carries the soul into the banqueting house of apples
and flaggons; holiness gives the soul a dear communion with God and Christ;
holiness brings the soul into a sight of Christ, an access to him, a boldness
in his presence; holiness admits the soul into the most intimate conferences
with Jesus Christ in his bedchamber, in his galleries of love, and that which
is an argument of more beauty than all the creatures in the world have besides;
holiness attracts the eye, and heart, and longings, and ravishments, the tender
compassions, and everlasting delights of the Lord Jesus; and if holiness be
thus lovely, Oh what is the holy spirit it self? what is the Rise, the Spring,
the Fountain of holiness? what? O my soul, that not only grace, but the spirit
of Christ should dwell in thy spirit? that thou should be God's building, and
that not as the rest of the world is, for his creatures to inhabit; 1 Cor. 3.9.
2 Cor. 6.16. Cant. 7.5.
but as a Temple for himself to dwell in, as a Gallery for himself to walk in?
Oh what longings! Oh what pantings and gaspings! Oh what faintings and
swoonings should there be in thy spirit after this Spirit! Come holy spirit, O
come and dwell in my soul! I know thou will make the place of thy feet
glorious; if I have but thy presence, I shall be all glorious within: O come,
come holy Spirit!

SECT. IV. Of hoping on Jesus in that respect.
4. LEt us hope in Jesus, carrying on the great work of our salvation for us in
these particulars; thus was the Apostles Prayer, Romans 15.13.
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and Peace in believing; that ye may
abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost; could we abound in hope
that Christ's Ascension, Session, and Mission of his Spirit did belong to us,
we should never be ashamed; Hope makes not ashamed. Romans 5.5.
O then let us look to our hope, and be sure that it be of the right stamp!
which in reference to every of these passages we may examine thus. As --

1. If Christ's Ascension be mine, then am I ascended with Christ: I mean not
in respect of any bodily Ascension, for that must not be until the last day;
nor in respect of any essential, substantial soul-ascension, for that must not
be before the separation of soul and body at our deaths-day: but in respect of
our spiritual ascension, for so we may ascend into heaven by faith and love;
though for the present we are on earth; Col. 3.1, 2.
if ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God; set your affections on things above, and not
on things on the earth. If Christ our Head be ascended, then we that are his
Members must needs follow after him in our affections: Christ tells us, Where
our treasure is, there will our hearts be also. Mat. 6.21.
If Christ our Treasure be ascended into heaven, our loves, our affections, our
hearts will follow after him: and if our hearts be in heaven, no question but
we our selves both souls and bodies shall at last ascend; when Christ ascended,
we ascended virtually with him, now we ascend spiritually, and at last we shall
ascend bodily; for he that ascended shall descend, and then we shall meet him
in the air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord. 1 These. 4.17.
In the mean time to maintain our hope, let us ascend daily by faith and love;
and this is our character, that Christ's Ascension is truly ours.

2. If Christ's Session be mine, then am I set down with Christ in heavenly
places; I mean not bodily, but by faith, which faith makes it as sure to my
soul as if I had a foot already in heaven; Faith is the substance of things
hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the evidence of things not seen. By faith I now sit in heavenly places, in
that I verily believe I shall do it one day; my hope is now certain, in that I
am as sure of that I look for, as I am of that I have already received; it is
the common objection, We see it not. As the Apostle said of Christ, We see not
yet all things put under him; but he presently answers, We see Jesus who was
made a little lower than the Angels, crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2.8, 9.
and so we may be sure the thing is as good as done; for if he be above, all
must come under; in like manner we see not our selves in present possession,
but we see Christ crowned, and our selves sitting with him virtually; and
therefore at last we shall see our selves actually crowned, and sitting
together with Christ in heavenly places. In the mean time faith takes
possession of the Kingdom of Heaven; says makes the soul even now to converse
with God, 1 Timothy 6.19.
and Christ, and Saints and Angels; Faith lays hold upon eternal life, it puts
the soul as it were into heaven, and sets it down at the right hand of Christ;
and this is our character, that Christ's Session is truly ours.

3. if Christ's spirit be mine, and sent to me, then have I both the person, and
train of the spirit of Christ; it is the having the spirit, and the working of
the spirit in me, that is my evidence of the Spirits mission; I look upon this
as the greatest Question, and the weightiest, and most important case of
conscience that can be propounded or known of us; viz. Whether the spirit of
Christ does reside in us? or whether we have a well-grounded hope to say of our
selves that we have the in-dwelling of the spirit of God? Know ye not that ye
are the Temple of God (says the Apostle) and that the spirit of God dwells
in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. 1 Cor. 6.19.
And again, Know ye not that your bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost? In
this Question he seems to put it out of Question, that true Christians should
know, and in right temper do know that the spirit of God dwells in them; if we
know not this, we cannot know that we have any part in Christ; because the holy
spirit is the principal bond of our union betwixt Christ and us; if we know not
this, we cannot know that we are justified, for we have nothing to do with
Christ's Righteousness, by which we are justified, until by our spiritual
union Christ is made ours; if we know not this, we cannot know we are the
adopted Children of God, for it is the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15.
whereby we cry in our hearts, Abba Father: if we know not this, we cannot know
that we are sanctified, for it is the spirit which is the beginner and
perfecter of our sanctification; if we know not this, we cannot know that our
prayers are heard, for it is the spirit that helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26.
and that makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered; if
we know not this, we cannot know whether we are in error or truth; or whether
our religion which we profess be true or false, for it is the spirit who
enlightens us, and teaches us, and leads us into all truth; if we know not
this, we cannot know our own comforts, for he is the only true Comforter, from
whom all sound comfort springs. Come then and put we our selves to the trial;
Let us search whether we have the spirit of Christ, which we may resolve (if we
will not deal deceitfully with our own hearts) by these following signs. --

1. The Spirit of Christ is the spirit of illumination; if he dwell in us he
will enlighten our eyes, reveal to us those saving truths of God as they are in
Jesus; But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, John 14.6. 1 John 2.20. v. 27.
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. -- But ye
have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all things. -- But the anointing
which ye have received of him abides in you and ye need not that any man teach
you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things; and hence it is that
this holy spirit is called the Spirit of wisdom, Ephesians. 1.17.
and revelation in the knowledge of God.

2. The Spirit of Christ is the spirit of adoption; it brings our souls into
that blessed estate that we are the Children of God: Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6.
Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear; but we have received
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. And because ye are sons,
God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father.

Zach. 12.10. Romans 8.16.
3. The spirit of Christ is a spirit of prayer. I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace, and of
supplication, -- Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. It is not said that
the spirit teaches us words, and fluent phrases, but it teaches us to pray in
the heart and spirit with sighs and groans.

4. The spirit of Christ is a spirit of sanctification; the Apostle having told
the Corinthians that they had been notorious sinners, 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans 1.4.
says further, that they were washed and sanctified by the spirit of God.
Hence the holy spirit is called The spirit of holiness; because he makes us
holy who were in our selves corrupt and sinful. If we have thi^ spirit, it
inclines our hearts to the things above, it mortifies our lusts, it brings us
nearer unto God: the spirit therefore that is impure and encourages men in
sin, and cries up carnal Liberty, is certainly none of the spirit of Christ;
and by this one sign many carnal pretenders of our times may be justly
convicted.

5. The Spirit of Christ is a spirit of love. God is love, and he that dwells
in love, dwells in God, 1 John 4.16. Gal. 5.22.
and God in him; as the spirit is love, so it begets love in the hearts of his
people; The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. All these graces are the
fruits of the spirit, but the first grace in the link is love: by his spirit we
are taught to love God, not only for his benefits, but in respect of his
nature; for his goodness, mercy, justice, holiness, and all other his saving
attributes; by his spirit we are taught to love any thing that has but the
stamp and image of God upon it: but as touching brotherly love, 1 These. 4.2.
ye need not that I write unto you, for ye your selves are taught of God to
love one another; the most of the Heretical spirits of these times do hereby
show that they have not the Spirit, their very religion lies in railing at
ministers, and reproaching those that are not in their way; this is far from
the Spirit of love that is in God's Children; certainly where there is malice,
hatred, strife, bitter-envyings, raylings, revilings, for such kind of persons
to lay claim to the Spirit of unity, it is a piece of impudent vanity, and a
false suggestion from their own corrupt erring spirit, or from the spirit of
error himself, who is an hater, reviler, and the accuser of the brethren.

6. The Spirit of Christ is a leading Spirit; Romans 8.14.
As many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of God. But what is
this leading of the Spirit? I Answer --

1. It is a drawing of the soul Christ-ward; Cant. 1.4.
Draw me (says the Spouse) and we will run after thee. There must be a drawing
of the soul in every duty to Jesus Christ; I say to Jesus Christ; for a man may
be furnished with eminent gifts, and with suitable assistance in the laying out
of those gifts from the Spirit, and yet he may be without the leadings of the
spirit; gifts exercised cannot suppress corruptions in a man's own heart, and
hence they that used their gifts, are called workers of iniquity; Mat. 7.23.
Jer. 30.21.
gifts do not carry out the heart toward Christ, but graces do; I will cause
him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me, for who is this that engaged
his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord.

2. It is a giving liberty to the soul to walk in the ways of Christ. 2 Cor.
3.17.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; I mean not a liberty to
sin, but to duty, nor yet every liberty to duty; for a man may exercise himself
in the external part of all duties, and yet be without the leadings of the
spirit; but I mean such a liberty, as when a soul accounts it an high favor
from the Lord, if he will but use him in any services for himself, when it
finds more delectation in these, than in any other ways; Psalm. 119.34, 173,
174. Romans 7.22. Romans 8.2.
I have chosen the way of truth (says David) and therein is my delight. And I
delight in the law of God, after the inner man (says Paul) for the law of the
spirit of life in Jesus Christ, has made me free from the law of sin and death.

3. It is a corroberating, or strengthening of the soul against all those
impediments, that would hinder it in the ways of Christ; Isa. 63.11, 12, 13,
14.
Israel is said to be led by the spirit of the Lord; and how did he lead them,
but by dividing the waters before them, and by keeping them that they should
not stumble? many times God's holy ones are beset with temptations, they find
their hearts full of deadness, hardness, unbelief, and all manner of
distempers; now if at such a time the mountains have been made planes, if at
such a time corruptions have been born down, and their hearts have been let out
toward Christ, certainly these are the leadings of the spirit: Romans 8.13, 14.
If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live; for
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God: the particular
[for] argues mortification to appertain unto the leadings of the spirit. There
is in the Saints a constant opposition between the works of the flesh, and the
works of the spirit; Gal. 5.17, 18.
now when the works of the flesh are kept underneath and prevailed against,
then a soul enjoys the leadings of the spirit; I know such oppositions are
not in any but Saints; carnal men would wonder that any should complain for
want of strength unto duties, why, they can easily come up to them, and be in
the exercise of them; but alas! this arises either from Satan's not molesting
them in the performance of duty, because they look not beyond the external part
of it; or from their own insensibleness of the working of corruption, when yet
it does act: only a gracious heart finds that if it be not strengthened by a
Power beyond its own, it cannot act any grace, or perform any duty as
acceptable to God; and hence the Apostle prays, That they might be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man. Ephesians. 3.16.


4. It is an enabling of the soul to act in Gospel-duties for Gospel-ends; when
the spirit leads, the soul never aims at a self-advancement; it never looks at
its own name and glory, as they did, in Mat. 6.1, 5. but it eyes in all its
actings the mortification of corruption, and the attainment of communion with
God and Christ, and the increase of all Grace, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness,
self-denial, etc. or if it seek for outward mercies, it seeks them in a
subordination to these, and in a way of subserviency to the interest and
designs of Christ: in all things whether outwar^ or inward, it seeks the glory
of God, as the ultimate end. And in these particulars consists the leadings of
the spirit of Christ.

Romans 8.16. 1 John 5.10.
7. The spirit of Christ is a witnessing spirit. The spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit that we are the children of God: and every one that
believes has the witness within himself. But of this two questions. 1. What
is this witnessing work of the spirit? 2. How does the spirit thus witness? for
the first, I answer.

1. In general; witnessing is a giving in some evidence upon our knowledge how
the matter in question stands, that thereby others may be ascertained of the
truth of the thing: Deuteronomy. 19.15. John 8.17.
At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter be established; these
words Christ cited, and said, It is written in your Law, that the testimony of
two men is true; not but that it was certain in it self before, but that now by
the testim ny of two it is rendered certain unto those that question the same;
this is witnessing.

2. In special; The witnessing of the spirit is an Office of the spirit,
whereby it works the soul into a knowledge, persuasion, or conclusion of its
acceptance into favor with God in Christ. Now the spirit witnesses either
objectively, or efficiently.

1. Objectively; When it only affords such special operations as have an
aptitude to ascertain the soul, but do not ascertain, thus many a time the
Spirit comes and brings in such, and such ascertions or affirmations of our
adoption, as if they were but duly observed, might manifest the same, but we
overlook these evidences, we will not hear what the spirit speaks to us; John
3.11.
We speak that we know (says Christ) and testify that we have seen; but ye
receive not our witness: so may the spirit complain, I have testified to you
that which I know, I have said that ye were children of God, but ye have not
received my witness; doubtless it is a sinful neglect not to yield attention
unto the voice of the spirit; and yet the spirit in this way may be resisted.

2. Efficiently; and if the spirit witness thus, it cannot be resisted; in this
way the spirit causes the soul to conclude of its adoption by its speakings to
it: this is not only the assertions or affirmations of our adoption, but the
assurances of our souls that we are adopted. Romans 8.38. Job. 19.25. 1 John 3.24.
I am persuaded, says the Apostle, and I know that my Redeemer lives says
Job. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us. But --

2. How does the Spirit thus witness? I answer, 1. Immediately. 2. Mediately.

1. Concerning the immediate testimony of the Spirit there is some
controversy: Antinomians would have no other testimony but this; all other
evidences (say they) are deceiving evidences; or if not deceiving, yet to make
use of them it were but to light a candle to the Sun; for what are the graces
of the Spirit in comparison of the Spirits own testimony? and it may be the
running into this extreme has caused others absolutely to deny any such
testimony; or at least to say for these enthusiasms or inspirations, let them
boast of them that have them, w^ know no such thing. Methinks a middle betwixt
both these (as it is proved by others) is most consonant to truth; for neither
can I reject the graces of sanctification from being grounds of our assurance;
neither dare I deny but there is something of the work of the Spirits testimony
which is an immediate work. Let us h^ar what others say of it --

Certainly there is a work, wherein the spirit acts as in illumination; and
infusion of good motions into us, Ford of the Spirit.
wherein by a secret influence upon the heart he quiets and calms the troubled
soul concerning its condition by his own immediate power, without any grounds
from Scripture without, or graces within.

There is a threefold work of the spirit; first, to conveigh and plant grace in
the soul 2. To act and help us to exercise the graces which are planted there.
3. To shine upon and enlighten those graces: Caryl on Job chap. 10.
this last work the spirit fulfills two ways; first by arguments and
inferences, which is a mediate work. 2. By presence and influence which is an
immediate work; this the Apostle calls, witness-bearing; There are three that
bear witness in Earth, The spirit, and water, and blood; the spirit brings in
the witness of Water and Blood, which is his mediate work; but besides and
above these he gives a distinct witness of his own, which is his immediate
work, is in a way of peculiarity and transcendency called the witness of the
Spirit. -- As it is with the motions of the spirit, many a time the spirit
excites a man to such or such duties, by laying his hand immediately upon the
heart, and thereby inclining it to obey those motions; so in this case when a
poor soul sits in darkness, and sees no light, Boltons direct for a comfortable
walking with God.
sometimes upon a sudden it is (as it were) taken up into the third Heaven; and
this is in such away that though the spirit of a man really believe it, and is
immediately calmed by it, yet it cannot tell how it came to pass.

There is a Testimony of the spirit, which sometimes the spirit may suggest and
testify to the sanctified Conscience, with a secret, still, heart-ravishing
voice, thus, or in the like manner, Thou art the child of God; thou art in the
number of those that shall be savid; thou shall inherit everlasting life: and
that as certainly and comfortably, as if that Angel from Heaven should say to
thee, as he did to Daniel, greatly beloved. -- Mighty and remarkable was the
work of the spirit this way upon the heart of that noble Martyr, Robert Glover,
upon the first sight and representation of the stake, when he cried, he is
come, he is come. Such an immediate springing of the spirit was in the heart of
Master Pecocke, who after many days of extremest horror, professed, The joy
which he felt was incredible. Such an immediate work was upon the heart of
Mistress Brettergh who after the return of her beloved, suddenly cried out, How
wonderful! How wonderful! how wonderful are thy mercies O Lord! O the joys,
the joys, the joys that now I feel in my soul! we feel and acknowledge by
daily experience, that Satan does immediately inject, and shall not the blessed
spirit after his holy and heavenly manner immediately also suggest sometimes?

As there is in the eye, lumen innatum, a certain inbred light, Rutherford on
Joh. 12. P. 100.
to make the eye see lights and colors without; and as there is in the ear,
aer internus, a certain inbred found and air, to make it discern the sounds
that are without; so is there in a gracious heart, a new nature, an habitual
instinct of Heaven to discern the consolations of God's Spirit, immediately
testifying that we are the Sons of God; there are some secret and unexpressible
lineaments of the Fathers countenance in this child, that the renewed soul at
first blush knows and owns it. But for fear of mistakes, in this case observe
we these Rules.

1. That although the spirit may immediately testify without any express or
formal application of a word, yet he never testifies but according to the Word.
If a man that never felt sin a burden, that throws away all duties of
Religion, that never Prays, Reads, Hears, or Meditates, shall say that he is
filled with joy, Peace, and, the assurance of God's Word, it is certain the
holy Spirit is not the Author of this, because the promise of peace belongs to
none of this stamp; see Math. 11.28. Isa. 57.15. Mal. 5.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

2. That ordinarily the spirit brings in his testimony either in duty, or after
duty. I have seen his ways, and I will heal him; I will lead him also, Isa.
57.18, 19.
and restore comforts to him and to his mourners; I create the fruit of the
lips, peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the
Lord, and I will heal him. I know there may be a case of grievous temptations,
and at such a time the spirit of God may come in by a sudden irradiation, and
cheer the soul wonderfully, though it knows not how; yet usually the spirit
brings in his testimony either in duty, or not long after duty.

3. That such testimonies of the Spirit beget only an actual assurance during
the present exigency, or in order to some present design that God is working
thereby; these are extraordinary dainties, that God will not have us feed
constantly upon; a gleam of light in a dark winters night, when a man cannot
coast the Country, and discern his way by those marks which direct him at other
times; or as a lightning from a thunder-cloud, that comes just in the moment
when a man is stepping into a pit that would swallow him up; now a Traveller
will not depend always upon such guides, but rather he will choose to travel
by day; and learn out such way marks as may be standing assurances to him that
he is in the way. And therefore --

2. The spirit witnesses mediately; and that either without, or with
argumentation. But both from the Word.

1. Without argumentation, and that is when the spirit applies some suitable
word to the soul, and without more ado enables the soul to close with that
suitable word. As for instance, thou art burdened for sin, and thou have
prayed earnestly for pardon of sin, and even then a secret whisper of the
Spirit casts that word into thy heart, Hos. 14.4. Mat. 11.28.
I will heal thy backslidings, and love thee freely, or such a voice as that,
come un-unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Now this is a direct testimony; only I dare not leave it without a
caution. -- Some can relate extraordinary passages of providence attending the
coming in of such and such a word: as that they did not know there was any such
Scripture, nor did thy know where it was and yet in opening the Book, it was
the very first place their eye was cast upon; or they wanted a Book, and in the
use of some other means unexpectedly a word was spoken, or remembered, so pat to
the case, as if it had been a very message from Heaven: certainly the Spirits
hinting in of words thus, is very observable; yet a bare giving in of a word is
no warrant that it comes from the spir^^ unless the soul come up to some end
which the word it self poynteth at; there must not only be a word, but a
closing with the word, and improving of the word, for the ends it aymeth at, as
quickening, comforting, supporting, acting of some graces, or such like; and by
this we may know that the testimony is true, and proceeds from the Spirit of
God.

2. With argumentation, and that is when the Spirit brings in the testimony of
blood and water; I may call it a testimony of Faith, and other graces of the
Spirit written in our hearts, and brought out by the spirit in a way of
argument, as thus -- He that believes, has everlasting life; but I believe,
Ergo. The first proposition is the Gospel, and in this way it is the first work
of the spirit to open our eyes, for the understanding thereof. The second
proposition is thy case, or my case; and here the Spirit enlightens the soul to
see it self under that condition, but I believe. Indeed many times this is not
so easily done, and therefore the spirit does elicite and draw forth the soul
to an assent by a further evidence of argument, True (says the soul) he that
believes has everlasting life, but I am none of those believers, and therefore
what does this promise concern such an unbelieving wretch as I am? In this case
now the Spirits work is longer, or shorter, even as he pleases; if it will be
no better, the Spirit is fain to produce some other proofs of Scripture, as
evidence faith in the subject in whom it is; such as purifying the heart, love
to God, his ways, his people, etc. and possibly it goes further yet, and
proves those graces to be in the soul by further marks. -- I know some object,
if the spirit say, thou art a believer, because thou have love, the soul may
doubt still whether it have love or no; and if the spirit say, thou have love
because thou delightest in God's Commandments; the question may be still,
whether that delight be sincere, or counterfeit; pure, or mixed; and therefore
say they, There can be no judgment of a man's justification by his
sanctification; or of his sanctification by the operation of particular graces.

I Answer, it is true, that whiles I endeavor to discover these graces merely
by reason, they may be still subject to question, and so they can make no firm
assurance; but in the soul that is graciously assured this way, the Spirit of
God rests the heart upon an ultimum quod sic: he convinces the soul by that
which is most visible in him, and so stops the mouth of cavilling reason from
perplexing the question any more. Indeed it is a fine skill to know whether a
true assurance be merely rational, or from the witness of the Spirit of God?
whether it be wrought out of a man's own brain, or wrought into his heart by
the Holy Ghost? now in some cases we may discern it, as thus; the assurance
that the Spirit gives, does sometime surprise a man unexpectedly, at unawares;
as it may be in a Sermon, that he came accidentally unto; or in a Scripture,
that I cast a transient-glancing eye upon; but thus does not reason. Again, The
assurance that the spirit gives, maintains a soul in a way of reliance and
dependence, when it sees no reason why he should do so; or it may be when he
sees a reason why it should not be so; as it is said of Abraham in another
case, Romans 4.18.
that he believed in hope against hope; faith told him there was hope that he
should be the Father of many Nations, when reason told him there was none.
Again, The assurance that the spirit gives, is attended with an high esteem of
Prayer, Duties, Ordinances, and in the issue (which is the most principal sure
mark) it purifies the soul that has it, 1 John 3.3.
He that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is pure; he is ever
washing himself from sin, and watching against sin, and taking all possible
care to keep himself pure and unspotted in this present evil world, it keeps
the soul humble, and lowly, it being impossible that such a testimony of the
spirit, and so intimate a converse with God, and the light of his countenance
should not reflect low thoughts upon a man's self concerning himself; such a
man cannot but say, Lord, what am I that thou have brought me hitherto? what?
for such a peevish, unbelieving, impatient soul as mine is, to be carried in
thy arms, and cheered with thy smiles, and to enjoy the comforts of thy spirit?
Oh what a wonderful, merciful gracious God have I?

Yet in all this I exclude not the Spirit in drawing a rational evidence from
Scriptures; certainly the spirit helps in a general way, by making use of our
reason, only it elevates and improves our reason to a further assurance by a
supernatural assistance; as in Prayer, and in Preaching of the Word, there may
be a common assistance of the Spirit of God; but there is another kind of
praying and preaching by the Spirit, which the Scripture often speaks of, and
calls the spirit of supplication, and the demonstration of the spirit; and that
is not performed by a common or general, but by a special and particular
assistance of the Spirit of God; so there is a twofold influence of the Spirit
in putting forth acts of assurance in the heart, even of a Godly and Sound
Christian; the very same man may act assurance sometimes rationally, and
sometimes spiritually; in the former the spirit acts too, but in a common way,
only in the latter, is the supernatural, special assistance, which peculiarly
is said to be the witness of the Spirit. I speak not against rational
evidences, only it concerns us to apply our selves to the Spirit to superadd
his testimony: O let us not so content our selves with ratioral evidences, but
that we labor to elevate the evidence of reason into a testimony of the Holy
Spirit of God. To wind up all I have said --

O my soul, try now the hope of the spirits indwelling by these several signs;
art thou enlightened savingly in the knowledge of God, and of Christ? art thou a
Child of God, one of his adopted sons for whom he has reserved the
inheritance? have thou a spirit of Grace and Supplication? a spirit of
Sanctification? a spirit of Love? art thou led by the spirit? do thou feel
the drawings of thy soul in every duty to Jesus Christ? do thou feel a
liberty, or a delight in thy soul to walk in the way of his Commandments? do
thou feel any strength to come in against thy corruptions; do thou feel the
spirits help to act in Gospel-duties for Gospel ends? have thou ever had the
immediate testimony of the spirit? or if not so; have thou ever had the
immediate testimony of the spirit without any argumentation? have thou
unexpectedly dipped and lighted on some places of scripture that has satisfied
thy soul as with marrow and fatness? or if not so neither, have thou the
immediate testimony of the Spirit with argumentation? can thou argue thus, He
that believes shall be saved but I believe, therefore I shall be saved. Or if
any doubt be made of the assumption; can thou prove it by such other graces
as accompany faith, and are the fruits of faith? can thou say by the help of
the spirit, and shinings of the spirit, that these, and these graces are in me,
and have been acted by me; yea, I do love God and christ, I do repent of my
sins, etc. surely then thy hope is well grounded, thou have the indwelling of
the spirit; it is thine, even thine.

SECT. V. Of believing in Jesus in this respect.
5. LEt us believe on Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for
us in these particulars, many scruples are in many hearts, What? is it possible
that I should have any share in Christ's ascension, Christ's session, Christ's
mission of his spirit? was it ever in God's heart that I should partake with
Christ in all these glories? if it must be so that he will let out his loves to
so unworthy a wretch, was it not sufficient for him to have come down from
Heaven, and to have acted my redemption here below? Is it not an high Favor
that a King should leave his Court, to give a poor prisoner in the Jayl a
visit? but will he take him with him to his own home, and bring him into his
own presence chamber, and set him at his right hand in his throne? And so that
Christ should not only leave his Fathers throne, and give me a visit, lying in
the dark dungeon of unbelief; but that he should take off the bolts, and set
open the prison doors, and take me up with him into Heaven, and there set me
down at his right hand, and in the mean time give me the earnest and pledge of
my inheritance, by filling my soul with his own spirit; O what an admirable
incredible thing is this? it was the last vision of John which was so full of
wonders. And I John saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem coming down from God
out of Heaven. -- And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying; Rev. 21.2, 3.
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them. Surely
it was a miraculous mercy that heaven should come down upon earth, and that God
should come down to men: but Oh what is this, that Earth should go up to
Heaven, that men should ascend up to God? yea, that my soul with Christ, and by
Christ, should ascend to God, and sit down with God in heavenly places? yea,
that my soul should have for its inmate the very same spirit that Christ
himself has? Oh I cannot, I will not, I dare not believe.

Scrupulous souls, be not faithless but believing; there is none of these
particulars for which we have not a warrant out of the Word of God; and
therefore believe: But that I may persuade to purpose, I shall lay down, 1.
Some directions, and 2. Some encouragements of faith.

1. For directions of Faith, observe these particulars. As --

1. Faith must directly go to Christ.

2. Faith must go to Christ as God in the Flesh.

3. Faith must go to Christ as God in the Flesh made under the Law.

4. Faith must go to Christ not only as made under the directive part of the
Law by his life, but under the penal part of the Law by his death.

5. Faith must go to Christ not only as put to death in the Flesh, but as
quickened by the spirit; of all these before.

6. Faith must not only go to Christ as quickened by the spirit, but as going
up into glory, as sitting down at God's right hand, and as sending the holy
Ghost; Faith should eye Christ as far as he goes; if he be ascended, so should
faith; if he go into glory, and sit down there, and act there for his people,
so should faith; and so should we in a way of believing follow after him, and
take a view of all his transactions where he is; we have heard before how faith
should go to Christ as dying, and as rising again; but yet faith is low, while
it does not go within the vail, and see him in glory; it is not enough to have
only a faith of Justification, but of Glorification. O come let us see Christ
in Heaven, and we can have no less than a glorious says! how many are there
that never yet came to act says in Christ as a glorified Christ? we are yet
still in the lower form; many of us take in no more of Christ than what was
done on the cross, or what some natural, and common resemblances of him can
hold forth; we seldom follow Christ into Heaven, to see what he is doing these
for us. O my soul! and O my faith! mount up, and be on the wing: Christ is gone
up to heaven, Christ is set down at God's right hand; Christ has sent down his
holy spirit: to this purpose it was expedient that he should go away, and now
he is gone away, to do something that remains to be done for thee in his
Kingdom; he had still some glorious piece to frame for thy salvation, and
therefore he left this world and went to his Father, that he might act it in
glory; and now he is invested with all the riches of Heaven, he has all the
keys of Heaven and Hell, he has all power to command, he has received all
the promise to himself, and all that he has to do, it is to let out of himself
again unto his Saints; he has not only got his Fathers heart for them, but he
has got all his riches to bestow upon them; when he came to Heaven, the Father
bid him sit down at his right hand, and take what he would, and bestow what he
would upon his Saints; and thereupon he gave gifts unto men, yea, he gave the
gift of gifts, even the Holy Ghost himself. What? art not thou a partaker of
this gift? O then Look up unto Jesus in reference to all these actings, set him
before thee: Christ in all these particulars is a right object for thy faith to
act upon.

7. Faith in going to Christ, his ascension, session and mission of the holy
spirit, it is principally to look to the purpose, intent, and design of Christ
in each of these particulars: Christ did nothing but he had an end, a meaning
in it for our good; and here is the life of Faith, to eye the meaning of Christ
in all his doings. Now the ends of Christ's ascension, session, and mission of
his spirit were several; I shall instance only in these few. As --

1. Christ ascended that we might ascend: look whatever God acted on Christ's
person, that he did as in our behalf, and he means to act the same on us: was
Christ crucified? so are we; is Christ risen again, so are we risen together
with him: is Christ gone up into glory? so are we; Heaven is now opened and
possessed by Jesus Christ for us, and at last we shall ascend even as he
ascended; Christ cannot be content with that glory he has himself, John 17.25.
until we be with him; Father I will, that those also whom thou have given me,
be with me where I am, that they may behold, or enjoy my glory which thou have
given me. Christ as our head is in glory, and so we are there already with him;
and Christ as our advocate is in glory, and there he is pleading and praying
for us, that we may actually be received and brought up to him: Father I will
that these whom thou have given me may be with me. Christ's crown of glory is
as it were a burden on his own head, until it be set on the heads of all his
^aints; O the blessed end of Christ's Ascension! how should faith pry into
this? Believers! you see your object, you know his person, never be quiet
until ye come into his condition: as we must go through all ordinances and
creatures till we come to Christ, so through all conditions of Christ until we
come to glory

2 Christ sat down that we might sit with him in heavenly places, what is the
end of Christ's Session, but that we m^gh^ invest all his ^aints with the same
privilege? In this height of glory, Christ is the pattern, and platform, and
Idea of what we shall be; surely this is the very top of Heaven; Christ is
exalted above the Heavens, that we might in our measure and proportion be
exalted with Christ; it was Christ's Prayer; that his Father, and he, and we,
might all be one, As thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may
be one in us Oh how should faith stand, John 17.21.
and gaze on Jesus Christ in this respect? ^h^t? is he on Gods right hand? and
is he there preparing a room, a seat, a mansion for my soul? What shall I sit
at the right hand of Christ? shall I sit as an assessor on his udgment-seat to
Judge the world wi^h Jesus Christ? when the Son of man shall sit o^ the Throne
of his Glory, Mat. 19.28.
ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. O
what is this? had not Christ said it, how could I have believed it? admire O my
soul at this aim of Christ the meaning of his exalting himself, it was to exalt
thee; and the meaning of his exalting thee on this manner, it is to m^nifest to
all the World, what the Son of God is able to do, in raising so poor a creature
to so rich a glory. O the end of Christ's sitting at God's right hand! hereby
the Saints are Christ's ass ssors; Lord's of the higher house, the Kings Peers
to judge the World with him, Christ divides (as it were) the throne with them.
I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, Luke 22.29,
30.
that you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

3. Christ sent down the Holy Ghost, that he might dwell in our souls endow us
with gifts, and graces; that he might comfort us, seal us unto the day of
redemption; fit us for glor^ amongst the many ends for which Christ sent down
his holy spirit, I shall insist only on these two. --

1. That he might help us to cry Abba Father: and make us to come boldly to the
Throne of grace, as Chil^ren to a Father. It is the spirit that tak^s us by the
hand and leads us to the Father, when others stand at a distance, and cannot
come near: As a Princes Son is admitted at all times though others are kept our
by O^ficers and Guards; so though there be never so much darkness, and fire,
and terror about God; yet the adopted child, who has received the spirit of
adoption, can say; make way there, and let me come to my Father; guards are
appointed to keep out strangers, but not Sons. And no wonder, for the spirit
makes intercession for us, Romans 8.26.
with groanings which cannot be uttered; the spirit teaches us what to pray,
and how to pray as ^e ought; the spirit puts a courage and boldness into the
hearts of his S^ints, even to admiration; this appears in that sometimes they
have beset God with his promises, that he could no way get off Quicken me
according to thy word, Psalm. 119.25.28.29.116.169.
-- And strengthen me ac^ording to thy word. -- And be merciful unto me
according to thy word. -- And uphold me according to thy word -- And give me
understanding according to thy word: And sometimes they have beset God with
their challenges of his Justice. Faithfulness, and Righteousness: so David,
Deliver me in thy righteousness. Psalm. 31.1.35.24.119.40.143.1.
-- And judge me according to thy righteo^sness. -- An quicken me according to
thy righteousness. -- And in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy
righteousness. Why, this is the ^pirits work, he helps our infirmities, he
imboldens our spirits in their approaches to God: surely it is one end of the
spirits mission; Because ye are sons. Gal. 4.6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba
Father. I will not deny but that bastards, strangers without the Covenant,
having no right to God as their Father, may yet petition God, as a subdued
people do their Conqueror, or as Ravens cry to God for food, or as some howl
upon their beds for Corn and Wine; but they cannot pray; Hos. 7.14.
in right Prayer there is not only required gracious ingredients in the action,
but also a new state of adoption and filiation: many speaks words to God, who
do not pray; many tell over their sins, who confess not their sins to God; many
speak good of God, who do not praise God; thousands claim Fathership in God,
where there is no Sonship, nor ground in the thing it self. A new nature is
only that best bottom of Prayer, that takes it off from being a taking of God's
Name in vain. Now this is the fruit of the spirit, and one of those ends of the
spirits mission.

2. That he might guide us into all Truth; I mean into all necessary,
Fundamental saving Truths: in this respect we have need of the spirit in these
days. He it is that Dictates to us which is the true Religion; he it is that
transcribes upon our hearts, that which was before only written in our books;
he it is that not only reveals truth from without, but imprints it also on the
soul, as a man does a seal by impressing it on the wax; 1 John. 5.10.
to this purpose says the Apostle, He that believes on the Son of God, has
the witness in himself; how in himself? I answer, 1. In that the Spirit gives
him a habit of faith. 2. In that the Spirit causes him to bring it forth into
act. 3. In that the Spirit stamps on the soul all those other impressions of
desire, hope, love, joy, or whatever else we call the new nature; so that now
there is a new nature within him, he has new thoughts, new designs, new
desires, new hopes, new loves, new delights, he drives a new trade (as it were)
in this world for another world: he is become in Christ a new Creature, 2 Cor.
5.17.
Old things are passed away, and all things are become new. And from hence we
may soundly argue the truth of our religion. Mark this, as the Written word is
the testimony without us, so are these impressions of the spirit the testimony
within us, by which we may know every necessary truth as it is in Jesus; this
is the meaning of the Apostle, He that believes has the witness in himself:
unbelievers have indeed a testimony without them, but believers have a double
testimony, one with out, and one within; and this witness within us will go
with us which way soever we go: it will accompany us through all straits and
difficulties. The external testimony may be taken from us; men may take from us
our Bibles, our Teachers, our Friends; or they may imprison us where we cannot
enjoy them; but they cannot take from us the Spirit of Christ: this witness
within, is a permanent, settled, habituate, standing witness; O what an
excellent help is here, that a poor Christian beyond all the furniture of the
most Learned Men, that want this testimony of the spirit of Christ! surely this
advantage will exceedingly furnish us against all temptations to any error,
that is plainly contrary to the essentials of religion. One of our late Divines
puts a case --

Mr. Baxters Spirits witness to the truth of Christianity.
If the Devil or any seducer would draw us to doubt, whither there be indeed a
Christ? or whither he did rise again, ascend, sat down at God's right hand,
and thence sent down the holy Ghost? what an excellent advantage is it against
this temptation, when we can repair to our own hearts, and there find a Christ,
or a Spirit of Christ within us? O (says the sanctified soul) have I felt
Christ relieving me in my lost condition, delivering me from my captivity,
reconciling me to God, and bringing me with boldness into his glorious
presence? and now after all this I shall doubt whether there be a Christ in
Heaven, or a spirit of Christ in my heart on Earth? have I felt him new
creating me, opening my dark eyes, and bringing me from darkness into his
mavelous light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, binding the strong man,
and casting him out, and yet shall I question whether there be a Christ, or a
Spirit of Christ? has he made me love the things which I hated, and hate that
which I loved? has he given me such a taste of the powers of the world to
come, and possessed me with the hopes of glory with himself, and given me a
measure, and portion in God, and set my heart where my treasure is, and caused
me in some measure to have my conversation in Heaven above, and yet shall I
doubt whether there be a Christ above, or a Spirit within? O what an impudent
lying spirit is this, that would tempt me against so much experience? And thus
may a believer argue from the testimony that is within.

I know some seeming Saints have fallen off into as great blaphemies as these I
have named; 1 John 2.19.
witness the Quakers, and Ranters, etc. but I may say of such, as John did,
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us. It is no wonder if Satan prevail
against those that gave Christ no deeper room but in their fantasy, and that
did never heartily close with him in love. But for those that have the Spirit
of Christ within them, it is not so with them; if they cannot answer the cavil
of Satan, or of any of his instruments, yet they can hold fast the grounds of
faith; Christ has a deep room and interest in their spirits; he is held faster
by the hand than by the head alone; love will hold Christ, when reason alone
would let him go; Romans 8.35, 36, 37.
his ear is nailed (as it were) unto his door; and because he loves him, he
will not leave him: Who shall separate him from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword, (as it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long) nay in
all these things we are more than conquerors through him that has loved us. A
modern Writer brings in a sincere heart, Mr. Baxter ibid.
paraphrazing (as it were) on this Text in this manner; Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? O thou malicious Devil, that do hunt me with thy
fiery darts! O you dull heretics. infidels, blasphemers, that fill up my ears
with your foolish sophisms, and trouble me with your disputes against my Lord
and Redeemer! go to him that knows him only by the hearing of the ear, if you
mean to prevail; but I have known him by the sweet experiences of my soul; go
to him that makes a Religion of his Opinions, and whose belief was never any
deeper than his fancy, and whose piety never reached higher than to abstinency,
and tasks of formal duty; these you may possibly draw away from Christ. But do
you think to do so by me? why, tell me how? with what weapons or arguments can
you think to prevail? what? shall tribulation be the means? no, no; I have that
promise in the hand of my faith, and that glory in the eye of my hope, that
will bring me through all tribulations under Heaven: or shall distress do it?
why, I will rather stick so much closer to him that will relieve me in distress
and bring me to his rest. Or will you affright me by persecution? I am assured
that this is the nearest way to Heaven, and I am blessed of Christ, when I am
persecuted for righteousness sake. Or shall nakedness be the weapon? I had
rather pass naked out of this World to Heaven, than to be clothed in purple,
and to be stripped of it at death, and to be cast into hell; Adam's innocent
nakedness, and Lazarus's rags were better than that Epicure's gay apparel. --
Or shall famine be the means? why, man lives not by bread alone; I had rather
my body were famished than my soul; I have meat to eat that ye know not of,
even the bread of life, which who so eats shall live for ever. Or will you
affright me from Christ by the sword of violence? I know that the Lord whom I
believe in, and serve, is able to deliver me out of your hands; but if he will
not, be it known to you I will not forsake him; your sword will be only the key
to open the prison doors, and let out my soul that has long desired to be with
Jesus Christ. If you tell me of peril, I know no danger so great as of losing
Christ, and salvation; and of bearing his wrath that can kill both body and
soul: do I not read in certain Histories of that noble Army of Martyrs, who
loved the Lord Jesus to the death, and gloryed in tribulation, and would not by
the flames of fires, or jaws of Lions, be separated from Jesus Christ? did not
they pass through the red sea, as on dry ground, to the promised land? yea,
though they were killed all the day long, and accounted as Sheep to the
slaughter? did they not stick and cleave fast to the Lord, and to the Captain
of their salvation? nay; were they not in all this conquerours, and more than
conquerours, triumphing in flames, to the confusion of Satan, and all their
enemies; as Christ triumphed on the Cross, destroying by death the Prince of
death? Heb. 2.14.
Oh what a blessed advantage is it against all temptations, to have the impress
of the Gospel of Christ on our heart, and the witness in our selves?

But I hear some object; If the witness in our selves be so full and
convincing, then what need have we any more to make use of Scriptures, or
Ministers? why should we leave an higher Teacher to go to a lower?

But I answer, 1. There is more than one thing wanting to enwise us to
salvation; as first, an outward Word; and secondly, an outward Teacher; and
thirdly, an inward Light: And accordingly God supplies this threefold want; the
first, by giving us the Scripture; the second, by giving us a Ministry, and
other occasional Teachers; the third, by giving us the illumination of the
Spirit, to help us to see by the former means, and to make the Word and
Ministry to us effectual. Now it were a mad thing for a man to say, I have eyes
to read in a book, and therefore I have no need of the light of Candle, or of
Sun; or I have eyes, and Sun, and therefore I have no need of the light in the
Air, which comes from the Sun; or I have the light both of the Eye, and Sun,
and Air, and therefore I can read by it without a Book; or I have a Book, and
therefore I can read it without a Teacher: certainly if a man would read, he
must have all these, or more than one of these; so God has appointed us three
necessary means for our illumination and direction; the Word, the Ministry, and
the Spirit; What God has joined, let no man separate; if any will foolishly
go, and set one of these against another, when God has set them all together,
and made them all necessary, assigning to each a several part in the work of
our illumination, they may abuse God and themselves, and go without the light,
while they despise the necessary causes of it. God's evidences must not be
separated, much less must one be pleaded to the neglect of all the rest; as the
work within us is not the first testimony, but a secondary confirming
testimony, so does it not make the first unnecessary or void: besides that, by
the external testimony we must convince other men, which by the witness within
us we cannot do. But this only by the way.

2. For the encouragement of our Faith to believe in Christ as in reference to
his Ascension, Session and Mission of his Spirit.

1. Consider of the excellency of this Object; what is it but Christ? Christ in
his Ascendant, Culminant, Regnant Power? Christ in his Marching, Conquering,
Triumphing Postures? in his Free, and Large, and Magnificent Gifts? When he
Ascended on high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto Men. O the
Glory, O the Excellency of Christ in these Respects! Verily they are enough to
tire out Men and Angels with the only Act of wondering and surveying of their
vastness. Here is Gospel-Work for all Eternity, to dig into this Gold-Mine, to
roll and turn this Soul-delighting precious Stone, to behold, enquire, and
search into these depths and heights of Christ exalted: and I believe this is
the satiety, the top, and prime of Heavens Glory, to see and wonder at the
virtues of him that sits on the Throne, at the right hand of God; to be filled,
but never Satiate with the Glory of Christ. What? Christ ascended? Christ set
down in Glory? and Christ sending down his Holy Spirit? here is a Compendium of
all Glories: here is one for an heart to be taken with, made up of nothing but
of several Mysteries of Glory.

2. Consider the Power, Virtue, and Influence of this Object into our souls
Salvation; oh what a stately Tower have we here erected to see Heaven on? Faith
may stand (as it were) on this Mount, and see it self in glory; Oh the
flowings, the rich emanations of Grace and Glory that come from hence! come,
let us draw, the Well is deep; all the drops and dewings that fall on Men or
Angels are but as chips in comparison of that huge and boundless body of the
fullness of Grace that is in Christ; one Lilly is nothing to a boundless and
broad Field of Lillies; Christ is in these respects the Mountain of Roses; oh
how High, how Capacious, how Full, how Beautiful, how Green? could we but smell
him who feeds among the Lillies, till the Day break, and the shadows fly away;
could we but dive into the Golden Veins of these unsearchable riches of Jesus
Christ, we should say, It is good to be here. Oh it is good to gather up the
fragments that fall from Christ; his Crown shines with Diamonds and Pearls; oh
why do we toil our selves in gathering sticks, when to morrow we shall be out
of this World, and go to Christ? come, where is our mouth of Faith? let us lay
to it here, let us suck and be satisfied with these Breasts of consolation; let
us milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of his Glory.

3. Consider of the suitableness of these Objects to our several conditions;
you may remember the first cry, Was it not love enough for Christ to come down,
and to visit us here; but that he must go up and take us with him? no, no, his
love was so great and vast, that for our sakes he moves up and down; this
ravished the Spouse, Behold he comes leaping upon the Mountains, and skipping
upon the Hills, Cant. 2.8. Cant. 2.8.
Gregory that measured his leaps, thus gives them; be first leaps from his
Fathers Mansion to his Mothers Womb; from her Womb to the Cratch; from his
Cratch to his Cross; and from his Cross to his Grave; from his Grave up again
to Heaven; great leaps indeed, that showed both his readiness to love, and
willingness to save: infinite love can never be out-tired with greatest
actions. But another cries, how should I believe that Christ is exalted, and
that by virtue thereof I shall be exalted, when I see my self in a forlorn
condition, forsaken of God, Psalm. 62.9.
and abject amongst Men; Alas! Man at his best is altogether Vanity, yea, Men
of low degree are Vanity, and Men of high degree are a Lie; to be laid in the
Balance I am altogether lighter than Vanity; how then should I believe any
such condition; is a Worm a fit or a capable Subject to wear a Crown? Yes, the
Lord is great, and he can do great things; He raises up the Poor out of the
Dust, 1 Samuel 2.8, 9.
and lifts up the Beggar from the Dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to
make them inherit the Throne of Glory; for the Pillars of the Earth are the
Lords, and he has set the World upon them, he will keep the Feet of his
Saints. -- Why there is my sadness, cries another; He will keep the Feet of his
Saints; if I were but a Saint, I could believe this Power; but alas! I am
unholy, an unsanctified piece of Clay; I am a sinner, a sinner of the Gentiles,
chief of sinners, I deserve to be thrown down to Hell, rather than to be
invested with Glory, and to sit in Heaven; True, but yet the Holy Ghost is
given to make thee holy; of thy self thou art vile, and most vile; but has not
the Holy Ghost entered in, and took possession of thy Spirit? has he not washed
thee with water? yea, thoroughly washed away thy blood? has he not anointed
thee with oil, and covered thee with silk, and decked thee with gold and
silver, and made thee comely through his comeliness which he put upon thee?
Why, this is the office of the holy Ghost, and if thou have but the in-dwelling
of the Spirit, this is thy state: I know there is a part of thee unregenerate,
and it will be so whiles thou art on earth, but withal there is in thee a new
nature, another nature; there is something else within thee which makes thee
wrestle against sin, and shall in time prevail over all sin, and this is the
Spirit of Christ, sanctifying of thee; Being sanctified (says the Apostle) by
the holy Ghost. Romans 15.16.
-- Other complaints might be thus brought in, but if we understand the
meaning, the design of Christ in his Ascension, Session, and mission of his
Spirit, how might a true faith answer all? oh believe! believe thy part in
Christ's Ascension, Christ's Session, Christ's Mission of his holy Spirit, and
thou may go singing to thy grave! a lively says in such particulars would
set a soul in heaven, even whilst yet on earth.

SECT. VI. Of loving Jesus in that respect.
6. LEt us love Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us in
these particulars; much has been said already of Christ's Conception, Birth,
Life, Death, Resurrection; such Arguments of love as are enough to swallow up
souls in love to Christ again: O the treasures of love and wisdom that have
been opened in former passages! but as if all those were not enough for God,
see here new Gold mines, new found out Jewels, never known to be in the world
before, opened and unfolded in Jesus Christ. Here are the incomes of the beams
of light most inaccessible; here are the veins of the unsearchable Glories of
Jesus Christ; as if we saw every moment a new heaven, a new treasure of love;
the Bosom of Christ is yet more opened; the new breathings and spirations of
love are yet more manifested. See! Christ for us, and for our salvation is gone
up to Heaven, is set down at God's right hand, and has sent down the holy
Ghost into our hearts; in the pouring out of these Springs of Heavens love, how
should our souls but open the mouth-wide, and take in the streams of Christ's
Nectar, Honey, and Milk, I mean his sweet, and precious, and dear
love-breathings? We have heard of Christ's invitations, Come to me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden: but suppose Christ had never outed his love in such
a love-expressing Come to me; Mat. 11.28.
yet Christ himself in these glorious particulars is such a drawing object;
(the very beauty of Christ, the very smell of the Garments of Christ, very
capacious and wide Heaven of Christ's exaltation are intrinsecally, and of
themselves such drawing, ravishing, winning objects) that upon the apprehension
of them we cannot choose but love Christ: as Gold that is dumb and cannot speak,
yet the beauty and gain of it cries aloud, Come hither poor creature, and be
thou made rich; so if Christ should never open his lips, if he should never
gently move, Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, Cant. 5.2.
for my head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night; yet the
Glory, the Power, the Sovereignty of Christ; the exaltation of his Person, and
the magnificence of his Gifts, should even change our souls into a Globe or
mass of Divine Love and Glory, As it were by the Spirit of the Lord. 2 Cor.
3.18.


Two things I shall instance in, which may be as the Load-stones of our love to
Christ; the first is his glory, and the second his bounty.

1. For his Glory, no sooner was he ascended, and set down at God's right hand,
but John the Divine had a sight of him, and oh what a glorious sight! Rev.
1.13, 14, 15, 16.
He was clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girt about the paps with
a golden girdle; his head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as
snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass,
as if they burned in a furnace, and his voice as the sound of many waters; and
he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth went a sharp two
edged sword, and his countenance was at the Sun that shines in his strength;
when John saw him thus, he swoons at his feet, but Christ for all his Glory
holds his head in his swoon, saying, fear not, I am the first, and the last; I
am he that lives, and was dead, ver. 17, 18.
and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and has the Keys of hell and of
death. A glorious Christ is good for swooning, dying sinners, would sinners but
draw near, and come and see this King in the chariot of love, and come and see
his beauty, the uncreated white and red in his sweet countenance, he would
certainly draw their souls unto him. Nay, say that all the damned in hell were
brought up with their burning fiery chains to the utmost door of Heaven: could
we strike up a window, and let them look in, and behold the Throne, and the
Lamb, and the Troops of glorified spirits clothed in white, with Crowns of
gold on their heads, and Palms in their hands, singing the eternal praises of
their glorious King; oh how would they be sweetened in their pain, and convinced
of their foolish choice, and ravished with the fullness of those joys and
pleasures that are in Christ's face for evermore? surely much more may this
glory of Christ warm thy heart; O my soul! what an happiness were it to see the
King on his Throne; to see the Lamb, the fair Tree of Life, the branches which
cannot for the narrowness of the place have room to grow in, For the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him? What an happiness were it to see love it self, and
to be warmed with the heat of immediate love that comes out of the precious
heart and bowels of this princely and royal Standard Bearer? as yet thou can
not, must not see these sights, there is no seeing the King thus in his beauty
till thou come to glory; for then, and then only must thou see him face to
face, and yet the Idea and Image of this glory is seen and may be seen of every
true believing soul; enough may be seen by an eye of faith, to kindle in thine
heart a flame of love to the Lord Jesus Christ: Oh who can think of the glory
that is in this dainty delightful One, and not be swallowed up in love? Who can
think of Christ's sitting at God's right hand, and sparkling in this glory
round about, and casting out beams of glory through East, and West, and North,
and South, through Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, and not love him with the whole
heart, soul and might? I remember one dying, and hearing some discourse of
Jesus Christ: Oh (said she) speak more of this, let me hear more of this; be
not weary of telling his praise, I long to see him, how should I but long to
hear of him? Surely I cannot say too much of Jesus Christ; in this blessed
subject no man can possibly hyperbolize; had I the tongues of Men and Angels, I
could never fully set forth Christ; it involves an eternal contradiction that
the creature can see to the bottom of the Creator. Suppose all the sands on the
Seashore, all the Flowers, Herbs, Leaves, twigs of Trees in Woods and
Forests, all the Stars of Heaven, were all rational creatures, and had they
that wisdom, and tongues of Angels to speak of the loveliness, beauty, glory
and excellency of Christ, as gone to Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of
his Father, they would in all their expressions stay millions of miles on this
side Jesus Christ. O the loveliness, beauty, and glory of his Countenance! can
I speak, or you hear of such a Christ? and are we not all in a burning love, in
a seraphical love, or at least in a conjugal love? O my heart! how is it thou
art not love sick? how is it thou do not charge the daughters of Jerusalem as
the spouse did, Cant. 5.8.
I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved that ye tell him,
I am sick of love?

2. For his bounty, no sooner was he ascended, and set down at God's right
hand, but he gives gifts unto men; and he sends down the holy Ghost. This was
the Gift of gifts; I shall only weigh two Circumstances in this Gift, either
whereof both dignifies, and casts a sparkle of bounty from the Giver, into the
heart of the Receiver to move him to love. As --

One Circumstance is the greatness of the Giver; certainly the pre-eminence or
dignity of any principle ennobleth and enhanceth the effect; a gift coming from
a great Person carries ever a scent with it of a certain greatness, and
relisheth either of excellency, or superiority, or nobility, or all. It is
storied of Charles the fifth, that in his wars being ever pressed with want of
money, and so unable to remunerate the services of diverse Dutch Captains, and
Nobles, whom he had entertained; he used after any great exploit performed by
them, to call together his Nobles and Camp into such a field, and there in the
presence of them all to take a Gold chain from about his own neck, and to put
it about the neck of such a Captain, or such a Colonel, and so to embrace him
and to give him thanks for his gallant service: why, this they esteemed a
greater favor (being Circumstanced by such a Person, in such a way) than if in
very deed he had given them a sufficient pay, or remuneration. O they valued
that Chain more than many bushels of the like Gold; the very Person of the
Emperor hanged at the Chain such a precious Jewel, as in warlike conceits a
million of Gold could not countervail. O my soul, if an Emperor thus gained
the affections of men, how should thou but love Christ the great Emperor of
Heaven and Earth: Numb. 11 17.
it was he that gave thee his Spirit, it was he that took off the Spirit which
is upon him, (so is the expression of God to Moses) and put it upon thee; and
does not the Person of Christ, the Dignity of Christ, inhance the value of the
gift? as all gifts are signs of love, so the love of a great Personage, and the
gifts issuing from such a love, ought more to be accounted than any gifts of
any meaner person whatsoever.

2. Another Circumstance is, the greatness of the Gift; this argues greatness
of good will; and consequently deserves a correspondence of a semblable
affection. Now what greater gift had Christ in store, than to give his own
spirit? the spirit proceeds from him, and is the same essence with himself;
the spirit is the third Person of the true and only Godhead, proceeding from
the Father and the Son, and coeternal, coequal, and consubstantial with the
Father and the Son; this appears by those divine Attributes and Properties
which are attributed, and communicated to the holy spirit: As, 1. Eternity. God
never was without his spirit; Genesis 1.1, 2.
In the beginning God created heaven and earth, -- and the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the waters. 2. Omnipotency, because he, together with the
Father and the Son, creates and preserves all things, By his Spirit he has
garnished the heavens; Job. 26.13. -- 33.4. 1 Cor. 12.11. 1 Cor. 2.10.
the Spirit of God has made me; and all these things works that one and the
self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will. 3. Omnisciency,
or the knowledge of all things, For the Spirit searches all things, yea the
deep things of God. 4. Immutability, or unchangeableness, Men, and brethren,
Acts 1.16. Romans 5.5.
this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled which the holy Ghost spoke. 5.
Infinite mercy, or love; God is love, -- and the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us. 6. Holy indignation even
against hi^^en sins, They rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit; Isa. 63.10. Acts
5.3, 4, 9. Ephesians. 4.30.
why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the holy Ghost? -- thou have not
lied unto men; but unto God; (a plain Text for the Divinity of the holy Ghost)
-- How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?
Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. I might add Miracles, Mat. 12.28. -- 28.19. 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Cor. 3.38.
and the institution of Sacraments, and Prophesies, and Gifts, and Graces as
the effects of his Divinity: I cast out devils (says Christ) by the Spirit of
God, and baptize in the Name of the Father, and of the Son; and of the holy
Ghost. And the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith. And we are changed into the same image from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. See now how the holy spirit is God,
coeternal, coequal, and consubstantial with God the Father, and God the Son; is
not this a great gift? yea, as great a gift as possibly can be given? what can
he more than to give himself, and to give his spirit? O the bonds of love that
are upon man toward Christ in this respect.

Come my soul and take a view of the Glory and Bounty of Jesus Christ! if thy
heart be not all brass, and iron, and stone; if there be any fleshiness,
softness, or pliableness in it; why, then how should thou choose but love? if
either beauty or bounty; if either Majesty or magnificence can draw thy
affection, Christ will have it; for in him is all; O let him be thy all! surely
if thou have any thing besides himself, he is the Donor of all, he is the
beauty of all, the sum of all, the perfection of all, yea, he is the Author,
Preserver, and Finisher of all.

SECT. VII. Of Joying in Jesus in that respect.
7. LEt us joy in Jesus as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us
in these particulars; there is not a particular under consideration, but it is
the object of a Christians joy. As, --

1. How should it heighten my joys, and enlarge my comforts, when I do but
consider that Christ is ascended into glory? by this it is clear and evident,
that Christ is accepted of the Father for me, or otherwise he should never have
been received into Heaven; if any frown had been in the face of God, surely
Christ coming so near God, he should have had it; if any exception had been
against his satisfaction, any flaw in our pardons, surely Christ should have
heard of it; yea, without question he must have been turned out of Heaven,
until he had made a full payment of our debts. I need not doubt of my
acceptance at the Throne of Grace, when Jesus Christ is accepted for me, and
that I stand in such a relation to Jesus Christ. Oh what joy is in this!

2. How should it heighten my joys, and enlarge my comforts, when I do but
consider that Christ is set down at God's right hand. Why, now he has the keys
of Heaven delivered into his hands; Mat. 28.18.
All power is given unto him in heaven and in earth, and now he can do what he
will; God the Father has given away (as it were) all his Prerogatives unto
Jesus Christ; John 5.22.
All judgment is committed to the Son, for the Father judges no man. Now he is
in a Capacity of acting out all his love, and the Father's desire to me in the
most glorious way; he is highly advanced, and thereby he has the advantage to
advance me, and to glorify me; God has given into his hands all the treasures
and riches of Heaven; in bidding him, sit down at his right hand, he told him
that he would have no more to do with the world, but that Christ should have
all, and that Christ should bestow all he had amongst his Saints; and that this
should be the reward of his death; and when once his Saints were come about
him, and sat with him in his glory, 1 Cor. 15.24.
why then Christ should resign up again his place, And deliver up the Kingdom
to God, even the Father. Oh what joy may enter into this poor dark dungeon,
disconsolate soul of mine, whiles I but think over these glorious passages of
my Christ in glory?

3. How should it heighten my joys, and fill me with joy unspeakable, and full
of glory, when I do consider that Christ, has sent down his holy Spirit into
my heart? when sorrow had filled the Apostles hearts, John 16.7.
because he had told them, I must go away; he comforts them with this, If I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send
him unto you. The spirit is the Comforter, and where he comes, he fills souls
with comforts; O what comfort is this, to know that the spirit of Christ is my
Inmate? that my soul is the Temple, the Receptacle, the House and dwelling of
the spirit of God? that Christ is in me of a truth, and that not only by the
infusion of his grace, but by the in-dwelling of his spirit? surely it is some
comfort to a sickly man that he has a Physician always in the house with him;
and to a woman that is near her travail, that the Midwife is in the house with
her; but what comfort is it to a poor soul that the spirit of Christ is always
in him? John 14.16.
I will send you another Comforter (said Christ) that he may abide with you for
ever. Christ in his bodily presence went away, Mat. 28.20.
but Christ in his spirit continues still; Lo I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world; he is with us, and which is more, he is in us for our
comfort. Col. 1.27.
Christ in you the hope of glory. Not Christ in Sermons which we hear, nor
Christ in Chapters which we read, nor Christ in Sacraments which we receive;
nor Christ in our heads by high notions, nor Christ in our mouths by frequent
glorious expressions; but Christ in our hearts by his spirit, is unto us the
hope of Glory. The grounds of our comforts in this respect, is, --

1. Christ's Presence; it is said of Paul, that after a sad shipwreck, the
sight of some Christian brethren so cheated him, Act. 28.15.
that upon the sight of them he thank^d God, and took courage; it is said of
Caesar, that he cheared the drooping Mariners in a storm, by minding them of
his presence, You carry Caesar; how much more should the in-being of Christ
solace Saints? Lo I am with you. O my soul, was it not a cordial to the
Disciples in a storm, that Christ was with them, whom the winds and waves
obeyed? cheer up now, for if the Spirit be in thee, Christ is with thee.

2. Christ's Complacency; if his Spirit dwell in us, how should he but be well
pleased with us? a man cannot properly be said to dwell in a prison, in which
he takes no delight; Psalm. 132.14.
the Spirits in-dwelling imports a delight of Christ in such a soul, Here will
I dwell, for I have desired it, or delighted in it, says God of Zion, though
many times drooping Christians, viewing their own beggarliness and vileness,
judge themselves worthy to be detested and deserted, and would relinquish
themselves if they possibly could, yet Christ looks to the poor and contrite
soul as a meet habitation for himself to dwell in, Isa. 57.15.
I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite, and
humble Spirit.

3. Christ's Communications; union is the ground of our communion with Christ;
and the nearer our union, the greater is our communion; if Christ were only in
a believer by the habit of grace, the union would not be so great, but if
Christ be in us by his spirit, the union is nearer, and therefore the communion
will be greater. O my soul remember this in all thy straits; there can be no
creature-want, or danger whatsoever wherein the improvement of this in-dwelling
of the Spirit may not refresh thee: art thou sick? the Physician both of soul
and body is within thee; art thou sad? the Comforter himself that supplies the
stead and room of Christ, inhabits in thee; art thou in exile, in banishment,
imprisonment at greatest distance from thy dearest Friends? see Paul's
refreshment when they were ready to pull him in pieces, and threw him into the
Castle, even the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, be of good
cheer Paul. Acts 23.11.
Christ will stand by thee, nay, Christ by his Spirit dwells in thee, and
will speak to thee comfortable words in thy greatest pressures.

4. Christ's Witnessings, if his Spirit dwell in us, we may then be assured of
future glory, Christ in you the Hope of Glory. It Is a sweet note of a Divine
upon it, Col. 1 27. Mr. Ash in his Sermon of Christ the riches of the Gospel.
Acts 8.13. Mat. 27.3. Heb. 12.17. Heb. 6.5, 6. Heb. 10.29.
The existency of Christ's Spirit in Believers, gives existence to their hopes
of Glory. The Spirit in us is God's earnest of Glory; the Spirit in us does
prepare us for participation in that Glory. I look upon this in-dwelling of the
Spirit as that which no Hypocrite in the World can lay any claim unto; as for
gifts, or graces, an Hypocrite may attain them, or something like them; it is
said of Simon Magus, that he believed; it is said of Judas, that he repented;
and of Esau, that he sought his birthright with tears; it is said of some,
that they partook of the Heavenly Gift, and of the Powers of the World to come,
and yet fell away; and it is said of such others, that they trampled upon the
Blood of Christ wherewith they were sanctified. Thus we find in
Scripture Phrase, that in an Hypocrite or wicked Man, there may be a kind of
Faith and repentance; a taste of Heaven, and of Sanctificatian; but where do we
find in all the Bible, that Christ, or the Spirit of Christ, is said to dwell
in an Hypocrite, or wicked Man? this only is the great privilege of a true
believer, Christ in him the Hope of Glory. -- O the comfort of this in-dwelling
of Christ! Luke 19.6.
If Zacheus hearing that Christ would abide in his House, received him
joyfully; how much greater cause of joy have they who have already lodged him
in their hearts? John 15.11.
These things have I spoken to you, said Christ, that my joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be full.

And now, O my soul, spread thy self on this great good, Christ's Ascension,
Christ's Session, and Christ's Mission of his Holy Spirit. What is joy but an
effusion of the appetite, whereby the Soul spreads it self on what is good, to
possess it more perfectly? the object is sweet, and large, and therefore the
soul had need to spread it self, that it may be more united to the Object, and
touch the good in more of its parts, yea, if it were possible in every part.
There is not any particular here before thee, but it is fuel for joy. O what
joy was in Heaven, when Christ Ascended, and when Christ sat down at God's
right hand, and when Christ sent down the Holy Spirit? how stood the Angels
wondering and admiring at these several passages? how did they stoop, and look
with the bowing of the Head, and bending of the Neck, as the Word implies? 1
Pet. 1.12.
and is not thy interest in these transactions more than Angels? O rejoice, and
again rejoice! suppose thy self in Heaven, and that thou had a vision of
Christ ascended; say, is he not a pleasant Object? In his face there is fullness
of joy. Psalm. 16.11.
Suppose thy self to have been in Heaven when he first entered into it, and when
he first sat down at God's right hand, and sent down the Comforter to his
Saints, was not Heaven full of joy? methinks the very thought of Christ's
bright Face, and Christ's white Throne, and Christ's Harpers, and Heavenly
Troops surrounding the Throne, and Christ's welcome to his Father, both for
himself and all his Saints; and Christ's carrying thy name upon his Breast
before his Father, should fill thy soul as full of joy, as possibly it can
hold. O the first fruits of Emanuel's land, that lies beyond time and death! O
the joys that were in Heaven at Christ's first entrance into Heaven! O my
soul, why do thou not check thy self, and lay aside thy sad complaints, and
forget this Earth, and Earthly troubles? why do thou not look up to Jesus
Christ, and rejoice in him who has done all this for thy Salvation? either the
Spirit of God is not thy Comforter, or thou can not but receive comfort in
these passages.

SECT. VIII. Of calling on Jesus in that Respect.
8. LEt us call on Jesus; I mean --

1. Let us pray that we may have our part in these transactions; or let us pray
for more and more assurance thereof unto our souls; for though we do believe,
yet we may not be without our doubts; and in case of doubts, what better means
than Prayer? I believe, Lord help my unbelief; Lord strengthen my Faith till I
come to that plerophory, or full assurance of faith, that I may know my
interest in the Ascension of Christ, and Session of Christ, and in the Mission
of Christ's holy Spirit, and if once we are but assured, then --

2. Praise God for these great transactions of his Son: are they not mercies
like mountains lying one upon another, and reaching up to the very Heavens? did
not love break out at first in a direct line? and as it went along, has it not
wound up it self, in such a variety of unthought of discoveries, as that it
amazeth Men and Angels? what? that Jesus Christ should not only act for us here
on earth, but also ascend for us into Heaven, and sit down there at God's right
hand above the Heavens? what? that all this should be for us and our salvation,
and to that purpose that he should send down his Spirit into our hearts, to fit
us, and prepare us for his glory? Now bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that
is within me bless his holy Name, bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all
his benefits. Psalm. 103.1, 2.
-- I will extol thee my God, O King, and I will bless thy Name for ever and
ever, every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and
ever. -- One generation shall praise thy works to another, Psalm. 145.1, 2, 4,
7, 10, 11, 12.
and shall declare thy mighty acts, I will speak of the glorious honor of thy
Majesty, and of thy wondrous works. -- I will utter the memory of thy great
goodness, and will sing of thy righteousness. -- Thy Saints shall bless thee;
they shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power, and make
known unto the sons of men thy mighty acts, and the glorious Majesty of thy
Kingdom -- Thy glory is above the earth and heaven, Psalm. 148.13, 14.
thou also exaltest the horn of thy people, the praise of all thy Saints, and
people near unto thy self. O that my soul were but in David's temper, thus to
breath out the praises of Jesus, and to bless his Name.

SECT. IX. Of conforming unto Jesus in that respect.
9. LEt us conform to Jesus in the aforesaid respects. A serious beholding of
Jesus in his Ascension, Session, and Mission of his Spirit, is enough to change
us into the same Image from glory to glory. It was the sweet saying of an
experienced Saint, View a glorified Christ, see him as in that relation and
condition, and you will soon have the sparkles of the same glory on your
hearts. Christ is now exalted, he is now in glory at the right hand of God,
Col. 3.1, 2.
O let all our actings be glorious, let all our walkings, joys, breathings be
as in glory, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God; set your affections on things
above, and not on things on the earth. I shall not in this transaction lay out
many particular conformities to Christ's actings, but gather all into one,
contained in this Text, which is heavenly conversation; seek things above, set
your affections above; Christ is gone up, and Christ is set down at God's right
hand; and herein if you will conform, let your hearts be in Heaven, let your
affections be in Heaven, let your conversations be in Heaven: it is the
Apostles own practice wherein stood his conformity to Jesus Christ for our
conversation is in heaven. Phil 3.20.
I do not know any one thing wherein we can be more like to Christ exalted,
whiles we are upon earth, than to have our hearts, our affections, our
conversations with Christ where he is: now then if we be vertually risen with
Christ, and ascended with Christ, and set down with Christ in heavenly places,
let us spiritually ascend, and sit down with him in these respects; certainly
there is a proportion in our heavenly conversation; oh let our conversations be
in Heaven?

In prosecution of this I shall examine these Quaeries. --

1. What do we mean by our conversation in heaven?

2. Why must our conversation be in heaven?

3. By what means must we come up to this conversation in heaven;

1. By our conversation in heaven I mean our aim at heaven; as heaven is our
home, so our eye is there; whatever we do, our end, our scope is to fit us for
heaven, and to lay in for heaven, We look not (says the Apostles) at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.
for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal. We look not] that is, we aim not at things which are seen;
invisible things are the only scope and aim of a gracious soul.

2. By our conversation in heaven, I mean our communion with Christ in heaven.
Truly our fellowship is with the Father, 1 John 1.3.
and with his Son Jesus Christ. As it is amongst friends that converse
together, they act mutually for the comfort one of another, there is a mutual
embracing and opening of their hearts to one another at every turn; so in our
conversings with Christ there is a communion, or a mutual acting of the soul
upon Christ, and of Christ upon the soul; we let out our hearts to Christ, and
he lets out his heart to us; especially when we are with Christ in his
Ordinances; it is not enough to call upon God, and to use some brokenhearted
expressions, but oh, what communion have I with Jesus Christ? I cannot be
satisfied except I taste and see how good the Lord is; I cannot be quiet,
except I hear something from Heaven this morning. Why, this is an heavenly
conversation.

3. By our conversation in Heaven, I mean our living according to the Laws of
Heaven; in all our ways we must still enquire, What rule is there from Heaven
to guide me in these ways? such and such a thing I have a mind to, but will the
Law of Heaven justify me in this? have I any word from Jesus Christ to guide
me in this? sometimes indeed my lust, my own ends, and the common course of the
world was my rule; but now I dare not act but according to the Will and Scepter
of Jesus Christ, now I am guided by the Laws of Heaven. Why, this is an
Heavenly conversation.

4. By our conversation in Heaven; I mean our thoughts, and meditations of
Heaven and heavenly things; When I awake (says David) I am always with thee;
Psalm. 139.18.
the hearts of believers are frequently upon their heavenly treasures; as it is
storied of Queen Mary, that a little before her death, she told them, if they
ripped her open they would find Call is in her heart; so it may be said of them
whose conversation is in Heaven, if you rip them up, you shall find Heaven in
their hearts; not a day passes over their heads without some converse with
Heaven, without some thoughts or meditations of heaven, and heavenly things.

5. By our conversation in heaven, I mean our affections on heaven, or on
Christ in heaven; Set your affections on things above, (i.e.) set your desires,
loves, hopes, joys, Col. 3.2.
breathings on heavenly things; our affections are precious things, and are
only to be set on precious objects; oh what a shame is it to set our affection
on the things of this life! have we a Kingdom, a God, a Christ, a Crown in
Heaven to set our affections upon? and shall we set them upon dross, and dung,
and such base things? are not all our pleasures and vanities base in comparison
of Christ? O be not we so base to set our affections on earthly things, but
rather on God and Christ; and this is our heavenly conversation.

6. By our conversation in Heaven, I mean our tradings, our negotiations for
Heaven, even whilst we are upon Earth: the word in the Original points at
this, (...), our trading is in Heaven; though our bodies be not there, yet our
tradings are there; we carry and behave our selves in this life as free
Denizons of the City of Heaven; our City whereof we are Citizens, and whereunto
we have right, is in Heaven above; in this respect we trade not for strifles,
as other men do, but we trade for great things, for high things; we merchandise
for goodly pearls, even for God, and for Christ, who sits at the right hand
of God. We see now what is meant by our conversation in Heaven.

2. Why is the conversation of the Saints in Heaven?

1. Because they know full well, that the Original of their souls came from God
and Heaven; the body indeed was of the dust of the ground, but the soul was the
breath of God; so it is said of the first man, God breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life, Genesis 2.7.
and man became a living soul. The soul had a more heavenly and divine Original
than any of the other creatures that are here in this nether World; and when
God works grace in the soul, and so it begins to know it self, and to return to
it self, it then looks on all things here below as vile, and as contemptible
things; it then looks upward, and begins to converse with things suitable to its
Original. As it is with a child that has a noble birth; if transported into
another Country, and there used like a slave, there set to take channels, or
(as the Prodigal) to feed swine; while he is there, and knows not his Original,
he minds nothing but to get victuals, and to do his work that he is set about;
but if once he come to know from whence he was, that he is indeed born heir to
such a Prince, in such a Country; O then his thoughts, and mind, and longings
will be altered; O that I were in my own Country! O that I were with my Father
in his Court! Even so it is with the souls of the Sons of men, they are the
birth (as I may so speak) of the great King of Heaven and Earth; and though by
the fall of man they came to be as slaves to Satan, yet when God is pleased to
convert the soul; then he discovers thus, Oh man, thou art born from on high,
thy soul is (as it were) a sparkle of God himself, thou art come from God, and
thou art capable of communion with God, even with God the Father, and God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost. O consider of thy Country whence thou came at
first, certainly thou never had such a divine and excellent being given thee
to delight only in the flesh, to be serviceable only to thy body; O look up
unto Jesus! why, this it is that turns the heart and sets the conversation on
heavenly things.

2. Because their best and choice things are already in Heaven, As their Father
is in Heaven, and their Savior is in Heaven, thither he ascended, and there
now he sits at the right hand of God; their Husband is in Heaven, their Elder
Brother is in Heaven, their King is in Heaven; their Treasure is in Heaven,
their Inheritance is in Heaven, their Hope is in Heaven, their Mansion is in
Heaven, their chief Friends are in Heaven, their Substance is in Heaven, their
reward is in Heaven, their Wages are in Heaven: and all these things being in
Heaven, no marvel their conversations be in Heaven.

3. Because they are going toward Heaven even whiles yet they are on Earth. If
the Nobleman (as we formerly supposed) do once know his condition, and begins
his travel homeward toward his Fathers Court, will he not every morning that
he rises, converse with them that come from his father to conduct him home?
does it not do him good to hear any man speak of his fathers Country? is it not
in his thoughts, in his talk, in his eye, in his aim, at every step? O my soul,
if thou art indeed traveling toward Heaven, how should thou but have it in
thy motions, affections, conversations? how should thou but daily commune
with thy own heart? Heaven is the place that I shall come to, ere long I shall
be there; I know that in this world I am but for a while, but in Heaven I shall
be for ever and ever; 1. These. 4.17.
we shall be caught up into the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so
shall we be ever with the Lord. Our very travel toward Heaven implies an
heavenly conversation, Psalm 84.7.
They go from strength to strength, till every one of them in Zion appears
before God.

Luke 17.21. Heb. 10.34.
4. Because much of Heaven is already in the Saints: The Kingdom of Heaven is
within you, says Christ; And knowing in your selves that ye have a better and
an enduring substance. Surely if the Saints have much of Heaven within them, it
must needs be that their conversation is in Heaven; but they know this in
themselves; they know it by what God has revealed in their own hearts; eternal
life is already begun in the souls of God's people; Heaven is in them, and
therefore no marvel if their conversation be in Heaven. My meaning is not as if
the Saints had no other Heaven but that within them; I know there is an Heaven
above; but some pieces, or earnests, or seeds, or beginnings of that Heaven
above is within them. Is there not a renewed nature, an Image of God, a spark
of life, a drop of glory in God's people? Surely yes; And if so, all these will
work heavenward; principles of grace will have some actings of grace till we
come to glory.

3. By what means should we attain, or come up to have our conversation in
Heaven?

1. Let us watch opportunities for heavenly exercises. God now by his Ministers
calls, Isa. 55.1, 3. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Come ye to the waters, come ye, buy and eat; come, buy wine, and milk without
money; come to me, and your souls shall live. Why now is the accepted time,
behold now is the day of salvation: whiles Ministers call, and we live under
the droppings of the Word, these are opportunities for Heaven; O then he that
never prayed, let him now pray; and he that never heard, let him now hear; the
Lord is now come near to us; Christ Jesus is calling, and mercy is entreating,
and love is beseeching, and wisdom is even hoarse with crying after us; O lay
hold on these opportunities for heavenly exercises, and then we shall come up
to heavenly conversations.

2. Take heed of resting in the formality of duties; many souls that have
enlightnings of conscience, dare not but take opportunities for heavenly
duties; but then comes in the temptations of the Devil, and corruptions of
their own hearts, and they say, now duty is done, or our task is over, and what
needs more? Alas, alas! It is not what have we done? but where have we been?
what, have our souls been in Heaven, with God, and with Christ? have we had any
communion with the Father, and with the Son in our duties? O take heed of
formality! it will exceedingly hinder our conversation in Heaven; O keep our
eye still upon our heart! ask in duty, what affections have been acted? how
much are we got nearer Heaven thereby? and by this means we shall come to an
heavenly conversation.

3. Let us look up unto Jesus as hanging on the Cross, and as sitting on the
Throne: this is the Apostles rule, Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
of our faith, Heb. 12.2.
who for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God. These two are
the objects of a Christians look who studies an heavenly conversation, viz.
Christ's Cross, and Christ's Session; by the Cross he is Author, and by the
Throne he is the Finisher of our faith; in the first is set down his love to
us, in the second is set down our hope of him; with high wisdom has the Holy
Ghost exhorted us with these two motives to run, and not to faint: first, here
is love, love in the Cross, Who loved us, Ephesians. 5.2.
and gave himself for us, a sacrifice on the Cross: secondly, Here is hope,
hope in the Throne, To him that overcomes, will I give to sit with me in my
Throne. Rev. 3.21.
After Christ's death he rose again, ascended, and is now set down at the right
hand of the Throne of God; and the same is our blessed hope, Christ's Throne is
not only his place, but ours also; the love of his Cross is to us a pledge of
the hope of his Throne, or of whatsoever else he is worth. Come then, and
settle your thoughts and looks on this blessed object; a sight of Christ's
Cross, but especially of Christ's Throne, is a blessed means to wean us from
the World, and to elevate and raise up our affections to things above, yea to
form and frame our conversation toward Heaven.

4. Let us wait for the appearing of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.20.
Our conversation is in Heaven (says the Apostle) from whence also we look for
the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ. Where a man's conversation is, there his
expectations may be; and where his expectations are, there a man's conversation
is, and will be; if we expect ere long, that the Lord Jesus will appear in
glory, and that we shall see him not with other, but with these same eyes, the
very waiting for these things will help our conversation to be heavenward.
Certainly the day is a coming, when Jesus Christ shall come with his Angels in
his glory, and then shall the bodies of the Saints shine gloriously before the
Face of God, and Jesus Christ: O the wonder of this day! the glory of Christ
shall then darken the glory of the Sun and Moon, and Stars; but my body shall
not be darkened, but rather it shall shine like the glorious body of Christ
Jesus; if a candle should be raised to have so much luster and beauty, as if
you should put it into the midst of the Sun, yet it would shine, you would
think it a strange kind of light; surely it shall be so with the bodies of
Saints, for though they are put into the midst of the glory of God, and of his
Son Jesus Christ, yet their bodies shall shine in beauty and luster there; now
did we believe this, and wait for it every day, How would it change us? how
would it work us to an heavenly conversation? I have a diseased and lumpish
body; and my body hinders me in every duty of God's worship, but within a while
Christ will come in his glory, and then he will make my body like unto his
glorious body, so that I shall be able to look upon the face of God, and to be
exercised in holy duties to all eternity without weariness, without
intermission: I have many things here that trouble my mind and spirit, and that
hinder me in my converse with Heaven, and heavenly things; but within a while,
Christ will appear with his mighty Angels, to be admitted of his Saints, and
then shall I sit as an assessor on the Throne, with Jesus Christ to judge the
world, and then shall I live for ever with him, to be where he is, and enjoy
all he has, yea all that he has purchased for me by his blood; oh let me wait
for this! let me look for it every day! God has but a little work for me here
on Earth, and when that is done, this shall be my condition. Christians! if but
every day we would work these things on our souls, it would be a mighty help to
make our conversations heavenly conversations.

5. Let us observe the drawings, and movings, and mindings of the Spirit, and
follow his dictates; to this purpose Christ ascended, and sat down at God's
right hand, and sent down the holy Spirit, that the Holy Ghost being come down,
he might do his office in bringing on our souls toward salvation; and if ever
our souls get above this earth, and get acquainted with this living in Heaven,
it is the Spirit of God that must be at the chariot of Elijah, yea the very
living principle, by which we must move and ascend; O then take heed of
quenching its motions, or resisting its workings, take we heed of grieving our
guide, or of knocking off the chariot-wheels of this holy Spirit. We little
think how much the life of graces, and the happiness of our souls does depend
upon our ready and cordial obedience to the Spirit of God; when he forbids us
our own known transgressions, and we will go on, when he tells us which is the
way, and which is not, and we will not regard, no wonder if we are strangers to
an heavenly conversation; if we will not follow the Spirit, while it would draw
us to Christ, how should it lead us to Heaven, or bring our hearts into the
presence of God? O learn we this lesson, and let not only the motions of our
bodies; but also the very thoughts of our hearts be at the Spirits beck! do we
not sometimes feel a strong impulsion to retire from the world, and to draw
near to God? O let us not despise, or disobey, but take we the offer, and hoise
up our sail, while we may have this blessed gale; if we cherish these motions,
and hearken to the Spirit, O what a supernatural help should we find to this
heavenly mindedness, or heavenly conversation?

Thus far we have looked on Jesus, as our Jesus in his Ascension, Session, and
Mission of his holy Spirit, our next work is to look on Jesus carrying on the
great work of our salvation for us in his Intercession, which he makes, and
will make to his Father on our behalf, till his second coming to judgment.
LOOKING UNTO JESUS In his Intercession. Book IX. Part VI.
CHAP. I.
Heb. 3.1. Romans 8.34. Consider the Apostle, and High Priest of our profession,
Christ Jesus -- who also makes intercession for us.
SECT. I. What the Intercession of Christ is.
WE have spoken of Christ's entrance into Heaven, and of his immediate actings
after his entrance there; that transaction which yet remains, and will remain
until his coming again, it is his Intercession for the Saints. In these
actings of Christ in Heaven (if we will follow him) we must go from glory to
glory; no sooner come we out of one room of glory, but presently we step into
another as glorious as that before: one would think, enough had been said
already of the glory of Christ, and of our glory in Christ; who would not
willingly sit down under the shadow of this happiness, and go no further? but
yet this is not all; so thick and fast does the glory of Christ break in upon
us, that no sooner out of one, but presently we are led into the bosom of
another. Oh what a blessed thing is it to be viewing Christ, and to be looking
up to Jesus Christ! Saints might do nothing else (if they pleased) but ravish
their hearts with the diversity of heavenly light and comfort, which breaks
forth from the bosom of Jesus Christ. Here is now another mystery as great, and
amazing, as the former, which springs out before our eyes in this transaction
of Christ's Intercession.

And in prosecution of this, as in the former, I shall first lay down the
object, and secondly direct you how to look upon it. The object is Jesus
carrying on the great work of our salvation in his Intercession: in ordering of
which, I shall examine these particulars; -- 1. What is this intercession of
Christ? 2. According to what nature does Christ intercede? 3. To whom is
Christ's intercession directed? 4. For whom is the intercession made? 5. What
agreement betwixt Christ's intercessions, and the intercessions of the
Highpriests of old? 6. W^^t is the difference betwixt Christ's intercession,
and the intercessions of those Highpriests? 7. What are the properties of this
intercession of Jesus Christ? 8. Wherein more especially does the intercessions
of Christ consist? 9. How powerful, and prevailing are Christ's intercessions
with God his Father. 10. What are the reasons of this great transaction of
Christ's intercession for his people?


1. What is the intercession of Christ? some define it thus, Christ's
intercession is that part of his Priestly office, whereby Christ is Advocate,
and intreater of God the Father for the faithful. I shall give it thus,
Christ's intercession is his gracious will, fervently and immovably desiring,
that for the perpetual vert^^ of his sacrifice, all his members might both for
their persons and duties be accepted of the Father. 1. I call the intercession
of Christ his own gracious will; for we must not imagine that Christ, in his
intercession, prostrates himself upon his knees before his Fathers Throne,
uttering some submissive form of words or prayers; that is not beseeming the
Majesty of him that sits at God's right hand; when he was but yet on Earth, the
substance of his requests for his Saints run thus, Father I will, that they
also whom thou have given me be with me where I am; and how much more now he is
in Heaven, John 17.24.
is this the form of his intercessions, Father I will this, and I will that. 2.
The ground of foundation of Christ's intercession, is the sacrifice, or death
of Christ; and hence we make two parts of Christ's Priesthood, or oblation;
the one expiatory, when Christ suffered upon the Cross; the other presentatory,
when he does appear in Heaven before God for us; the one was finished on Earth,
when Christ suffered without the gate; the other is performed in Heaven, now
Christ is within the City; the one was a sacrifice indeed, the other is not so
much a sacrifice as the commemoration of a sacrifice; the first was an act of
humiliation, and this latter is an act of glory; the first was performed once
for all, this latter is done continually; the first was for the obtaining of
redemption, and this latter is for the application of redemption; so that the
ground of this is that; Christ fervently and immoveably desires his Father for
the sake and virtue of his sacrifice. 3. The subject matter interceded for, is,
that all the Saints and their service, might find acceptance with God; first
Christ's intercession is for our persons, and then Christ's intercession is for
our works, for as out persons are but in part regenerate, and in part
unregenerate; or in part flesh, and in part spirit; so be our duties, part
good, and part evil; in part spiritual, and in part sinful; now by Christ's
intercession is Christ's satisfaction applied to our persons, and by
consequence the defect of our duties is covered and removed; and both we and
our works are approved and accepted of God the Father. And thus much for the
nature of Christ's intercession, what it is.

SECT. II. According to what nature Christ does intercede.
2. ACcording to what nature does Christ intercede? I answer, according to both
natures: 1. According to his humanity, partly by appearing before his Father in
Heaven, Heb. 9.24. Joh. 16.26, 27.
and partly by desiring the salvation of the Elect: Christ is entered into
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. And I say not unto
you that I will pray or desire the Father for you, for the Father himself
loves you. 2. According to his Deity, partly by applying the merit of his
death, and partly by willing the salvation of his Saints; and as the effect
thereof, by making requests in the hearts of the Saints with sighs unspeakable.
1 Pet. 1.2.
Elect, through sanctification of the Spirit and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ: this sprinkling is the applying of the blood of Jesus, and that
is an act of intercession: Joh. 17.24.
Again, Father I will that they whom thou have given me be with me where I am;
he desires as man, but he wills as God; and as the effect of this he gives the
Spirit, Romans 8.26.
The Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered. But what are the intercessions of the Spirit to the intercessions of
Christ? I answer, much every way; the Spirits intercessions are as the effect,
and Christ's intercessions are as the cause; the Spirits intercessions are as
the Echo, and Christ's intercessions are as the first voice; the spirit
intercedes for men in and by themselves, but Christ intercedes in his own
person; there is a dependence of the Spirits intercessions in us upon Christ's
intercessions in himself. First, Christ by his intercession applies his
satisfaction made, and lays the salve to the very sore; and then he sends down
his holy spirit into our hearts to help our infirmities; and to teach us what
to pray, and how to pray as we ought. Now this he does as God, for who shall
give a commission to the spirit of God, but God himself? it is as if Christ
should say, see holy Spirit, how I take upon me the cause of my Saints, I am
perpetually representing my sacrifice to God my Father, I am ever pleading for
them, and answering all the accusations that sin or Satan can lay against them;
and now go thy way to such and such, and take up thy dwelling in their hearts,
and assist them by thy energy, to plead their own case; I am their Advocate or
Intercessor by office, and therefore be thou their Advocate or Intercessor by
operation, instruction, inspiration, and assistance.

SECT. III. To whom Christ's intercession is directed.
3. TO whom is Christ's intercession directed? I answer, immediately to God the
Father; If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
Jesus Christ the righteous. In the work of intercession are three persons, a
party offended, a party offending, and the Intercessor distinct from them both;
the party offended is God the Father, the party offending is sinful man, and
the Intercessor distinct from them both, is Jesus Christ, the middle person (as
it were) betwixt God the Father, and us men; the Father is God, and not man;
and we that believe in Christ are men, and not God; and Christ himself is both
man and God, and therefore, he intercedes and mediates betwixt God and man: If
any object, that not only the Father is offended, but also the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, and therefore there must be a Mediator to them also; the solution
is easy; Christ's intercession is immediately directed to the Father; but
because the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have all one indivisible essence, and
by consequence one will; it therefore follows, that the Father being appeased
by Christ's intercession, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are also appeased with
him, and in him I deny not but Christ's intercession is made to the whole
Trinity, but yet immediately, and directly to the first person, and in him to
the rest. -- But if so, then in some sense (say our adversaries) Christ makes
intercession to himself, which cannot be; because in every intercession there
must of necessity be three parties: this point has sore puzzled the Church of
Rome, that for the solving of it, they knew no other way but to avouch Christ
to be our intercessor only as man, and not as God, which is most untrue; for as
both natures did concur in the work of satisfaction, so likewise they do both
concur in the work of intercession: and it is an ancient and approved rule, that
names of office, which are given to Christ, such as Mediator, Intercessor,
Appellationes officii competunt Christo secundum utramque naturam.
etc. agree unto him according to both natures; and can the act of Christ's
intercession be the act of Christ's manhood alone? what? to hear, and offer up
prayers? to receive and present the prayers and praises, and other spiritual
sacrifices of all believers in the World? to negotiate for them all at one and
the same time, according to the variety and multiplicity of their several
occasions? surely this is, and must be the work of an infinite, and not of a
finite agent; this cannot be effected without the concurrence of the divine
nature with the humane; but what needs any further answer to this objection?
suppose Christ intercede to himself as God; that is not immediately, and
directly to the same person God the Son, though to the same God essentially;
indeed Christ (...) God-man, in respect of his natures agrees with both; being
not only God, not only man; but God-man, man-God, blessed for ever; but in
respect of his person, being the second person in the Trinity he is distinct
from both. 1. From the personality of man, for he has only the personality of
God and not of man. 2. From the first person of the Godhead, who is God the
Father, 1 John 5.7.
for there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost; and these three are one, (i e.) three persons, and but one God.

SECT. IV. For whom this Intercession is made.
4. FOR whom is this Intercession made? I answer, 1. Negatively, not for the
World, John 17.9.
I pray not for the World, says Christ; whiles Christ was on Earth he would
not so much as spend his breath, or open his lips for the World; he knew God
would not hear him for them; in like manner Christ prays now in Heaven. Not for
the World, he never had a thought to redeem them, or to save their fouls, and
therefore they have no share in his intercessions; I know the objection, that
Christ upon the the Cross, Luke 23.34.
prayed for the bloody Jews, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do; but that might be of private duty as man, who in that respect submitted
himself to the Law of God, which requires that we forgive our enemies, and pray
for them that persecute us, and not of his proper office as Mediator; or if it
be referred to the proper mediatory intercession of Jesus Christ (which I
rather think) it will not prove that he prayed for them all universally, but
only indefinitely, (i.e.) only for them that were present at his crucifying,
and that in simplicity of heart, and not of affected ignorance, crucified
Christ; and accordingly this prayer was heard, which so many of the Jews were
converted at Peter's Sermon, Act. 2.41. what needs more? his own words are
express, that Christ's intercessions are not for the World, or reprobates. So
much negatively.

2. Positively, Christ's intercession is general, and particular; for all, and
every faithful man; John 17.9.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world; but for them which thou have given
me, for they are thine. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has
desired to have you, Luke 22.31, 32
that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not. As the High Priest went into the Sanctuary with the names of the twelve
tribes upon his breast, so Christ entered into the holiest of all, with the names
of all believers upon his heart, and still he carries them upon his breast, and
presents his will and desire unto his Father for them; nor does he only
intercede in general, but Simon, Simon; mark that; what ever thy name is, John,
Peter, Thomas, Mary, Martha, if thou art a believer, Christ prays for thee; it
is our common practice to desire the prayers one of another, but O who would
not have a share in the prayers of Jesus Christ? why, certainly if thou
believe in Christ, Christ prays for thee; I have prayed, and I will pray for
thee, says Christ, that thy faith fail not.

SECT. V. What agreement there is betwixt Christ's intercessions, and the
intercessions of the Highpriests of Old.
5. WHat agreement is there betwixt the intercessions of Christ, and the
intercessions of the High Priests of Old? Among the Jews in the times of the
Old Testament, they had an High Priest, who was in all things to stand betwixt
God and them. Now as the Jews had their High Priest to intercede for them, so
the Lord Jesus was to be the High Priest of our Christian profession, and to
intercede for us; it will therefore give some light to this doctrine of
intercession, if we will but compare these two; and first consider, what
agreement betwixt Christ and the Highpriests of Old; betwixt Christ's
intercession, and the Highpriests intercessions?

1. Christ and the Highpriests of Old agreed in name; not only they, but
Christ himself is called an High Priest; Heb. 8.1. Heb 3.1.
We have such an High Priest, who is set down at the right hand of the Majesty
on high. -- Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Heb. 5.6.
Jesus Christ. -- Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedech.
The Old Priesthood of Aaron was translated into the Priesthood of Jesus
Christ; so that he was a Priest as well as they.

2. They agreed in office; that consisted of two parts, oblation and
presentation; First, They offered a sacrifice: And secondly, They presented it
in the holy of holies, with prayer and intercession unto God; the one was done
without, the other within the holy of hollies; and in answer thereunto there
are two distinct parts of Christ's Priesthood: 1. The offering of himself a
sacrifice upon the Cross: 2. The carrying of himself and of his blood into the
holy of holies, or in the heaven of heavens; where he appears and prays in the
force of that blood; and this was so necessary a part of his Priesthood, that
without this he had not been a complete Priest, Heb. 8.4.
for if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest; that in, if he should have
made his abode upon the earth, he should not have been a complete or perfect
Priest, seeing this part of it (which we call the presentation, or
intercession) lay still upon him to be acted in heaven. And indeed this part of
his Priesthood is of the two the more eminent; yea, the top and height of his
priesthood; and therefore it is held forth to us in the Types of both those
two orders of Priesthood that were before him, and Figures of him, both that
of Aaron and Melchizedech. 1. This was Typified in that Levitical Priesthood
of Aaron and his fellows; the highest service of that Office was the going into
the holy of hollies, and making an atonement there; yea, this was the height
of the high Priest's honor, that he did this alone, and it constituted the
difference betwixt him as he was high Priest, and other Priests; for they
killed and offered the Sacrifices without as well as he, but only the high
Priest was to approach the holy of hollies with blood, and that but once a
year. 2. This was Typified by Melchizedech's Priesthood, which the Apostle
argues to have been much more excellent then that of Aaron's, in as much as
Levi, Aarons Father, paid Tithes to this Melchizedech in Abraham's loins; now
Melchizedech was his Type, not so much in respect of his Oblation, or offering
Sacrifice, as in respect of his continual presentation and intercession in
heaven; and therefore the same clause, for ever, still comes in when
Melchizedech is named, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedech. Heb. 5.6. -- 7.17.
Here then is the agreement betwixt Christ and the Highpriests of old; in
respect of name, both were Priests; and in respect of Office, both had their
oblations, and presentations, or intercessions with God in Glory.

3. In the point of Intercession they agreed in these particulars. --

1. The High Priest of old, usually once a year, went into the most Holy place
within the vail; and so is Christ our great High Priest passed into the Heavens
within the Vail, even into the holy of holies. Christ by his own blood entered
in once into the holy place -- Not into the holy places made with hands, Heb.
9.12, 24.
which are the Figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us.

2. The Highpriests of old had a plate of pure Gold upon their Foreheads,
which was to bear the iniquity of the holy things, that they might be accepted
before the Lord; Exodus 28.38.
and so does Christ bear the iniquity of our holy things. Spiritual Christians!
here is your comfort, you are not able to perform any duty to God, but there is
a great deal of sin in the same; you cannot hear, nor pray, nor confer, nor
meditate without much sin; but Christ bears all these sins, even the iniquity
of your holy things, and he presents your persons, and prayers without the
least spot to his Father; he is the Angel of the Covenant that stands at the
Altar, Rev. 8.3.
having a golden Censer. with much incense; to offer it with the prayers of his
Saints, and so they are acceptable before the Lord.

3. The Jewish Highpriests, bore the names of the Children of Israel on a
breast plate of judgment upon their hearts for a memorial before the Lord
continually; Exodus 28.29.
and so does Christ our great High Priest bear the names of his people upon his
heart before the Lord continually. But how is Christ said to bear the names of
the Saints upon his heart? I answer --

1. Continually, in presenting of them to his Father as they are in him: how is
that? why, he represents them without spot, as righteous in his own
righteousness; Ephesians. 5.27.
Christ loved the Church, that he might present it to his Father, and in him to
himself, a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy, and without blemish.

2. In this continual remembering of them: Psalm. 112.6.
the righteous shall be had in continual remembrance; this is the souls comfort
in a time of desertion, or in an evil day; Psalm. 13.1.
if any cry out as sometimes David did, how long will thou forget me Lord? for
ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? Isa. 40.14, 15, 16.
Let such a one remember that Christ's redeemed ones are upon his heart, and he
can not forget them, But Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me; Oh no! can a woman forget her suckling child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet I will not
forget thee, behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls
are continually before me; the Sons of Zion are upon Christ's heart, and hands
and they are ever in his sight.

3. In his perpetual loving of them; they are near and dear unto him, he has
set them as a Seal upon his heart; so was the prayer of the Spouse, set me as a
Seal upon thine heart, Cant. 8.6.
as a Seal upon thine arm; and then it follows, for love is as strong as
death. Christ has an entire love to his Saints; he dyed for them, and now he
intercedes for them; he keeps them close to his heart, and there is none shall
pluck them out of his hands, John 13.1.
for whom he loves, he loves unto the end. Thus far of the agreement betwixt
Christ's intercessions, and the intercessions of the high Priests of old.

SECT. VI. What the difference is betwixt Christ's intercessions, and the
intercessions of the high Priests of old.
6. What is the difference betwixt Christ's Intercessions, and the
intercessions of the high Priests of old? There is no question, but howsoever
they might agree in some respects, yet Christ officiates in a more transcendent
and eminent way then ever any high Priest did before him; now the difference
betwixt Christ and them, and betwixt Christ's Intercessions and their
Intercessions, may appear in these particulars. --

Heb. 4.14.
1. They were called high Priests, but Christ is called the great high Priest;
such a Title was never given to any but Christ; whence the Apostle argues for
the steadfastness of our profession: seeing then that we have a great high
Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our profession.

2. The Highpriests then were Aaron and his Sons, but Christ our great
High Priest is the Son of God; for so he is styled in the same verse, the great
High Priest that is passed into the heavens, Heb. 4.14.
Jesus the Son of God.

3. The Highpriests then were but for a time, but Christ is a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchizedech. Heb. 5.6. Heb. 7.3.
Melchizedech (says the Apostle) was without Father, without Mother, without
descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. That is, as far as
it is known; and so is Christ without a Father on earth, and without a Mother
in Heaven; without beginning, and without end; he abides a Priest perpetually,
even to the end of the World; yea, and the virtue of his Priesthood, is
infinitely beyond all time, even for ever and ever.

4. The Highpriests then entered only into that place that was Typically holy,
but Christ is entered into that place that is properly holy; he is entered into
the Heavens, or (if you will) as into the holy of holies, so into the heaven of
heavens.

5. The high Priests then did not always intercede for the people; only once a
year the high Priest entered into the holy of holies; and after he had sprinkled
the mercy-seat with blood, and caused a cloud to rise upon the mercy-seat with
his Prayers and Incense, then he went out of the holy of holies, and laid aside
his Garments again; but our great high Priest is ascended into the holy of
holies, never to put off his princely-priestly garments: nor does he only once
a year sprinkle the mercy-seat with his sacrifice, but every day; he lives for
ever to intercede; Oh what comfort is this to a poor dejected Soul! if he once
undertakes thy cause, and get thee into his prayers, he will never leave thee
out night nor day; he intercedeth eyer, till he shall accomplish and finish thy
Salvation; the smoke of his incense ascends for ever without intermission.

6. The Highpriests then interceded not for sins of greater instances; if a
man sinned ignorantly, there was indeed a Sacrifice, and Intercession for him;
but if a man sinned presumptuously, Numb. 15.30.
he was to be cut off from among his people; no Sacrifice, no Intercession by
the high Priest then; but we have such an high Priest as makes Intercession for
all sins; every sin though it boil up to blasphemy (so it be not against the
holy Ghost) shall by the virtue of Christ's intercession be forgiven. In that
day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, Zach. 13.1.
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness, (i.e.) for
sins of all sorts. Verily I say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven unto the
Sons of Men, Mark. 3.28.
(i.e.) Scarlet sins, or crimson sins; sins of the deepest dye shall by Christ's
Intercession be done away; the voice of his blood speaks better things than the
Blood of Abel; it intercedes for the abolition of bloody sins.

7. The high Priests then interceded not without all these materials, viz. A
Temple, an Altar, a Sacrifice of a young Bullock for a sin-offering, Levit.
16.3.
and a Ram for a burnt offering; a Censer full of burning coals of fire taken
off the Altar, a putting the incense upon the fire, that the cloud of the
incense might cover the mercy-seat, a sprinkling the mercy-seat with the blood
of the Bullock, and of the Goat with their finger, seven times; such materials
they had, and such actions they did, which were all distinct as from
themselves; but Jesus Christ in his Intercessions now needs none of these
materials; but rather he himself and his own merits are instead of all. As, 1.
He is the Temple, either in regard of the Deity, the gold of the Temple being
sanctified by the Temple, or in regard of his humane body, destroy this Temple,
(says Christ) and I will build it again in three days; it was destroyed, and
God found it an acceptable Sacrifice, and smelt in it a sweet savor as in a
Temple. 2. He is the Altar according to his Deity, for as the Altar sanctifies
the gift, so does the Godhead sanctify the manhood; The Altar must needs be
of a greater dignity than the oblation, and therefore this Altar betokens the
Divinity of Jesus Christ. 3. He is the Sacrifice most properly according to the
Manhood, for although by communication of properties the blood of the
Sacrifice is called the blood of God, Acts 20.28.
yet properly the human Soul and flesh of Christ was the Holocaust, or whole
burnt-offering roasted in the fire of his Fathers wrath. 4. His merits are the
cloud of Incense, for so the Angel; Christ is said to have a golden Censer, and
much Incense, Rev. 8.3, 4.
that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar
which was before the Throne; and the smoke of the Incense which came with the
Prayers of the Saints ascended up before God out of the Angels hand: the merits
of Christ are so mingled with the prayers of his Saints, that they perfume
their Prayers, and so they find acceptance with God his Father. We see now the
difference betwixt Christ's Intercessions, and the Intercessions of the high
Priests of Old.

SECT. VII. What the Properties of this Intercession of Christ are.
7. WHat are the properties of this Intercession of Jesus Christ? I answer. --
1. It is heavenly and glorious; and that appears in these particulars.

1. Christ does not fall upon his knees before his Father, as in the days of
his humiliation; for that is not agreeable to that glory he has received; he
only presents his pleasure to his Father, that he may thereto put his Seal and
Consent. 2. Christ does not pray out of private charity as the Saints pray one
for another in this life, but out of public Office of mediation, there is one
God, 1 Timothy 2.5.
and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. 3. Christ prays
not out of humility, which is the proposing of requests for things unmerited,
but out of authority, which is the desiring of a thing, so as withal he has a
right of bestowing it, as well as desiring it. 4. Christ prays not merely as an
advocate, but as a propitiation too; Christ's Spirit is an advocate, but only
Christ is advocate and propitiation; Christ's Spirit is our advocate on earth,
but only Christ in his Person applies his merits in heaven, and furthers the
cause of our salvation with his Father in heaven. In every of these respects we
may see Christ's intercessions is heavenly and glorious.

2. It is ever effectual and prevailing: as he has a power to intercede for
us, so he has a power to confer that upon us for which he intercedes. John 14
16. John 16.7.
I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter. If I go not
away the comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart I will send him unto
you. If Christ prayed on earth, he was ever heard, but if Christ prayed in
heaven, we may be sure the Father ever hears and answers there; when Christ
as man prayed for himself, he was heard in that which he fears, but now
Christ as Mediator praying for us, he is ever heard in the very particular
which he desires. James 4.3.
We sinful men many a time ask and receive not, because we ask amiss, that we
may consume it upon our Lusts; but Jesus Christ never asks amiss; nor to wrong
ends; and therefore God the Father who called him to this Office of being (as
it were) the great Master of Requests in behalf of his Church, John 11.41, 42.
he promises to hear him in all his requests. Father, I thank thee that thou
have heard me, and I know thou hear me always, says Christ.

3. It is of all other the transactions of Christ, till the very end of the
World, the most perfective and consummate: indeed so perfective, that without
it all the other parts of Christ's Mediatorship would have been to little
purpose. As the Sacrifices under the Law had not been of such force and
efficacy, had not the high Priest entered into the holy place to appear there,
and to present the blood there unto the Lord; so all that ever Christ did or
suffered upon earth, it had been ineffectual unto us, had he not entered into
heaven, Heb. 9.24.
to appear there in the presence of God for us. Surely this Intercession is
that which puts life into the death of Christ; this Intercession is that which
strikes the last stroke during this World, in the carrying on of our souls
Salvation, Goodwin, Christ set forth. Romans 8.34.
and makes all sure. It is a witty observation that one makes of these several
steps of Christ's actings for us; as first, there was an all sufficiency in his
death, who shall condemn? it is Christ that dyed. 2. A rather in his
Resurrection; yea rather, that is risen again. 3. A much rather in his life and
session at God's right hand, for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to
God by the death of Christ, much rather being reconciled we shall be saved by
his life. Romans 5.10.
4. The Apostle rises yet higher to a saving to the utmost, and puts that upon
his intercession; wherefore he is able to save us to the utmost, Heb. 7.25.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us. If in the former were any
thing wanting, this intercession of Christ supplies all; it is the Coronis,
which makes all effectual; it saves to the uttermost, for it self is the
uttermost and highest step; on earth Christ begins the execution of his office,
in heaven he ends it; in his life and death Christ was the meritorious cause,
but by his intercession Christ is the applying cause of our souls salvation. In
this very Intercession of Christ is the consummation and perfection of the
Priesthood of Christ. O then how requisite and necessary must this needs be?

4. It is gracious, and full of bowels; Christ his intercession, and indeed
Christ's Priestly office is erected, and set up on purpose, for the relief of
poor distressed sinners. There is no mixture of terror in this blessed office
of Jesus Christ, and this does distinguish it from his other offices. Christ by
his Kingly office rules over the Churches, and over the World; but all obtain
not mercy whom he thus rules over; Christ by his prophetical office comes to
his own, but many of his own received him not; but now wherever the Priestly
office of Jesus Christ is let forth upon a Soul, that soul shall certainly be
saved for ever. O this Priestly office of Christ is an office of mere love and
tender compassion: Heb. 4.15.
Christ (says the Apostle) is such an High Priest as cannot be but touched
with the feeling of our infirmities. Oh he is a merciful, Heb. 2.17.
and a faithful high Priest in things partaining to God, to make reconciliation
for the sins of the People. He is merciful and exceeding compassionate; in all
our afflictions he is afflicted; Isa. 63.9.
-- and in his love, and in his pity he Redeemed us; and in his love and pity
he intercedes for us.

SECT VIII. Wherein the Intercession of Christ consists.
8. WHerein more especially does the Intercessions of Jesus Christ consist?
some suppose that Christ's very being in heaven, and putting God in mind of his
active and passive obedience by his very presence, is all that intercession
that the Scripture speaks of. But I rather answer is these particulars. As --

1. Christ's intercession consists in the presenting of his Person for us: he
himself went up to heaven, and presented himself; the Apostle calls this, an
appearing for us: Christ is not entered into the holy place made with hands,
but into heav^n, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Heb. 9.24.
I believe there is an Emphasis in the Word appearing for us. But how appears
he for us? I answer. 1. In a public manner; whatsoever he did in this kind, he
did it openly and publicly; he appears for us in the presence of God the
Father; he appears for us in the presence of his Saints and Angels; heavens
eyes are all upon him in his appearing for us. 2. He appears for us as a
Mediator, he stands in the middle betwixt God and us; hence it is, that he is
God-man, that he might be a Mediator betwixt God and man. 3. He appears for us
as a Sponsor, and a pledge; surely it is a comfort for a man to have a friend
at Court, at the Princes elbow, that may own him, and appear for him; but if
this friend be both a Mediator and Surety, a Mediator to request for him, and a
Surety to engage for him. Phil. 9.10. ver. 18, 19.
Oh what comfort is this! thus Christ appeared in every respect; he is a
Mediator to request for us; and he is a Surety to engage for us: as Paul, was
for Onesimus a mediator, I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus; and a Sponsor, if
he has wronged thee; or, owe thee ought, put that on my account, I will repay
it. So is Jesus Christ for his Saints; he is the Mediator of a better Covenant,
Heb. 8.6. Heb. 8.6.
and he is a Surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7.22. Heb. 7.^2.
4. He appears as a Solicitor, to present and promote the desires and requests
of his Saints, in such a way as that they may find acceptance with his Father.
He is not idle now he is in Heaven; but as on earth he ever went about doing
good: so now in glory he is ever about his work of doing good; he spends all
his time in Heaven in promoteing the good of his people; as from the beginning
it was his care, so to the Worlds end it will be his care to solicit his
Father in the behalf of his poor Saints; he tells God, thus and thus it is with
his poor Members, they are in want, in trouble, in distress, in affliction, in
reproach; and then he presents their sighs, sobs, prayers, tears, and groans;
and that in such a way as that they may become acceptable to his Father. -- 5.
He appears as an Advocate: if any man sin, 1 John 2.^.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. An Advocate
is more than a Solicitor; an Advocate is one that is of Counsel with an other,
and that pleads his Case in open Court; and such an advocate is Jesus Christ
unto his people. 1. He is of Council with them; that is one of the Titles given
him by the Prophet Isaiah, Wonderful, Counselor; Isa. 96.
He counsels them by his Word and Spirit. 2. He pleads for them, and this he
does in the high Court of Heaven, at the Bar of God's own Justice; there he
pleads their case, and answers all the accusations that are brought in by
Satan or their own Consciences: but of this anon. -- 6. He appears as a public
agent, or Ledger-Embassadour; what that is, some tell us in these particulars;
1. His work is to continue peace; and surely this is Christ's work, he is our
peace (says the Apostle); that is, the author of our peace; Ephesians. 2.14.
he purchased our peace, and he maintains our peace with God; to this purpose
he sits at God's right hand to intercede for us, and to maintain the peace and
union betwixt God and us; therefore being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. His work is to
maintain intercourse and correspondency; and surely this is Christ's work also;
By him we have an access unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.3.12.
-- In him we have boldness and access with confidence, by the Faith of him;
the word access] does not only signify coming to God in prayer, but all that
resort and communion which we have with God, as united by faith to Jesus
Christ; according to that, 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ had once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God. This benefit have all believers in and by Christ; they come to
God by him, they have free commerce and intercourse in heaven -- 3. His work is
to reconcile and take up emergent differences, and this is Christ's work also;
Isa. 53.12.
he makes intercession for the Transgressors; he takes up the differences that
our transgressions make betwixt God and us. 4. This work is to procure the
welfare of the People or State where he negotiates; and this is no less
Christ's Work, for he seeks the welfare of his people, he sits at God's right
hand to intercede for them, and commending their estate and condition to his
Father, Phil. 1.19.
he makes it his request to his Father that his members may have a continual
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; that they may be strengthened in
temptations, confirmed in tribulations, delivered from every evil work, enabled
to every good duty, and finally preserved unto his Heavenly Kingdom.

2. Christ's Intercessions consists in the presenting of his Wounds, Death, and
Blood, as a public satisfaction for the debt of sin; and as a public price
for the purchase of our glory.

There is a question amongst the Schools, whether Christ has not taken his
wounds, or the signs, skars, and prints of his wounds into heaven with him? and
whether Christ is representing those wounds, skars, and prints unto his Father,
does not hereby intercede for us? some I am sure are for the affirmative.
Aquinas distinguishes of Christ's Intercession as being threefold, Aquin. in
Job. c. 2.
the first before his passion by devout prayer, and the second at his Passion
by effusion of his blood, and the third after his Ascension, by the
representation of his Wounds and Scars. Howsoever this hold, (for I dare not be
too confident without Scripture-ground) yet this I dare say, that Christ does
not only present himself, but the Sacrifice of himself, and the infinite Merit
of his Sacrifice. When he went to heaven, he carried with him absolutely the
Power, Merit, the virtue of his Wounds, and Death, and Blood into the presence
of God the Father for us; and with his blood he sprinkled the Mercy-seat (as it
were) seven times. We read in the Law, that When the high Priest went within
the vail; he took the blood of the Bullock, and sprinkled it with his finger
upon the mercy-seat Eastward: Levit. 16.14.
and before the mercy-seat he sprinkled the blood with his finger seven times:
not only was the Priest to kill the Bullock without the holy of holies, but he
was to enter with the blood into the holy of holies, and to sprinkle the
mercy-seat therein with it; surely these were patterns of things to be done in
the Heavens: Christ that was slain and Crucified without the gate, carried his
own blood into the holy of holies, or into the heaven of heavens, Heb. 9.12.
for by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us; and thither come, he sprinkles it (as it were) upon
the mercy-seat, (i.e.) he applies it, and obtains mercy by it; by the blood of
Christ God's mercy and justice are reconciled in themselves, and reconciled
unto us; Christ sprinkles his blood on the mercy-seat seven times; seven is a
note of perfection; where Christ's blood is sprinkled on a soul, that soul is
sure to be washed from all filth, and at last to be perfected and saved to the
very utmost: Christ's blood was shed upon the earth, but Christ's blood is
sprinkled now he is in heaven; what? is any soul sprinkled with the blood of
Christ; Heb. 12.22, 24.
surely this sprinkling comes from heaven, so the Apostle, But ye are come to
mount Zion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, -- and
to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and then it follows, to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel. It is upon mount
Zion where this sprinkling is: there is Jesus at God's right hand, there he
stands (as it were) upon the mount, Levit. 16.14, 19.
and there he sprinkles his blood round about him; heaven is all besprinkled,
as the mercy-seat in the holy of holies was; the earth is all besprinkled, as
the Altar out of the holy of holies was; heaven and earth are all besprinkled
with the blood of Jesus, so that the Saints and people of God are no where, but
their doors, and their posts, and houses (I mean their bodies and souls) are
all besprinkled with the blood of the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
World. Why, this is that blood of sprinkling that speaks better things than
that of Abel. Mark, that Christ's blood has a tongue; it speaks, it cries, it
prays, it intercedes; there is some agreement, and some difference betwixt
Christ's blood and Abels blood.

Genesis 4.10.
1. The agreement is in these things; Abels blood was abundantly shed, for so it
is said, the voice of bloods; and Christ's blood was let out, with thorns and
scourges, nails and spear, Genesis 4.10.
it was abundantly shed: Again, Abels blood cried out, yea it made a loud cry,
so that it was heard from earth to heaven, the voice of thy Brothers blood
cries unto me from the ground; and Christ's blood cries out, it makes a loud
cry, it fills heaven and earth with the noise, yea the Lords ears are so filled
with it, that it drowns all other souls, and rings continually in his ears.

2. The difference is in these things; Abels blood cried for vengeance against
Cain, but Christ's blood speaks for mercy on all believers; Abels blood was
shed because he sacrificed, and he and his sacrifice accepted: but Christ's
blood was shed that he might be sacrificed, and that we through his sacrifice
might be accepted: Abels blood cried thus, see Lord, and revenge; but Christ's
blood cried thus, Father forgive them for they know not what they do; and at
this very instant Christ's blood cries for remission; and here is our comfort; if
God heard the servant, he will much rather hear the Son, if he heard the
servant for spilling, he will much more hear the Son for saving; yet that I may
speak properly, and not in figures, I will not say that the very blood which
Christ shed on the Cross is now in heaven, nor that it speaks in heaven; these
cryings are merely Mataphorical; yet this I maintain as real and proper, that
the power, merit, and virtue of Christ's blood is presented by our Savior to
his Father both as a public satisfaction for our sin, and as a public price
for the purchase of our glory.

3. Christ's Intercession consists in the presenting of his will, his request,
his interpellation for us; John 17.24.
grounded upon the vigor and virtue of his glorious merits. Father I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
my glory which thou have given me. This was a piece of Christ's prayer while
yet he was on earth; and some say it is a summary of Christ's Intercession
which now he makes for us in his glory; he prayed on earth as he meant to pray
for us when he came to heaven; he hints at this in the beginning of his Prayer,
for he speaks as if all his work had been done on earth, John 17.4, 5.
and as if then he were even beginning his work in heaven; I have glorified
thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do; and now O
Father glorify thou me with thy own self, with the glory which I had with thee
before the World was.

I know it is a question, whether Christ now in heaven do indeed, and truth,
and in right propriety of speech pray for us? some able Divines are for the
Negative, others for the Affimative. For my part (leaving a liberty to those
otherwise minded according to their light) I am of opinion, that Christ does
not only intercede by an interpretative Prayer, as in the presenting of
himself, and his merits to his Father; but also by an express prayer, or by an
express and open representation of his will: and to this opinion methinks these
Texts agree. I will pray the Father, John 14.16. John 16.26, 27.
and he shall give you another Comforter, and at that day ye shall ask in my
Name, and I say unto you, that I will pray the Father for you; when he says, I
say not, that I will pray for you, it is the highest intimation that he would
pray for them; as it is our phrase, I do not say that I will do this, or that
for you, no not I; when indeed we will most surely do it, and do it to purpose.
Austin confirms this, orat pro nobis, orat in nobis, and oratur a nobis, etc.
He prays for us, he prays in us, and he is prayed to by us: he prays for us as
he is our Priest, Aug. Prefat. in psalm. 85.
and he prays in us as he is our Head, and he is prayed to by us as he is our
God. Ambrose tells us, That Christ so now prays for us as sometimes he prayed
for Peter, that his faith should not fail. Amb. super ad Roman. 8.
Methinks I imagine as if I heard Christ praying in heaven in this Language, O
my Father, I pray not for the World, I will not open my lips for any one Son of
perdition; but I employ all my blood, and all my prayers, and all my interests
with thee for my dear, beloved, precious Saints; it is true, thou have given me
a personal glory which I had with thee before the World was, and yet there is
another glory I beg for, and that is the glory of my Saints. O that they may be
saved! why I am glorified in them, they are my joy, John 17.10, 13, 24.
and therefore I must have them with me where I am; thou have set my heart upon
them, and thou thy self have loved them as thou have loved me; and thou have
ordained them to be one in us even as we are one, and therefore I cannot live
long asunder from them; I have thy company, but I must have theirs too; I will
that they be with me where I am; If I have any glory, they must have part of
it; this is my prayer, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me.
Why, thus Christ prayed while he was on Earth, and if this same prayer be the
summary of Christ's intercession or interpellation now he is in heaven, we may
imagine him praying thus; it were too nice to question, whether Christ's prayer
in heaven be vocal or mental? certainly Christ presents his gracious will to
his Father in heaven some way or other, and I make no question but he fervently
and immoveably desires that for the perpetual virtue of his sacrifice all his
members may be accepted of God, and crowned with glory; nor only is there a cry
of his blood in heaven, but Christ by his prayer seconds that cry of his blood;
an argument is handed to us by Master Goodwin thus: As it was with Abel,
Goodwin, Christ set forth.
so it is with Christ; Abels blood went up to heaven, and Abels soul went up to
heaven, and by this means the cry of Abels dead blood, was seconded by the cry
of Abels living soul; his cause cried, and his soul cried; as it is said of the
Martyrs, that the souls of them that were slain for the Testimony which they
held, cried with a loud voice, saying, how long Lord, Holy and True, do thou
not judge and avenge our blood that dwell on the earth? Rev. 6.9, 10.
even so it is with Christ, his blood went up to heaven, and his soul went up
to heaven, yea his body, soul, and all his whole person went up to Heaven; and
by this means his cause cries, and he himself seconds the cry of his cause:
Jesus Christ in his own person ever lives to make Intercession for us; he ever
lives as the great Master of requests to present his desires, that those for
whom he dyed may be saved.

4. Christ's Intercession consists in the presenting of our persons in his own
person to his Father, so that now God cannot look upon the Son, but he must
behold the Saints in his Son; are they not members of his body, in near
relation to himself? and are not all his Intercessions in behalf of them, and
only of them? but how are all the Elect carried up into heaven with Jesus
Christ, and there set down before his Father in Jesus Christ? I answer, not
actually, but mystically; when Christ intercedes, he takes our persons, and
carries them in unto God the Father in a most unperceiveable way to us; for the
way or manner I leave it to others, for my part, I dare not be too inquisitive
in a secret not revealed by God; only this we say, that Christ presents our
persons to his Father in his own person; and this was plainly shadowed out by
that act or office of the high Priest, who went into the holy of holies, Exodus
28.12.
with the names of all the Tribes of Israel upon his shoulders, and upon his
breast; and this the Apostle speaks out yet more plainly, by him we have an
access unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.3.12.
and in him we have boldness and access with confidence: I shall a little
enlarge on both these Texts, recorded for our instruction in the Law, and
Gospel, in the Old and in the New Testament. First, we find in the Law, Exodus
28.14.
that Aaron was to put two stones upon the shoulders of the Ephod, for stones
of memorial unto the children of Israel, and so Aaron was to bear the names
before the Lord upon his two shoulders for a memorial. And again; Aaron, was to
bear the names of the children of Israel in the breast plate of judgment upon
his heart; when he went into the holy place for a memorial before the Lord
continually. Ver. 29.
Here we find the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel engraven in stones,
which the High Priest usually took with him into the holy place, when he
appeared before the Lord; first, upon his humeral, and then upon his pectoral;
in both showing that he entered into that place, not only or principally in his
own behalf, but in behalf of the Tribes whom he presented before the Lord, that
they might be in continual remembrance with the Lord; a lively Type of Christ's
Intercession, who being entered into the Heavens he there appears in the behalf
of his Elect, and he presents their persons to his Father, bearing them (as it
were) upon his shoulders, and upon his heart; why thus Christ takes our persons
into heaven, and represents them in his own person to his Father. Secondly we
find in the Gospel a gracious promise, Ephesians. 2.18. -- 3.12.
that by Christ we have access unto the Father, and in Christ we have access
with confidence. Where the word access, (...) signifies properly a manuduction
or leading by the hand to God; an introduction, or bringing into God; alluding
to the custom in Princes Courts, where none may come into the
Presence Chamber, unless they be led, or brought in by some Favorite or
Courtier there; thus none may have access into the presence of God unless they
are brought in by this Favorite of heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ; whose very
office it is to bring men unto God; he takes us by the hand and leads us to the
Father. q. d. Come Souls, come along with me, and I will carry you to the
Father. Look how a child that ha^h run away from his Father, is taken by the
hand of a friend, or of his ^lder brother, and so brought again into the
presence of his Father; even so all we, having run away from God, are by the
good hand of Christ taken up, and led again into the presence of the Father; he
is that Ladder that Jacob saw, upon whom we ascend into the bosom of God, and
into heaven; he is that High Priest, that takes our persons, and bears them on
his shoulders and on his heart, sustaining our persons, and presenting our
conditions unto his Father, and our Father, unto his God, and our God.

5. Christ's Intercession consists in the presenting of our duties unto God. Not
only does he take our persons and leads and carry them into the presence of
God, but together with our persons he presents all our services in his own
person. Now in this act he does these two things.

1. He observes what evil, or what falling is in our duties, and he draws that
out, and takes it away, before he presents them unto God; or as a child that
would present his Father with a posie, he goes into the garden, and gathers
flowers and weeds together; but coming to his Mother, she picks out the weeds,
and binds up the flowers by themselves, and so it is presented to the Father:
thus we go to duty, and we gather weeds and flowers together but Christ comes
and picks out the weeds, and so presents nothing but flowers to God the Father;
and this is plainly set forth by that ceremony of the High Priest, in taking
away the iniquity of their holy things; Exodus 28.36.37.38.
And thou shall make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it like the
ingravings of a Signet, holiness to the Lord; and thou shall put it on a blew
lace, that it may be upon the Mitre, upon the forefront of the Mitre it shall
be. And it shall be on Aarons forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of
the holy things, which the Children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy
gifts, and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted
before the Lord: This was the manner of the Ceremony, and this was the end of
the Ceremony, that Aaron might bear and take away the iniquity of their holy
things: what was this but a Type of Jesus Christ? who with his most absolute
righteousness covers all the defects of our good works, which are still
spotted with some defect? Isa. 64.6.
Alas! all our righteousness are as filthy rags, but Christ draws out the evil
of duty, and failings in duty, before he will present them unto God.

2. He observes what good there is in any of our duties or performances and
with that he mingles his own prayers and Intercessions, and presents all as one
work interwoven or mingled together unto God the Father. And another Angel
stood at the Altar having a golden Conser, Rev. 8.3, 4.
and there was given unto him much Incense that he should offer it with the
prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the Throne; and
the smoke of the Incense which came with the prayers of the Saints ascended up
before God out of the Angels hand. I know there is a controversy, who this
Angel should be, that with the Incense mingles the prayers of all Saints? some
conjecture him to be a created Angel, in that the incense or ordours are said
to be given to him, and not to be his own, or to have them of himself: others
say he could be no other but the Angel of the Covenant, for no Angel does
intercede or present our prayers but Jesus Christ; as for that which is spoken
concerning the seven Angels presenting the Saints prayers, I am Raphael, one of
the seven holy Angels, which present the prayers of the Saints. We say it is no
canonical Scripture, Tobit. 12.1^
nor is it authorized by any canonical Scripture; besides, I cannot think that
the Priests were types of Angels, but only of Christ: Again, howsoever the
Greek Copies so read that Text, yet the ancient Hebrew Copy set forth by Paulus
Fagius, and Jerome, who translated it out of the Caldee (as Master Mede on
Zachar. 4.10. avoucheth) reads it thus, I am Raphael, one of the seven Angels,
which stand, and minister before the glory of the holy One. And certainly in
this Text of Revel. 8.3, 4. There is a figurative description of an heavenly
service, correspondent to that which was performed in the Temple; namely, that
the people being without at prayer, the Priest offered incense within upon the
Altar, Luke 1.9, 10. To signify that Believers prayers have always need to be
helped, and sanctified by Christ's intercession; and what though the incense
was given him? we know that Christ himself was given of God; God so loved the
world, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son; and yet this hinders not, but that Jesus
Christ gave himself, and that he gave himself for an incense too; for so the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.2.
He has given himself for us an offering, and a sacrifice unto God; for an
incense, or for a sweet smelling savor; in this respect the incense might be
given him, and yet the incense was his own; they were only Christ's merits,
righteousness, satisfaction; they are the sweet odor, by virtue whereof, God
accepts of his Saints persons and prayers; and it is only Christ that presents
before God that which he is and has, he alone being both offering and Priest;
we can think of no other Priest in Gospel Times, but only Jesus, Heb. 6.20.
The forerunner, even Jesus Christ made an high priest for ever, after the
order of Melchizedech. It is Jesus, and only Jesus that presents our prayers,
and sanctifies our prayers, and mingles our prayers with his merits, and so
makes them penetrate sweetly before his God.

6. Christ's intercession consists in the presenting of our plea or answer in
Heaven to all those accusations that are brought in against our selves. And
this I take it to be the meaning of the challenge, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's elect? Romans 8.33, 34.
it is God that justifies, Who is he that condemns it? it is Christ that
dyed, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the right of God, who
also makes intercession for us. Christ intercedes; and who shall condemn?
Christ takes off all accusations; and who shall charge? if the Law, or Sin, or
Satan, shall dare to accuse, our Jesus is ready at God's right hand to answer
all. There is a vision in Zachariah representing this, Zach. 3.1.
And the Angel showed me Joshua the high priest, standing before the Angel of
the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him. It was the custom
of the accuser to stand at the right hand of the accused; Set thou a wicked man
over him, Psalm 109.6.
and let Satan stand at his right hand; now here is Satan standing at Joshua's
right hand to accuse him; but whereof does he accuse him? that appears in the
words following, Ver. 3.
Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, an ordinary sign of sin; as a white
garment is a sign of Christ's righteousness, so is a filthy garment in
Scripture, a sign of vileness; alas! Joshua was defiled with the pollution
which he had gotten by the contagion of Babylon, and now at his return, Satan
lays it to his charge; but Jesus Christ, our great High Priest, steps in, and
takes off the accusation; And the Lord said unto Satan, Ver. 2.
the Lord rebuke thee O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke
thee; twice he repeats it, to show the fullness of Christ's intercession, q. d.
the Lord my God, my everlasting Father, rebuke, and confound thee Satan, in
this thy malicious opposition against my Joshua; and then he goes on in his
apology for Joshua; Ver. 2.
Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? q. d. is not this one, whom of my
grace I have reserved amongst my people, whom I caused to pass through the fire
of mine indignation? and shall not my decree of grace stand firm and inviolable
toward such? or thus, Is not this a brand plucked newly out of the fire of
affliction? was he not in the captivity of Babylon? and is it likely he should
be there, but he would be defiled with the touch of pitch? take a brand, and
pull it out of the fire, and there will be some dust, and ashes, and filth
about it; Why Lord (says Christ) this Joshua is but newly pulled out of the
burning; and therefore he must needs have ashes, and dust, and filth about him:
Ver. 4.
But come (says Christ to his holy Angels) take away the filthy garment from
him; Ver. 4.
and come (says Christ to his servant Joshua) Behold I have caused thine
iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with change of raiment. And
thus Christ took off the accusation that was brought against Joshua, by Satan,
for his filthy garments. In like manner does our blessed Intercessor at this
instant, if a poor Saint falls into any sin, and defiles his garments, Satan
comes in, and takes the right hand of him, and accuses him before the Lord; but
Christ our great High Priest being at the right hand of his Father, he takes up
the cause, puts in a plea, and answers all the accusations of the enemy; True
Lord, this poor soul has filthy garments, but is he not a firebrand newly
plucked out of the fire? was he not in his natural and sinful condition the
other day? is he not yet partly regenerate, and partly unregenerate? needs
therefore must there be some ashes, and dust, and filth upon him. O my Father,
my will is, That thou consider him in that respect, thou know his frame, and
thou remembrest that he is but dust, though he have filthy garments now upon
him, yet I will give him change of rayments; I will cloth him with the robe of
my righteousness, and then thou shall see no iniquity in Jacob, no
transgression in Israel. Why? thus the Lord Christ steps in, and answers to all
the accusations that are brought in against us by the Law, or Sin, or Satan, to
God his Father; 1 John 2.1.
and in this respect he is truly called our Advocate, If any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. We have an Advocate
that pleads for us, that answers for us: that in a way of equity (grounding all
upon his own merits) calls for the pardon of our sins, and for the salvation of
our souls.

SECT IX. How powerful and prevailing Christ's Intercessions are with God his
Father.
9. HOW powerful and prevailing are Christ's Intercessions with God his Father?
I answer, very much, and this will appear if we consider, --

Heb. 8.1.
1. That Christ is our great High Priest to God; We have such an High Priest,
who is set down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Now 'twas the way of
God to lend his ear in special manner to the Highpriests; and therefore the
people usually run to them, 1 Samuel 9 9.
when they would enquire of God; Before time in Israel, when a man went to
enquire of God, thus he spoke, Come, and let us go to the Seer, for he that is
now called a Prophet (or High Priest) was before time called a Seer. -- People
were wont to repair to the Priests, and the Priests were wont to go to God; and
good reason, for the Priests were to mediate for the people, and the people had
experience that God would hearken to the cry of their Priest; 1 Samuel 12.18, 19,
23.
Samuel called unto the Lord, and the Lord sent thunder, and rain that day. And
all the people said to Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God. --
And Samuel said unto the people, -- God forbid that I should sin against the
Lord in ceasing to pray for you. Now such an High Priest as this (though with
far more eminency) is Christ to God; he intercedes for his people, (God forbid
that he should ever cease to pray for his people:) and he has God's ear in
especial manner; if ever God lend his ear to any one, it must needs be to this
High Priest, because of his office to intercede betwixt God and his people.
Christ stands in the middle, or indeed next to God, as he is in these
Gospel Times our great High Priest; and therefore he must needs prevail with
God in every petition he puts up for us.

Heb. 5.4, 5.
2. That Christ was called to this office by God. Christ glorified not himself
to be made an High Priest; no, no; but he was called of God as Aaron was; it
was God the Father that designed him to it, and that furnished him for it, and
that invested him in it; Psalm 110.4.
The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchizedech. Now to what purpose should God call him to this
office, but especially to intercede for them, to whom God was willing to
communicate salvation? it was God's mind as well as Christ's mind to save his
Elect; and this was the way where on they agreed; that an High Priest should be
appointed, and an office of intercession should be erected, and by that means
the salvation purchased should be applied; many times we are apt to conceive
legal or law-thoughts of God the Father, as that he is just and severe; and
that Christ his Son is more meek, and merciful: but this cannot be, for there
are not two infinite wills, not two infinite mercies, one in the Father,
another in the Son, but one will, and one mercy in both. And to that purpose
observe but the readiness of God the Father to receive Christ honorably into
heaven, that he might do the work of the High Priest there; no sooner had
Christ entered through the gates into the City, but presenly, sit thou down
(says God) at my right hand; but to what end? surely not only to rule as King
(of which we have spoken before) but also to intercede as our great High
Priest; hence we find in Scripture, that Christ's session and intercession; his
Kingly and Priestly office are joined together; Heb. 8.1.
He is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens: he!
who? why, Christ our High Priest; we have such an High Priest who is set down.
It is as if Christ at his entrance into heaven had said, My Father, I am come
hither as the great High Priest; having on his breast plate the names of all
the Elect, and I come to intercede for poor sinners; what, shall I have welcome
on these same terms? to whom the Father replied, Welcome my son, my only Son on
these very terms; come, sit thee down, and interede for whom thou please; I
have called thee on purpose to this very office, and thou shall prevail. Surely
the Father is engaged to purpose to hear the Son, in that he is an High Priest
to God, and called to his office by God.

3. That Christ is God's Son; and that is more than God's High Priest; he is
his natural Son, his beloved Son, his Son that never gave him the least
offense; sure then when he comes and intercedes for a man, he is most like to
speed; if a gracious child do but cry, my Father, my Father, he may prevail
very much, especially with a Father who is tenderhearted; Jesus Christ is the
gracious, precious Son of God the father; and God the Father is a dear and
kind-hearted Father, how then should the intercessions of Christ but be most
powerful with God? hence some gather the prevalency of Christ's intercession,
because in many places of Scripture where this part of Christ's Priesthood or
intercession is laid down, this Sonship is also expressed or set forth; Heb.
4.14. Heb. 5.5, 6.
as we have a great High Priest entered into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God.
-- And thou art an High Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedech. But
immediately before, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. O needs
must the intercession of such a Son be very prevalent: I say of such a Son, for
was ever any Son like this Son of God? was ever any Son so like his Father, or
so equal with his Father? we know he is a begotten Son, and yet never begun to
be a Son; he is the Son of the Father, and yet never begun to have a Father: he
is a branch of the King of ages, and yet in all the ages past was never
younger; surely all the relations of Son and Father in the World, are but a
shadow of this relation betwixt God and Christ; it is so near, that though they
are two (as in all relations there must needs be relatum and correlatum) yet
Christ speaks of them, as if they were but one; I and my Father are one; John
10.30.
if then the Father should deny him any thing, he should deny himself; or cease
to be one with his Son which can never be. Christ is God's Son, his natural
Son, his beloved Son, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, says God? O then how
prevalent must Christ's intercession be with God?

4. That Christ is God himself, not only God's Son, but God himself? how
powerful in this respect must his intercessions be unto the Father? it is true,
that Christ is another subsistence and person from the Father, but Christ is
one and the same God with the Father; Christ is the very essential,
substantial, and noble representation of God himself; Christ is the very self
of God, both God sending, and God sent; Christ is the fellow of God, Awake O
sword against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow; Zach. 13.7.
nay, Christ is God, and not another God, but one God; God of God, light of
light, very God of very God; begotten, not made, being of one substance with
the Father, by whom all things were made. Can we imagine now that God himself
should be denied any boon of God himself? if God sometimes spoke to his
servants, Ask of me, Isa. 45.11.
command ye me concerning all the work of mine hands: will not God much more
say to God, Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance,
Psalm. 2.8.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession? we have brought it
now so near, that if God be God, and God be Omnipotent, that he can do, and can
have whatsoever he pleases: then Christ being one God with his Father, he must
needs prevail; it is but ask and have, let him ask what he will.

5. That Christ is God's darling upon this very account, because he intercedes
for his People. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life,
John 10.17.
that I might take it again. I lay it down by suffering, and I take it again by
rising, ascending up into heaven, and interceding there; and therefore does my
Father love me. O the love of God to Christ, and of God in Christ to all his
Saints! God so loved the world, that he gave his Son; and Christ so loved the
world, that he gave himself; and now again because Christ gave himself, and his
gift is as a sweet smelling savor unto God, therefore God loves Christ; O what
a round of love is here! God loves Christ, and Christ loves us, and the Father
loves Christ again for loving of us: there is not an act of Christ in his work
of our redemption, but the Father looks on it with love and liking: Mat. 3.17.
Isa. 53.11.
at his baptism, lo a voice came from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; at his death, He sees of the travel of his soul,
and he is satisfied; at his ascension he hears of the intercessions of his
soul, and he is delighted; Christ's intercessions are God's music: and
therefore as sometimes Christ spoke to his Spouse, Cant. 2.14.
so God speaks to Christ, Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice,
for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. Now Christ's
intercessions must needs prevail, when God love's Christ for his intercessions
sake: if before the world was made, Prove. 8.29, 30.
the Son was his Fathers darling, (for it is said) When he appointed the
foundations of the earth, then I was by him, and as one brought up with him,
and I was daily his delight. In the Original [delights], intimating that the
eternal Son was variety of delights to his Father. O then what delights, what
variety, what infinite of delights has God in Christ now interceding for us?
what a dear darling is Christ to God, when not only he stands by him, but he
represents to him all the Elect from the beginning to the end of the World; q.
d, See Father, look on my breast, read hear all the names of those thou have
given me, as Adam, and Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; of the Twelve Tribes, and
of the Twelve Apostles, of all the Martyrs, Professors, and Confessors of the
Law and Gospel; I pray for them, I Pray not for the World, but only for them,
for they are mine; methinks I hear God answer, What my Son! and what the Son of
my womb! and what the Son of my vows! have thou begotten me thus many Sons? and
are all these mine? why then ask what thou will, and have what thou please; I
am as strongly inclined and disposed to give thee grant, as thou would have
it; it is my joy, my delight, my pleasure to save these souls, and surely the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in thy hands.

6. That Christ is God's Commander (I speak it with reverence) as well as
petitioner; it is a phraze given to the servants of God, command ye me; and may
we not give it to the Son of God? Christians! God is as ready to do us service,
as if we had him at command; Isa. 45.11. 1 John 5.14.
This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will he hears us: and in this sense we may boldly say, that God the
Father is as ready to hear Jesus Christ, as if he had him at command; not that
in deed and reality he commands God, but that in deed and truth he commands all
below God, and he commands all in the stead of God. And to this purpose is that
voice of God, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion; Psalm 2.6.
and why my King? I dare not say he is God's King, as if God were Christ's
inferior, or Christ's subject: God forbid! why then my King? I answer, he is
God's King, because appointed by God; or he is God's King, John 5.22.
because he rules in the stead of God; The Father judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment unto the Son. God has given away all his prerogatives
unto Jesus Christ, so that now the King of Saints can do what he will with God,
and with all the world; only it follows, Ask of me, and I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance: as if the Father should have said, I cannot deny
thee, and yet O my Son, I would have thee ask; do what thou will in Heaven,
Earth, and Hell; I have not the heart, indeed I have not the power to deny thee
any thing, only acknowledge this power to be originally in my self, that all
that honor the Son, may honor the Father; and all that honor the Father, may
honor the Son. These are the terms betwixt, God the Father, and God the Son;
Oh then how powerful and prevailing are Christ's intercessions with his Father?
if he ask who has power to command, there is little question of prevailing in
his suit. We have heard in our days of a suit managed with a petition in one
hand, and a sword in the other; and what the effect is, all now can tell. As a
King who sues for peace, backed with a potent Army; able to win what he entreats
for, must needs treat more effectually; so Christ sueing to his Father for his
Saints, with a power sufficient to obtain what he sues for, he must needs
effect what his desires may be; it is well observed, that Christ is first said
to sit at God's right hand, and then to intercede; he treats the salvation of
sinners as a mighty Prince treats the giving up of some Town, which lies seated
under a Castle of his that commands the Town; or he treats the salvation of
sinners, as a Commander treats the surrendering of a person already in his
hands: it is beyond God's power (I speak i^, with submission) to deny his Son
in any thing he asks: Exodus 32.10.
if the Lord sometimes cried out to Moses like a man whose hands are held, Let
me alone; how much more does Christ's intercession bind God's hands, and
command all in Heaven, Earth, and Hell? hence we say, that God the Father has
divested himself of all his power, and given the keys into Christ's own hands;
I am he that lives and was dead, Rev. 1.18.
and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and death;
there is no man goes to Hell, but he is locked in by Jesus Christ; and there is
no man goes to Heaven, but he is locked in there by Jesus Christ; he has the
keys of all men's eternities hanging at his own girdle; if he but say, Father I
will that this man, and that woman, shall inherit Heaven; the Father cannot but
reply, my Son I have no power to deny thy suit; Thou have the keys of Heaven in
thine own hands, be it even as thou will.

7. I shall only add this on the Fathers part, that God is Christ's Commander
to this office, as well as Christ is God's Commander in this office. O why
should we have hard thoughts of God the Father, more than of God the Son? is he
not as willing of our salvation as Jesus Christ? surely 'twas the Oath of God,
I mean of God the Father: As I live says the Lord, I would not have the death
of a sinner, Ezekiel. 33.11.
but that the wicked turn from his sin and live. Was not this the first salute
of God to Christ when he first entered into heaven; Sit thou here on this
throne, Psalm 2.7, 8.
and ask what thou will of thy Father? nay, did not the Father prevent the Son
in laying his commands upon him to ask, before the Son opened his mouth to
speak a word, by way of any requests to God, his Father? Thou art my Son, this
day (even this day of thy resurrection, ascension, session) have I begotten
thee; ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possessions? q. d. Come Son, thou art
my Son, this day I have begotten thee, and though I have begotten thee from all
eternity, yet this day, and every day I am begetting thee still: I said to thee
at thy resurrection, this day have I begotten thee, and I said to thee at thy
ascension, this day have I begotten thee; and now ask, and be not shy, or
modestly backward in petitioning; I command thee to this Office, I make thee
here the great Master of requests in Heaven; others may pray out of charity,
but none but thy self in a way of Justice, Authority, and Office; and therefore
ask boldly and largly, open thy mouth wide and I will fill it. O what a
demonstration of love is this, not only to Christ, but to us in Christ, that
when man had offended his God, broke covenant with God, and turned enemy to
God, that then God the Father should seek peace with man, offer conditions of
peace to man, and for that purpose should appoint a Mediator, an Intercessor,
and call his Son to that office: and now he is in Heaven, that he should bid
him do his office, and ask freely; so that if the Elect be not saved, it should
be laid on the score of Christ, Goodwin Christ exalted.
for the Father is most willing: Surely here is more than intimation of the
Father's inclination to accept of Christ's intercessions on our behalf: we may
read here that the Fathers heart is as much toward us, as Christ's own heart;
Oh he is full of bowels, he is gentle, and easy to be entreated; Christ needs
not much a do to get his grant; Christ adds not by his intercession one drop of
love to the heart of God; only he draws it out, which otherwise would have
been stopped; nor does he broach it before his Father command him to it. Oh then
how Powerful and prevailing must Christ's intercessions be?

SECT. X. Of the reasons of Christ's Intercession.
10. WHat are the reasons of this great transaction of Christ's intercession
for his people? I answer --

1. It is the Fathers will that it should be so; he called Jesus Christ, to
this office, Ezekiel. 36.36, 37.
the command of God is upon Jesus Christ; Ask what thou what wilt for thy
redeemed ones, I willingly engage my self to grant, only it is my pleasure
thou should ask: as sometimes he said to the house of Israel, I the Lord have
spoken, and I will do it; notwithstanding I will yet for this be enquired of,
by the house of Israel, to do it for them: so says God to Christ, I the Lord
have spoken, and I will do it, only my Son, I will be enquired of by thee. I
look upon this as the main reason of Christ's intercession, Even so Father, for
so it seemed good in thy sight; it is God's will that Christ should intercede.

2. It is the Father's love to engage his Son for his own people. O the comfort
of a sound Christian in this respect! what, art thou in temptation, or
desertion? surely Christ is engaged by God to petition for thee; thou have put
up many petitions to Christ, and he has put them all up unto God; he could do
no otherwise, for he is in place an Advocate, to mention and plead such cases
as are moved to him. Methinks I imagine God thus bespeaking his Son; See thou
do this poor soul good my Son; here is for him according to all his needs, only
ask according to what thou know will make him happy; must he have my Spirit?
my comforting Spirit? will no less, no cheaper thing serve his turn? then here
it is. Oh how is Christ engaged now to petition for them, whom God loves, and
for whom he gave himself? surely if Christ should leave to intercede for such,
he would displease his Father, which we know he would not do, he would undergo
Hell first.

3. It is Christ's own inclination to do his Office: the power that Christ has
for the good of Sinners is necessarily acted: as the Sun shines upon all the
World, and it cannot do otherwise; so Christ the Son of righteousness, shines
or intercedes for all his Saints, and he can do no less: what is the will of
the Father, is the will of Christ, (I mean the will of Christ naturally, not
artificially in a way of self-denial, as God's will it is said to be our will)
so that what the Father would have Christ own, he cannot but own; for the same
Spirit is in Christ which is is in the Father, and in the self-same measure: As
God is captivated with love toward all captives, so am I, says Christ; as God
would have all be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, so would I
too says Christ. The very same bottomless sea of love, that fluctuates in my
Father's breast, John 10.30.
it is in my breast, For I and the Father are one.

4. It is Christ's honor to intercede: hereby is the Crown set on Christ's
head, much honor and glory redowns to Jesus in this very respect. I believe
all the work that is done in Heaven, it is Christ interceding, and the Saints
and Angels praising; Christ intercedes for ever, and the four beasts, and four
and twenty-Elders sing for ever, Rev. 4.8, 9, 10, 11. an argument of Christ's
honor, by Christ's intercession, is given in thus by Master Goodwin; if it
were not for Christ's intercession, Goodwins, Christ set forth.
how would the Office of Christ's Priesthood be out of work? And this reason is
more than intimated, Heb. 7.24, 25. Heb. 7.24, 25.
This man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood; and the
work of his Priesthood is interpreted, ver. 25. To make intercession for ever.
The meaning of this is, that God would not have him continue to be a Priest in
title only, or in respect only of a service past, and so to have only the
honor of Priesthood perpetuated to him, out of the remembrance of what he once
had done: But God would have him to enjoy, as the renown of the old, to a
perpetual spring of honor by this new work of intercession, and so to preserve
the verdure of his glory ever fresh and green; and the sum of the Apostles
reasoning is this, that seeing himself was to be for ever, so his work of
Priesthood should be for ever, that so his honor might be preserved and
continued for ever also.

5. It is Christ's love to his Saints; his heart is so inamoured with his
Saints, that therefore he intercedes for them for ever; Love is as strong as
death; it is never weary of doing good for the party beloved; now Christ's
Saints are Christ's love; My sister, my love, Cant. 5.2. Mal. 3.17. John 15.19.
Isa. 43.20.
my dove; the Saints in Christ's books are so many jewels, And they shall be
mine, says the Lord of hoasts, in that day when I make up my jewels; the
Saints are Christ's only choice, the very flower of the Earth; You have I
chosen out of the world; and ye are my people, my chosen; All the World is
Christ's refuge, and Kings are but mortar to him, only the Saints are Christ's
chosen, they are they whom the Lord in his eternal councels has set a part for
himself; But know (says the Psalmist) that the Lord has set apart him that is
Godly. psalm. 4.3.
The Saints are Christ's image (i.e.) the resemblance of Christ in all that
which is his chief excellency, I mean in his righteousness and holiness; as if
I would take the picture of a man, I would not draw it to resemble his
back-parts, but as near as I could, I would draw it to life, the very face and
countenance; so are the Saints the very picture, the image, the draught of God
in his top excellency. The Saints are in covenant with Jesus Christ, and
therefore in nearer relation than any others; hence it is that they are called
the portion of God, the treasure of God, the peculiar people of God; those that
God and Christ satisfy themselves in, those that God and Christ have set their
hearts on; the children of God the Father, the very Spouse and bride of God the
Son; in some respect nearer than the Angels themselves, for the Angels are not
so married to Christ in a mystical union, as God's people are; now is it any
wonder that those who are so very dear to Christ, should be in the prayers of
Christ? if they were so much in his heart, that sometimes be shed his blood for
them, will he not now intercede for? O yes! to this end he carries them on his
breast or heart, as near as near may be, that they may be in a continual
remembrace before the Lord for ever; his very love compels him to this office,
to intercede for them.

6. It is Christ's delight to intercede for his Saints? before the world was,
Prove. 8.31. Psalm 40 7, 8.
His delights were with the sons of men; and when the fullness of time came,
then said he, Lo I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me, I
delight to do thy Will O my God; and what was that, but to be with the sons of
men? he knew that was his Fathers pleasure, and in respect of himself, he had a
delight to live with them, and to dye for them: and no sooner he entered into
Heaven, but there he delights to officiate still in behalf of the sons of men;
he carries their names on his heart there, and though some of their persons be
on earth, and he in his bodily presence is in Heaven, yet distance of place
cannot deaden his delights in the remembrance of them; he is ever minding his
Father of his people in the nether world; he tells him that they are his, all
in all, upon the earth, all his joy, and all his delight, and all his portion;
as men use to give portions to their children, so God having but one Son by
eternal generation, he has given the Elect unto him as his portion; and hence
he makes it his great business in Heaven, to provide mansions for his portion,
to take up God's heart for his portion, to beg favor and love for his portion.
Here it is the joy of Christ in Heaven, in going to his Father, and telling him,
Why Father? I have a small portion yet on earth, and because they are on earth,
they are still sinning against thy Majesty, but I have suffered and satisfied
for their sins, and hither am I come, to mind Thee of it, and contiunally to
get out fresh pardons for new sins; come, look on my old satisfaction; did
Thou not promise? Isa. 53.11, 12.
is it not in the Articles of agreement betwixt Thee and me, that I should see
of the travel of my soul, and should be satisfied? did Thou not say, that
because I poured out my soul, therefore Thou would divide me a portion with
the great, and the spoil with the strong? O my Father, now I make intercession
for the transgressors; give me out pardons for an hundred thousand millions of
sins; Thou have said and sworn, that Thou have no pleasure in the death of
sinners; and it is my pleasure, my joy, my infinite delight, to save sinners;
these are my seed, my portion, my redeemed ones, and therefore let them be
saved. Thus Christ intercedes, and his delight in his Saints, as knowing it to
be his Fathers mind, draws him on to this intercession; indeed this reason
hangs upon that primary, and first reason; it is God's will that Christ should
intercede; as it is Christ's delight to do the will of his Father in Heaven, I
delight to do thy Will O my God.

7. It is Christ's compassion that causes intercession. Christ is such an high
Priest, Heb. 4.15.
(says the Apostle) as cannot but be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities. He was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. When
he was on earth, he felt our infirmities, frailties, miseries, and as a man
that has felt the Stone, or Gout, or Fever; or especially that has felt
soul-troubles, cannot but compassionate those that are in the like condition;
so Christ having had the experience of our outward, and inward sufferings, he
cannot but compassionate us; and hence it is (his very compassion's moving)
that he intercedes to his Father in our behalf. It is observed, that the very
office or work of the High Priest, was to sympathize with the people of God;
only in the case of the death of his kindred; he was not as others, to
sympathize or mourn; but Jesus Christ goes beyond all the Highpriests that
ever were before him; he does fully sympathize with us, not in some, but in all
conditions; In all our afflictions he is afflicted. Isa. 63.9.
I believe Christ has carried a man's heart up with him to Heaven; and though
there be no passions in him as he is God; yet the flower, the blossom, the
excellency of all these passions, (which we call compassions) are infinitely in
him as he is God; he strikes, and tries, and yet he pittieth; when Ephraim
bemoaneth himself, God replies, Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child?
for since I spoke against him, Jer. 31.21.
I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him.
Surely there is a violence of heavenly passion in Christ's heart as God-man,
which makes him to break out into prayer to God, and into compassions toward
Men: O that tempted souls would consider this! it may be Christ is giving you a
cup of tears and blood to drink, but who knows what bowels, what turnings of
heart, what motions of compassion are in Jesus Christ all the while? those who
feel the fruit of Christ's intercession know this, and cannot but subscribe to
this truth. O ye of little faith, why do ye doubt of Christ's bowels? is he not
our compassionate High Priest? has not the tenderest, meekest, mildest heart
of a man that God possibly can form, met with the eternal and infinite mercy of
God himself in Jesus Christ? you have heard that Christ in both natures is our
High Priest, Mediator, Intercessor, and if either God or Man know how to
compassionate, Heb. 4.15.
Christ must do it. O the bowels of Christ! He is touched (says the Apostle)
with the feeling of our infirmities; it is an allusion to the rolled and moved
bowels of God, in Jer. 31.20. Christ in Heaven is burning and flaming in a
passion of compassion toward his weak ones; and therefore he pleads,
intercedes, and prays to God for them.

Thus far we have propounded the object which is Christ's intercession; our
next work is to direct you how to look upon Jesus in this respect. CHAP. II.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus as carrying on the great work of our Salvation in
his Intercession.
LET us know Jesus carrying on this great work of our salvation in his
Intercession. Is it not a rare piece of knowledge to know what Christ is now
doing in Heaven for us on Earth? If I had a weighty suite at Court, on which
lay my estate and life, if I knew that I had a friend there that could prevail,
and that he were just now moving in my behalf, were not this worth the
knowledge? I dare say in the behalf of all believers in the World, Christ is
now interceding for us at the right hand of God; ever since his ascension into
Heaven he has been doing this work; it is a work already of above sixteen
hundred years; and Summer and Winter, Night and day, without any tiredness of
Spirit; Christ has been still praying, still interceding; Christ's love has
no vacation, no cessation at all: yea, even now whiles you read this, Christ is
acting as an Advorate for you, Christ has your names engraven, as a seal on
his heart; and standing right opposite to the eye of his Father, the first
opening of the eyelids of God is terminated upon the breast of Jesus Christ;
Is not this worth the knowledge? O my soul, leave off thy vain studies of
natural things! if they do not conduce some way or other to the right
understanding of this, they are not worth the while; What is it for an
Aristotle to be praised where he is not, and to be damned where he is? O the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ! such a knowledge (if true) is no
less than saving. Come, study his intercession in all the former particulars; I
have run them over, for the work is swollen under my hands, and I would now
abbreviate; only remember this, that in Christ's intercession are many secrets
which we must never know on this side Heaven; oh take heed of entering into this
labarinth without the clew of the Word; above all desire the guidance of the
Spirit to enlighten thy darkness, and what ever thou know, know it still for
thy self.

SECT. II. Of considering Jesus in that respect.
2. LET us consider Jesus carrying on this work of our salvation in his
intercession, many of God's people have found the benefit, and for my part I
cannot but approve of it as an excellent, quickening, and enlivening duty to be
much in a way of meditation, or consideration; especially when we meet with
such a blessed subject as this is; Psalm. 104.34.
My meditation of him shall be sweet, (says David) I will be glad in the Lord;
it is enough to make a meditation sweet and refreshing, when it is conversant
about such a subject as Christ's intercession; Is it not as incense, a sweet
odor, and perfume with God himself? and shall not each thought of it be sweet
to us? come, let us be serious in this duty; and that we may do it thoroughly;
let us consider it in these several particulars. As --

1. Consider of the nature of Christ's intercession: what is it but the
gracious Will of Christ fervently desiring that for the virtue of his death,
and sacrifice, thy person and performances might be accepted of God? As Christ
on earth gave himself to the death, even to the death of the Cross for the
abolition sin, so now in Heaven he prays the Father, by his agony and bloody
sweat, by his his cross and passion, by his death and sacrifice, that thy sins
may be pardoned, thy service accepted, and thy soul saved. This is the Will of
Christ, even thy justification, sanctification, and salvation; accordingly he
presents his Will, Father I will that all those privileges flowing from my
death may be conferred on such a person by name; such a soul is now meditating
and considering of my intercession, and my will is that his very meditation may
find acceptance with God. O what workings would be in thy heart and spirit, if
thou did but consider that Christ even now were speaking his Will, that thy
person and duty might both find acceptance, and be well-pleasing with God.

2. Consider of the person that intercedes for thee; it is Christ in both
Natures; it is thy Mediator; the middle one betwixt God and man; in this
respect thou may consider him as one indifferent, and equally inclining to
either party, like a pair of scales that hang even, neither side lift up, or
depressed more than the other; Gal. 3.20.
A Mediator is not of one, says the Apostle, Christ indifferently partook of
both Natures, Godhead, and Manhood, that so he might be fit to stand in the
gap between his Father and us; he is a Priest according to both Natures; he is
a Dayes-man wholly for God, and a Dayes-man wholly for us, and on our side.

3. Consider of the person to whom Christ intercedes; is it not to his Father?
Thou art sure to speed well, O my soul, for God is the Father of thy
Intercessor. If I had a suit to some Majesty, and the Prince would but mediate,
I might hope to speed; Christ is Gods's Prince (as I may call him) and in
respect of us, The first-begotten of many brethren; And herein is thy
rejoicing, that the party offended is Christ's own Father, and, in Christ, thy
Father; fathers cannot be cruel to their own dear children; What man amongst
you, whom if his son ask bread, he will give him a stone; or if he ask a fish,
Mat. 7.9, 10, 11.
will he give him a Serpent? If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give
good things to them that ask him? and especially if Christ himself ask?

4. Consider of the persons for whom Christ intercedes, it is for all the
Elect, and in particular for thee O the sweet of this one meditation! if I knew
that my name were written in Heaven, should I not (as Christ bids me) rejoice
in this? Luke 10.20.
oh but what is it to have my name written in the chief part of Heaven? what is
it to have my name written in the breast plate of Jesus Christ? come, read O my
soul, is it not thus written, Isaac, or Jacob, I have prayed, and I am praying
for thee that thy faith fail not? sure I am that I would not part with my hope
in the privilege for all the wide world; the very consideration of this makes
me to esteem of all the world as dross, and dogs-meat. And oh that ever the
world, or flesh, or devil should steal this meditation out of my heart! Oh that
ever I should forget that Christ's is gone to Heaven, that he is entered into the
Holy of Holies, and that he carries my name into the presence of God the
Father! I speak the same to thee that read, if thou art a Believer, there is
no doubt of it, but Christ is speaking a good word to his Father in thy behalf;
he can no more forget thee in his intercessions, than a Mother with full
breasts can forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on
the Son of her womb: Now if ever, look up to Jesus, yea look, and never leave
looking, till thou spiest thy own name writ on his heart; it is enough to fix
thy soul, and to make it dwell on Jesus Christ thus carrying thee on his
shoulders, and bearing thee on his breast plate for a memorial unto his Father
in Heaven.

5. Consider of the agreement and difference betwixt Christ's intercessions,
and the intercessions of the high Priests of old; they did both intercede, but
Christ's intercessions are ever in a mere transcendent, eminent way: Christ is
more faithful in his office and place than ever high Priest was; Christ is more
compassionate and pitiful than ever high Priest was; and hence it is that he
has the Title of (...), James 5.11.
one of many commiserations; all is mercy, and love, and sweetness, and more
than motherly affection that comes from Christ. O my soul, why should thou
say with Israel, Isa. 40.27.
My way is hidden from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over by my God? as
if Jesus Christ had left thee out of the count of his people, and out of the
roll of those whom he is to look after. No, no; he is a faithful and merciful
High Priest; far above all the high Priests of the Old Testament; and if they
were so careful not to leave out of their breast plate one name of all the
Twelve Tribes; how much more careful is Christ not to leave out thy name in his
intercession? from this very Argument of Christ's compassion and Christ's
faithfulness, Heb. 3.1, 2.
the Apostle calls on us to consider the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him, above
Aaron, or Moses, or any of the high Priests; why, consider him O my soul; this
Gospel-high Priest is well worthy indeed of thy consideration.

6. Consider of the properties of Christ's intercession; is it not heavenly and
glorious, effectual and prevailing, and of all other the transactions of our
salvation, whilst this world lasts, the most perfective and consummate? O give
me the intercessions of Christ above all the intercessions of Men or Angels. I
know the Saints on earth pray mutually one for another, but they pray not in
their own names, or for their own merits, but in the Name and for the merits of
Jesus Christ; and as for the Saints and Angels in Heaven, Cypr. Epist. Hier.
lib. advers. Vigil.
Cyprian and Jerome seem to grant, that they pray for the state of the Church
Militant; but if so, they do it only of charity, as Brethren, not of office as
Mediators; they do it only for the Church in general, and not for any
particular man or member of the Militant Church; such an intercession as this,
so heavenly, so effectual, so perfective of our salvation, so authoritative and
public, found upon the satisfactory merits of the person interceding, is
proper only to Christ. I would be glad of the prayers of all the Churches of
Christ; O that there were not a Saint on the earth, but that I were by name in
his morning, and evening prayer (whosoever thou art that read, I beseech
thee pray for me); but above all, let me have a property in those prayers and
intercessions that are proper only to Christ; I am sure then I should never
miscarry; Christ's prayers are heavenly, glorious, and very effectual.

7. Consider of the particulars wherein more especially Christ's intercession
consists: Is it not in the presenting of his person, blood, prayers,
interpellations? is it not in the presenting of our persons, performances,
pleas or answers to the accusations of Satan? men little think how busy our
Mediator, Sponsor, Solicitor, Advocate is now in Heaven for us; men little
think that Christ is appearing, and his blood is crying, and his prayers are
ascending, and his robe of righteousness is covering us, and the iniquity of
our holy things: O my soul, look up, consider Jesus thy Savior in these
respects! I am persuaded, if thou did but know, if thou could but see, what
a deal of work Christ has in hand; and how he carries it on for thy salvation,
it would melt thy heart into very tears of joy. Whilst Christ was on earth,
Luke 2.49.
and his Mother had lost him, he could then say, Wist ye not that I must go
about my Fathers business? now Christ is in Heaven, he is about the same
business still; all his employment in Heaven is to intercede for us, that we
may be saved: very true, there is much in this intercession of Jesus Christ; it
is a Tree of many branches, and every branch fruitful; so that if thou would
enlarge thy Meditation in this wide Ocean of delights, there is room enough;
but herein I must leave thee in the duty, for I can but point at the several
particulars whereon thou may enlarge: O think on it, that Christ, and
Christ's blood, and Christ's prayers should be all at work! that Christ should
play the Advocate, and plead thy cause, and perfume thy duties with his
Incense; and take thy person in an unperceivable way to God his Father, and cry
there, O my Father be merciful to this sinner, pardon his sin, and save his
soul for the sake of Jesus: O blessed mediation! O blessed is the man, that on
this blessed object knows how to meditate both day and night.

8. Consider of the power and prevalency of Christ's intercessions with his
Father. Is he not to this puropose a Priest to God, and called thereto by God?
is he not the Son of God, yea, God himself? is he not God's Darling? God's
Commander, as well as Petitioner? nay, is not the hand of God himself in this
design? is not the Fathers heart as much toward us and our salvation, as
Christ's own heart? as sure then as Christ is gone into Heaven with thy name
engraven on his heart, so sure shall thou follow him, and be with him where he
is. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? who is he that
condemns? where Christ becomes Patron to defend against the sentence of
damnation, it is in vain for Sin, or Law, or Satan, to attempt any thing: for
as an innocent person is safe so long as he has his learned Advocate to answer
all Objections; so it is with Believers, who have Christ himself both Judge and
Advocate; a sure Advocate; he ever prevails in whatsoever he undertakes; he was
never yet cast in any suit; he has for these Sixteen Hundred years carried
away all the causes of hundreds, thousands, and millions of souls; why, he is
so dear and near to his Father, that he can work him to any thing he will: And
O my soul, if thou have any relation to Jesus Christ, is not here comfort; I
dare in the Name of Christ be thy warrant, and give it under my hand, that if
Christ pray for thee, Christ will be sure to save thee; he never yet failed, he
never will fail in any of his suits to God: Oh consider of this!

9. Consider of the reasons of Christ's intercession; many are given, but this
may be sufficient, It is Gods own Ordinance; the very wisdom of God found out
this way to save our souls, viz. that an High Priest should be appointed, who
should die for sinners, and afterward present his death to his Father by way of
intercession in their behalf. Some may look upon this as needless, what could
not God have pardoned our sins, and saved our souls without a Priest? I shall
not dispute God's power, but if any will, let such a one tell me what way could
his own wisdom have found out to heaven between the wrath of God, and the sin
of man? I believe it would have posed all the wisdom of the world (of Men and
Angels) to have reconciled God's mercy in the salvation of man, and his justice
in the condemnation of sin; to have poured out hell upon the sin, and yet to
have bestowed heaven upon the sinner; now then, if God himself did study to
find out this way, and that he has said, This is my pleasure, that Christ my
Son shall be a Priest, and that he shall offer himself, and Present himself and
his offering, and his prayer to me for his People: O my soul rest on this as
the very ordination of God; admire at the contrivance of God; say, O the depth!
question no further, only Meditate, and ponder, and consider of it till thou
feel Christ's intercession darting its influence and efficacy on thy
sin-sick soul.

SECT. III. Of desiring after Jesus in that respect.
3. LEt us desire after Jesus carrying on this work of our salvation in his
intercession. I cannot but wonder what a dullness seizes on my heart, and on
all the hearts of the Sons of men, that we have no more longings after Christ,
whose heart is ever panting and longing after us. Surely we do not set our
selves to find out experimentally the sweetness that is in Christ; if there
were not another object to think upon, but only this one of Christ's
intercession, is not here enough to put us all into a teeming longing frame? O
my soul, rouse up, and set this blessed object before thy face? take a full
view of it until thy affections begin to warm, and thou beginst to cry, Oh for
my part in Christ's intercession! Oh I would not be left out of Christ's
heavenly prayers for ten thousand worlds! come and be serious! the object is
admirably sweet and precious; long for it, pant after it! God understands the
Rhetoric of thy breathing, as well as of thy cry. But what is there in
Christ's intercession that is so desirable? I answer --

1. In Christ's intercession lies the present transaction of our souls
salvation. Such passages as hitherto we have spoken of are done and past; the
transactions of eternity, were at an end when time began; the transactions of
Christ promised, had their period when Christ was incarnate; the transactions
of Christ's Birth, and life and death, and resurrection, and ascension, are now
above a thousand and six hundred years old; I know the virtue and influence of
all these transactions continue, and will continue for ever and ever, but the
several actings had their periods; and only Christ's session, and mission of
his spirit, and his blessed intercession both were, and now are the very
present employment of Jesus Christ. If it were possible that we could see into
Heaven, if with Stephen we could look up steadfastly, and see the Heavens
opened; if our eyes by an extraordinary power were carried through that azure
sky, and through all till we come to the Holy of Holies, and to Jesus Christ in
his glory; what should we see but Christ interceding, Christ busy with his
Father in his poor Saints behalf? now he prays, now he presents his person,
merits, intercession, interpellation, q. d. Father, here are a company of
Rebels justly fallen under thy displeasure, they deserve to be set at an
eternal distance from thee, but I must needs have them pardoned, and received
into thy bosom; come, make thine own terms, let justice require never so great
satisfaction, I have paid a price sufficient for all, and effectual for them;
give them what laws thou please, I will undertake they shall observe them;
and to this purpose away, away holy spirit, go to such and such souls; enable
them to their duties, yea, enable them in duty, and sanctify them throughout
in souls; bodies and spirits. Why, this is the present transaction of Jesus
Christ, and therefore most desirable; methinks I long to know what Christ is
now a doing in Heaven for my soul; and is it not thus, is not all his time
spent either in reading pardons for his redeemed ones; or in presenting
petitions from them, and pleading for them. Surely he is still interceding
every day, it is his present work for our souls, O desirable work!

2. In this present transaction lies the application of all Christ's former
actings, whether of his habitual righteousness, or of his active and passive
obedience. All those passages of Christ's incarnation, conception,
circumcision, birth, life, and death, which more especially we look upon, as
the meritorious causes of our salvation, had been nothing to us, if they had
not been applied by Christ: they were the means of impetration, but Christ's
intercession is the means of application: Christ purchased salvation by those
precedaneous acts, but he possesses us of our salvation by this perfective and
consummate act of his intercession. The order of this is laid down by the
Apostle, Heb. 5.8, 9, 10.
in that first, He learned obedience by the things which he suffered, and then
being made perfect, he became the Author (or applying cause) of eternal
salvation to all them that obey him; being to this purpose, called of God an
High Priest after the order of Melchizedeck. Now is not this the desirable act
above all other acts? Alas! what am I better for a Mine of Gold in such, or
such, or such a field, in which I have no propriety at all? I am thoroughly
convinced that Christ's merits are most precious merits, but oh that they were
mine! Oh that Christ's intercessions would bring the salve, and lay it to my
sore! Oh that I could hear that voice from Heaven, My son, I was incarnate for
thee, and conceived for thee, and born for thee, and circumcised for thee, and
I did the Law, and suffered the penalty for thee; and now I am interceding that
thy very soul may have the benefit of all my doings, and of all my sufferings.
Why, if Christ's intercessions be the applying cause, if it bring home to my
soul all the former transactions of Christ, saying, All these are thine, even
thine, oh how desirable must this intercession be?

3. In this application lies that communion and fellowship which we have with
the Father and the Son: John 17.21.
I pray for these, that as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us. Understand this soberly, we cannot think that there should be
that oneness in equality betwixt God and us, as betwixt God and Christ; no,
no, but there is oneness in similitude and reallity, even in this life; by
virtue of Christ's intercession we have oneness with God and Christ, not only
in comforts, but also in graces; I pray you mark this: when I speak of
communion with God in this life, I mean especially the communication of grace
between God and the soul; on God's part there is a special influence of grace
and favor to man; and on man's part, there is a special return of grace and
honor to God. Some trembling souls are apt to think, that all communion with
God and Christ consists only in the comforts of the holy spirit, whereas
Christians may as really and advantagiously have communion with God in secret
conveyances of grace, inward supports, in a concealed acceptance of service,
in the hidden drawings of the soul Godward, as in the more open, and
comfortable manifestations of God unto the soul; communion with God is a
familiar friendship (I speak it in an holy humble sense) now do we not as
usually go to a friend for council and advice, as for comfort and cheering? in
a friends bosom we entrust our sorrows as well as our joys. Suppose a soul even
spiritually overwhelmed, and ready to break, be taking it self unto God, and
venting it self before the Lord; now if afterward the soul has no more case,
than by the bare lanching of the sore, if God pours in no balm at all, but only
gives support; shall we say that this soul in this case has no communion with
God? O yes! in God's secret visits of the soul, and in the souls restless
groping after God, though nothing but darkness be apprehended, yet that soul
lives in the light of God's countenance; the Sun shines, though a cloud
interposeth; God smiles though the soul do not perceive it; or certainly thou
have his strengthening-supporting presence, if not his shining; John 17.23.
now this is the fruit of Christ's blessed intercession; and this is the
subject matter of Christ's intercessions, O my Father, that these may be one in
us; I in them, and thou in me; I in them by the influence and power of my
Spirit, and thou in me by the fullness and power of the Godhead. And is not this
a most desirable thing?

4. In this communion lies the vision and fruition of Jesus Christ in glory,
grace brings to glory; If communion here, we shall have communion hereafter;
and this also is a part of Christ's prayer and intercession, Father I will that
they also whom thou have given me may be with me where I am, John 17.24.
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. Jesus cannot be in
Heaven long without his Saints; indeed it is impossible that Christ should be
in Heaven, and that pieces and bits of Christ-mystical should be in Hell, or
yet long on Earth. Christ will draw in his Legs and Members on earth up nearer
to the Head; certainly Christ and you that are believers must be under one roof
ere long. Is not he gone before to prepare a place, yea, many mansions for you;
John 14.2.
we think them happy on earth that have their many stately Halls and Palaces;
their summer, and their winter-houses. O Christians! how happy will you be when
you come to be Lords and Heirs of many stately Mansions in the streets of
Heaven? but what speak I of Mansions now I am naming Christ? Mansions are
nothing, many Mansions are but little, yea, many Mansions in Christ's Fathers
house, are but created chips of happiness, in comparison of that communion
which by virtue of Christ's intercession we shall have with Christ. It is the
saying of an eminently learned holy Divine, Sam. Rutherford.
I should refuse heaven (says he) if Christ were not there; take Christ away
from Heaven, and it is but a poor, dark, heartless dwelling; Heaven without
Christ would look as the direful land of death. And therefore after Christ had
spoke of many Mansions, and of a place that he would prepare for his Saints, he
adds further to increase their joy, John 14.3.
I will come again (says he) and receive you unto my self, that where I am,
there ye may be also. Mansions are but as places of briars and thorns without
Jesus Christ, and therefore I would have Heaven for Christ, and not have Christ
for Heaven; O this communion with Christ is above all desirable, and this is
the subject matter of Christ's prayer, Father I would have the Saints to be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. Why, this is the communion
which the Saints shall have with Christ, never will their eyes be off-him,
never will their thoughts wander after any other objects; O the intimacy that
will be then betwixt Christ and Christians! Oh what communication of glory will
there be to each other! These shall walk with me (says Christ) for they are
worthy. Rev. 3.4.


O my soul, if this be the business of Christ's intercession, if all these
particulars are contained in the bowels of this one transaction, how is it that
thou art not in a fainting swoon? how is it that thou art not gasping,
groaning, sick unto death with the vehement thirst after thy part and portion
in Christ's intercession? if there be such a thing as the passion of desire in
this heart of mine, O that now it would break out! Oh that it would vent it
self with mighty longings, and infinite aspirings after this blessed Object!
why Lord I desire, but help thou my faint desires; blow on my dying spark, it
is but little; and if I know any thing of my heart, I would have it more; Oh
that my spark would flame! why Lord I desire that I might desire; Oh breath it
into me, and I will desire after thee.

SECT. IV. Of hoping in Jesus in this respect.
4. LEt us hope in Jesus, carrying on this work of our salvation in his
intercession. It is good that a man should hope. Indeed if it were not for
hope, Lam. 3.26.
the heart would not hold; only look that our hope be true hope: very
hypocrites have a kind of hope, but if God's Word be true, The hope of unjust
men shall perish. Prove. 11.7. Job 27.8, 9. Job 8.13, 14.
-- What is the hope of the hypocrite? -- Will God hear his cry when trouble
comes upon him? No, no, The hypocrites hope shall perish? his hope shall be
cut off, and his trust shall be as a Spiders web. O my soul hope in Jesus, but
rest not till thou can give a reason of thy hope, till thou can prove that
they are the hopes which Grace, and not only Nature has wrought; that they are
grounded upon Scripture-promises, and sound evidences; that they purify the
heart; that the more thou hopest, the less thou sinnest; that they depend on
sure and infallible causes, as on the truth, power, and mercy of God; on the
merits, mediation, and intercession of Jesus Christ; what? is this last amongst
the rest (I mean the intercession of Christ) the spring of thy hope? can thou
follow the stream, till it brings thee to this Fountain, or Wellhead of hope,
that now thou can say; O this intercession is mine? come, search, and try, it
is worth the pains; and to put thee out of question, and in a more facile way
of discerning, I shall lay down these signs. As --

1. If Christ's intercession be mine, then is the Spirits intercession mine; or
if thou would rather argue from the effect to the cause, then thus; if the
Spirit's intercession be mine, then is Christ's intercession mine. In this case
we need not to ascend up into Heaven to learn the truth, rather let us descend
into our own hearts, and look whether Christ have given us of his spirit, which
makes us cry unto God with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed; he that
will know whether the Sun shine in the Firmament, he must not climb into the
clouds to look, rather he must search for the beams thereof upon the earth;
which when he sees, he may conclude, that the Sun shines in the Firmament: O
come and let us ransack our own consciences; let us search whether we feel the
Spirit of Christ crying in us, Abba Father: certainly these two are as the
cause and the effect; Christ's intercession in Heaven, and his Spirits
intercession on earth are as twins of a birth; or rather such is the
concatenation of these two, that Christ's intercession in Heaven breeds another
intercession in the hearts of his Saints. It is the same Spirit dwelling in
Christ, and in all his Members, that moves and stirs them up to cry, Abba
Father. Here then is my Argument, if Christ has put his spirit into thy heart,
and if the Spirit has set thine heart on work to make incessant intercessions
for thy self, then is Christ's intercession thine. There is a kind of a round
in the carrying on of this great work of intercession; as, 1. Christ intercedes
for his people, O that my Spirit might go down! 2. God harkens to the
intercession of Christ, Away holy spirit, get thee down into the hearts of such
and such. 3. The spirit waits on the pleasure of them both, and no sooner down,
but he sends up his intercession back again: Christ cries to God, and God sends
the spirit, and the spirit goes and echoes in the hearts of Saints to the
cries of Christ. Gal. 4.6.
Much of this is contained in that one Text, God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into our heart, (...) crying, (as if he merely acted our tongues) Abba
Father, here is God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, and all
are acting their parts on the elect people of God: the Son intercedes, O that
my spirit may be given to these; the Father willingly grants, Away holy spirit,
and as my Son asks, enter, and take possession of those sinful hearts; the
holy spirit obeys, and no sooner in the hearts of his Saints, but he cries in
them Abba Father; God hears Christ, and the spirit hears God, and the Elect
hear the spirit; and now because the Spirit speaks in the Elect, Mosea 2.21.
God hears the Elect; much like unto this is that of the prophet, And it shall
come to pass in that day, I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens,
and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and wine, and
oil, and they shall shall hear Jezreel. O my soul to the test! has God sent
forth the spirit of his Son into thy heart? have thou the in-dwelling of the
Spirit; and now by the help of the spirit can thou pray with earnestness,
confidence, and an holy importunity? can thou cry Abba Father? Can thou
cry] with earnestness? Father] with confidence? and Abba Father] or Father,
Father] with an holy importunity? why, these are the very signs of the spirits
intercession. O my soul that thou would deal faithfully with thy own self;
can thou by the help of the spirit go to the Father in the name of Christ? as
Christ is gone before into the holy of holies to intercede; so can thou with
boldness follow after, Heb. 10.19.
and enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus? Can thou say God has
given me his spirit, and his spirit has showed me Christ as my Mediator at the
right hand of God; and now under the wing of such a Mediator, I can by the
Spirits, assistance go with boldness ((...) with assuming a liberty) to speak
any thing I will in the ears of God? Surely this is the fruit, the effect of
Christ's intercession, and therefore thou may comfortably conclude, Christ's
intercession is mine.

2. If at any time in the midst of duties I am savingly affected, then is
Christ's intercession mine. Sometimes it pleases God to appear in ordinances,
and the soul is comforted, quickened, enlarged, affected; why, now I look on
this as the efficacy of Christ's Blood, and as the power of Christ's
intercession; at that very instant that I feel any good in any ordinance of
Christ, why, then, even then is Christ prevailing with God his Father for what
I feel; then, even then may I boldly say, Now is the Lord Jesus, who is at
God's right hand in heaven, remembering me a poor worm on earth: Oh now I feel
the fruit of his intercession; Oh what is this spirit, power, grace, comfort,
sweetness I drink of, but a taste of the honeycomb with the end of my rod,
dropping from the intercessions of Jesus Christ? and if this presence of
Christ's Spirit be so sweet, what is himself, then? I know we had need to be
wary in laying down this sign, it is clearly proved by an eminent Divine, Mr.
Burges of Assurance. Mat. 13.20. Mark 16.20. John 5.35.
that sweet motions of heart in holy things are not infallible Evidences of
grace: the third kind of hearers are said to receive the Word with joy; they
found some sweet and power in the Ordinances of Christ; and Herod heard John
gladly; and many for a season rejoiced in John's light and Ministry: Certainly
affections in holy administrations with delight and joy, may be in those, who
yet have no true grace; so it may be that the novelty and strangeness of a
doctrine may much affect and delight; or the nature of the doctrine as it is
comfortable, without any respect to spiritual operation, may exceedingly
affect; or the Ministers abilities, because of his parts, eloquence, elocution,
affectionate utterance may much delight, and stir up the hearers affections;
fine head-notions may produce some affectionate heart-motions; but what
symptom of grace in all this? The sign therefore I lay down of my propriety in
Christ's intercessions is not every sweet motion, or every excited affection,
but that which is holy, spiritual, heavenly, saving; I may discern much of
this, if I will but look into the grounds and effects of my excited, or stirred
up affections; if the ground thereof be fetched from Heaven, and in their
effect they tend toward Heaven; if they wean my heart from the world; if they
elevate and raise up my affections to things above; if they form, and frame my
conversation heaven-wards, then may I be assured these motions and affections
are of the right stamp; for all such motions are but sparks of that heavenly
fire, the the flame whereof is mindful of its own original; they are the fruits
of Christ, and they go back to Christ; they work toward their center, they
tend toward the place from whence they came; and in this respect O that I
could never hear a Sermon, without a savory affection of what I hear! O that I
could never go to prayer without some warmth, and heat, and life, and fervency!
Oh that in every duty I were savingly affected, that I felt the savor of
Christ's ointments, whose name, and whose intercession is as an ointment poured
forth! in times of the Old Testament, if they offered up a sacrifice, and a
material fire came down from Heaven, and burnt up the sacrifice to ashes, it
was a certain testimony that the sacrifice was accepted: Now in the time of the
Gospel we must not expect material fire to come down upon our duties, but has
the Lord at any time caus^d an inward and spiritual fire to fall down upon thy
heart warming thy spirit in duty? and carrying it up heavenward? Surely it so,
thou may safely conclude, these are the very effects of Christ's
intercession; his intercession is mine.

3. If in my heart I feel a holy frame, disposition, inclination; to pray, and
cry and intercede for others, especially for the miseries and distresses of the
Church of God, then is Christ's intercession mine. We should (as near as we
may) in every thing conform to Christ; and this conformity is an evidence or
sign to us of our interest in Christ: O my soul go down into the inmost closet
of thy heart, look what disposition there is in it toward the members of
Christ; and thou may conclude, there is in Christ's heart the very same
disposition toward thee. Ah! do I think there is love in my bosom toward the
Saints, and that there is no love in Christ's bosom toward me? what? can I
think that my narrow, straitened, sinful bowels are larger than those wide,
compassionate, tender bowels of Jesus Christ? as a drop of water is in
comparison of the Ocean, and as a gravel-stone is in comparison of the sand, so
is my heart to Christ's, and my love to Christ's, and my bowels to Christ's.
Come then, and try by this sign; Hereby we know that we are translated from
death to life if we love the brethren; he that loves not his brother, abides
in death. -- Hereby perceive we the love of God, 1 John 3.14.16.
because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for
the brethren; is not this plain, if I love the brethren, Christ loves me; if I
feel in my heart an holy disposition to go to God, and to pray, and cry, and
intercede for a Saint in misery, surely the Lord Jesus has as much bowels
toward me, to go and intercede for me, and to present my prayers unto God the
Father; his intercession is mine.

4. If I am called, justified, sanctified, then is Christ's intercession mine:
are not these the subject matter of Christ's intercession? I pray (says
Christ) that thou should keep them from the evil. -- I pray that thou would
sanctify them through the truth! John 17, 15, 17, 20, 24.
neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word or preaching; Father I will that those whom thou have given
me, be with me in glory. He first prays that we may be called and justified,
and then he prays that we may be sanctified and saved: he holds at both ends
of this golden chain of our salvation; the one end is hanged at his breast,
where the names of all his Saints are written; and the other end is at his
heart that he may be the Author and finisher, the first and last, the beginning
and ending of our souls salvation: alas! there is nothing in us, in our reach
here below; the first stirrings of grace is up in Heaven at the right hand of
the Father; and the far end of any gracious thought is as far above us, as the
heart of Christ is above the earth: Come then, since all hangs on this great pin
of Christ's intercession; let us search and try, are we called? do we believe
on the Son? are we sanctified in some measure? are we kept from the evil, that
sin may not have dominion over us? has Christ put up these prayers in our
behalf, that now we feel (as it were) and experience the truth of Christ's
prevailings with his Father in our hearts and lives? O sure signs that Christ's
intercession is ours; away, away, all diffidence, doubting, wavering
fluctuating hopes; a soul thus grounded may with Paul cast the ganlet, and bid
defiance to all the world, Romans 8.34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect, who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, and who also makes intercession for us.

SECT. V. Of believing in Jesus in that respect.
5. LEt us believe in Jesus, as carrying on this great work of our salvation in
his intercession; wounded spirits are full of scruples, and thus they cry, My
sins will never be forgiven; have not I sinned against God, and Christ, and the
Spirit of Christ? had I not my hands imbrued in the blood of his Son? and have
not I trodden under foot the blood of God? and will that blood that I have
shed, and trod on, intercede for my pardon? Had I but gone so far as the Jews
did, who indeed killed and crucified Christ, I might have had some hopes,
because they knew not what they did, and therefore Christ prayed, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. But alas! I sinned, 1 Cor. 2.8.
and I knew well enough what, and wherein I have sinned: had they known (says
the Apostle) they would not have crucified the Lord of glory; but alas I knew
it, and I was fully convinced that the commission of every sin is a crucifying
of Christ, and yet against knowledge, and judgment, and light, and checks of my
own conscience, I have crucified the Lord of glory, Heb. 6.4, 6.
and is not the Apostle express? it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, -- if they fall away, to
renew them again unto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves, the Son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, Oh I fear my name is not in the
roll of those for whom Christ intercedes, I have crucified him afresh, and will
he intercede for such a dead dog as I am? I cannot believe. Silence, unbelief!
be not tyrannical to thy self, for Christ will not, sin shall do thee no hurt,
nor Satan, no nor God himself, for Jesus Christ can work him to any thing; if
he but open his wounds in heaven, he will so work his Father, that thy wounds
on earth shall close up presently. O but I have sinned against light; and what
then? I hope thou have not sinned wilfully, maliciously, despightfully against
the light: the Apostle tells us, that if we sin wilfully, after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10.26, 27.
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation. These two Texts in Heb. 6.4. and 10.26. are
parallel, and give light to each other; and therefore unless thy sin be the
unpardonable sin, unless wilfully, maliciously, and despightfully, thou have
crucified Christ, as some of the Jews did, never pass a doom of final
condemnation on thy soul: what is there no difference betwixt a sin done
wilfully, or purposely, of malice with delight; and aginst the feeling of thy
own conscience; and a sin done of mere ignorance, inconsideracy, infirmity, or
through a strong temptation, though against light it self? I know there is a
light given in by God's Word, and some beam of the Holy Ghost, which yet never
penetrated so far as to transform and regenerate the soul wholly to God's
Image; and in such a case a man may fall away even into an universal fall, a
general Apostasy; but do thou not hope better things of thy self than so? I
suppose thou do; O then believe! O believe thy part in Christ's intercession!
and for the directions of thy faith, that thou may know how, or in what
manner to believe, observe these particulars in their order. As --

1. Faith must directly go to Christ.

2. Faith must go to Christ as God in the flesh.

3. Faith must go to Christ as God in the flesh made under the Law.

4. Faith must go to Christ made under the directive part of the Law by his
life, and under the penal part of the Law by his death.

5. Faith must go to Christ as put to death in the flesh, and as quickened by
the Spirit.

6. Faith must go to Christ as quickened by the Spirit, and as going up into
glory, as sitting down at God's right hand, and as sending the Holy Ghost; of
all these before.

7. Faith must go to Christ as interceding for his Saints; this act of Christ
is for the application of all the former acts on Christ's part; and our faith
closing with it, is for the application of this, and all other the actings of
Christ on our part. Now is our faith led up very high; if we can but reach
this, we may say, our faith stands very lofty, when it may at once see earth
and heaven; when it may see all that Christ has acted for it here, and all
that Christ does act, and will act in heaven for it hereafter. It is not an
ordinary, single, particular act of faith that will come up to this glorious
mystery, no, no; it is a comprehensive, perfective act; it is such an act as
puts the soul into a condition of glorious triumph, Who shall condemn?
Goodwin, Christ set forth.
it is Christ that will save me to the uttermost, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for me. That same word [to the uttermost] is a good word, and well
put in; it is a reaching word, and extends it self so far, that thou can not
look beyond it: let thy soul be set on the highest mountain that ever any
creature was yet set on, and there let thy soul take in, and view the most
spacious prospect both of sin, and misery, and difficulties of being saved,
that ever yet any poor humbled soul did east within it self, yea, join to these
all the objections, and hindrances of thy salvation, that the heart of man can
suppose or invent against it self; lift up thy eyes, and look to the utmost
thou can see, and Christ by his intercession is able to save thee beyond the
horizon, and furthest compass of thy thoughts, even to the utmost, and worst
case the heart of man can possibly suppose; it is not thy having lain long in
sin, or long under terrors and despairs; it is not thy having sinned often
under many enlightnings, that can hinder thee from being saved by Christ; Do
but remember this same word [to the uttermost] and then put in what exception
thou will, or can. O the holy triumphs of that soul that can but act its
says on Christ's intercession! why, this is the most perfect and consummate
act of Christ's Priestly office; this argues thy Christ to be a perfect
Mediator, and being a perfect Mediator, no condition can be desperate; And
being made perfect, (says the Apostle) he became the Author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him; Heb. 9.5.
now therefore lead up thy faith to this blessed object, and thou have under
consideration the whole of Christ, and the total of Christ's actings in this
world from first to last; in respect of mediation this is the Coronis, the
up-shot, the period, the consummation, the perfection of all.

8. Faith in going to Christ as interceding for us, it is principally and
mainly to look to the purpose, end, intent, and design of Christ's
intercession: now the ends of Christ as in the reference unto us, are these. --

1. That we might have communion and fellowship with the Father, and the Son. I
pray for these, that as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, John 17.21.
they also may be one in us.

2. That we might have the gift of the Holy Ghost; I will pray the Father, John
14.16, 17.
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,
even the Spirit of Truth.

3. That we might have protection against all evil, John 17.15.
I pray (says Christ) that thou would keep them from the evil. Some may
object, are not the faithful Subject to evils, corruptions, and temptations
still? how then is that part of the intercession of Christ made good unto us? I
answer, the intercession of Christ is presently available, only it is conveyed
in a manner suitable and convenient to our present condition, so as there may
be left room for another life; and therefore we must not conceive all presently
done; it is with us as with Malefactors doomed to death, suppose the Supreme
power should grant a pardon to be drawn; though the grant be of the whole thing
at once, yet it cannot be written but word after word, and line after line; so
the grant of our protection against all evil is made unto Christ at first, but
in the execution thereof, there is line upon line, and precept upon precept,
here a little, and there a little; we know Christ prayed for Peter, I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; yet Peter's faith did shake and
totter; the prayer was not, that there might be no failing at all, but that it
might not utterly and totally fail; and in that respect Peter was protected.

Heb. 4.14, 16.
4. That we might have free access to the Throne of Grace; So the Apostle,
Seeing then we have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus
the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession, Heb. 10.23.
and come boldly to the Throne of grace. And again, Having therefore boldness
to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, and having an high Priest over
the House of God, let us draw near with a true heart in a full assurance of
faith.

5. That we might have the inward interpellation of the Spirit, which is, as it
were, the Echo of Christ's intercession in our heart: Romans 8.26.
The Spirit makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered.
It is the same Spirit groans in us, which more distinctly and fully in Christ,
John 17.13.
prays for us. These things I speak in the world (says our Savior) that
they might have my joy filled in themselves. q. d. I have made this prayer in
the world, and left a record and pattern of it in the Church, that they feeling
the same heavenly desires kindled in their own hearts, may be comforted in the
workings of that Spirit of prayer in them, which testifies to their souls the
quality of that intercession which I make for them in the Heaven of Heavens;
certainly there is a dependence of our prayer on Christ's prayer: as it is with
the Sun, though the body of it abide in the Heavens, yet the beams of it
descend to us here on earth; so the intercession of Christ, though as tied to
his person, it is made in Heaven; yet the groans, and desires of the touched
heart, as the beams thereof, are here on earth.

6. That we might have the sanctification of our services; of this the
Levitical Priests were a type, Exodus 28.38. Rev. 8.3.
For they bear the iniquity of the holy things of the children of Israel, that
they might be accepted; and he is the Angel of the Covenant, who has a golden
Censer to offer up the prayers of the Saints. Some observe a threefold evil in
man, of every of which we are delivered by Christ: First, an evil of state or
condition under the guilt of sin: Secondly, an evil of nature under the
corruption of sin: Thirdly, an evil in all our services by the adherency of
sin; for that which touches an unclean thing, is made unclean thereby. Now
Christ by his righteousness and merits justifies our persons from the guilt of
sin; and Christ by his Grace and Spirit does in measure purify our faculties
from the corruption of sin; and Christ by his incense and intercession does
cleanse our services from the adherency of sin; so that in them the Lord smells
a sweet favor; and both we and our services find acceptance with God.

7. That we might have the pardon of all sin. It is by virtue of Christ's
intercession that a Believer sinning of infirmity has a pardon of course, for
Christ is his Advocate to plead his case; or if he sin of presumption, and the
Lord give repentance, he has a pardon at the hands of God the Father by virtue
of this intercession in a way of justice. And to this end rather is Christ
called an Advocate than a Petitioner; 1 John 2.1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. The work of an Advocate
differs from the work of a Petitioner; an Advocate does not merely petition,
but he tells the Judge what is Law, and what ought to be done, and so does
Christ. O my Father (says Christ) this soul has indeed sinned, but I have
satisfied for his sins, I have paid for them to the full; now therefore in a
way of equity, and justice, I do here call for this man's pardon. If this were
not so, our estate would be most miserable, considering that for every sin
committed by us after repentance, we deserve to be cast out of the love and
favor of God our Father for ever and ever.

8. That we might have continuance in the state of grace, I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not. Luke 22.32.
Some that dissent from us in the point of perseverance, object, that in our
Savior's Prayer for Peter there was somewhat singular; but we say, that in
this Prayer there is nothing singular, which is not common to all the faithful,
and unto such as are given unto Christ of the Father; they allege that this
privilege was granted to Peter as an Apostle; but we say, that if it was
granted to Peter, as an Apostle, then it was common to Peter and Judas, in that
both were Apostles. They allege further, that Christ prays not for the
absolute perseverance of Believers, but after a sort, and upon condition. But
we say the Prayer of Christ is certain, and not suspended: in this Prayer his
desire is not for Peter that would presevere, but his desire is for Peter that
he should persevere; the object of the thing for which Christ prays, is
distinct from the thing it self prayed for.

9. That we might have the salvation of our souls in the day of Jesus; John
17.24.
Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they might behold my glory. Why, this is the main end in respect of us,
our glory; and indeed herein is the main piece of our glory, to behold this
glory! Oh to see the Lord Jesus Christ glorified, as he shall be glorified,
must be a glorious thing; What is it to see his glory, but to behold the luster
of his Divinity through his humanity? In this respect our very eyes shall come
to see God, as much as is possible for any creature to see him: we may be sure
God shall appear through the humanity of Christ, as much as is possible for the
Divinity to appear in a creature; and therefore Men and Angels will be
continually viewing of Christ. I know there is another glory of Christ which
the Father will put upon him; Because he humbled himself, therefore God will
exalt him, Rev. 14.4.
and give him a name above every name; and we shall see him in this glory. O
the ravishing sight of Saints! Christ is so lovely, that the Saints cannot
leave, but they must, and will follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: there shall
be no moment to all eternity, wherein Christ shall be out of sight to so many
thousand thousands of Saints; now this is the glory of the Saints above; as a
Queen that sees the Prince in his glory, she delights in it, because it is her
glory; so the Church, when she shall see Christ her Husband in his glory she
shall rejoice in it, because she looks upon it as her own: Is not this a
blessed end of Christ's intercession? why, hither tend all the rest; all the
other ends end in this; and for this above all Christ intercedes to his Father,
Father, Cant. 3.11.
I would have my Saints with me, O that all the daughters of Zion may behold
King Solomon with the Crown wherewith thou have crowned him in the day of his
Espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

Only one Question, and I have done; how should I set my faith on work to act
on Christ's intercession for these ends? I answer, --

1. Faith must persuade it self that here is a virtue in Christ's intercession.
Certainly every passage, and acting of Christ has its efficacy, and therefore
there is virtue in this; it is full of juice, it has a strong influence in it.

2. Faith must consider that it is the design of God, and the intendment of
Christ, that this intercession should be for the good of those that are given
to Christ. O there is enough in Christ, enough in Christ's intercession to
convey communion, the Spirit, protection, free access to the Throne of Grace, a
Spirit of prayer, pardon of sins, continuance in grace, salvation of souls to
the Saints, and people of God, through all the world; and this is the design of
God, that Christ's intercession should be as the fountain whence all these
streams must run, and be conveyed unto us.

3. Faith must act dependantly upon the intercession of Christ for these very
ends, this is the very nature of Faith, it relyes upon God in Christ, and upon
all the actings of Christ, and upon all the promises of Christ: so then, Is
there a desirable end in Christ's intercession which we aim at? O let us act
our Faith dependantly; let us rely, stay, or lean upon Christ to that same end;
let us roll our selves, or cast our selves upon the very intercession of Jesus
Christ: Saying, O my Christ, there is enough in thee, and in this glorious
intercession of thine, and therefore there will I stick, and abide for ever.

4. Faith must ever and anon be trying, improving, wrestling with God, that
virtue may go out of Christ's intercession into our hearts. I have heard Lord,
that there is an Office erected in heaven, that Christ, as Priest, should be
ever praying, and interceding for his people: O that I may feel the efficacy of
Christ's intercession! am I now in prayer? O that I could feel in this prayer,
the warmth, and heat, and spiritual fire, which usually falls down from
Christ's intercession into the hearts of his! Lord warm my spirit in this duty;
give me the kisses of thy mouth; O that I may now have communion with thee, thy
Spirit upon me, thy protection over me! O that my pardon may be sealed, my
grace confirmed, my soul saved in the day of Jesus! In this method, O my soul,
follow on; and who knows but God may appear e're thou art aware? howsoever be
thou in the use of the means, and leave the issue with God.

SECT. VI. Of loving Jesus in that Respect.
6. LEt us love Jesus, as carrying on this great work of our salvation in his
intercession. Now two things more especially will excite our love. 1. Christ's
love to us. 2. Our propriety in Christ. For the first, many acts of Christ's
love have appeared before, and every one is sufficient to draw our loves to him
again. As --

1. He had an eternal love to man; he feasted himself on the thoughts of love,
delight, and free grace to man from all eternity; since God was God (O
boundless duration) the Lord Jesus in a manner was loving and longing for the
dawning of the day of the Creation; he was (as it were) with child of infinite
love to man before he made the world. Some observe, that the first words which
ever Christ wrote, were, Love to Believers: and these were written with glory,
for it was before gold was, and they were written upon his bosom, for then
other books were not.

2. In the beginning of time he loved man above all creatures, for after he had
made them all, he then speaks as he never did before, Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness, Genesis 1.26.
and let him have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth; and though man at that very
instant unmade himself by sins, Christ's love yet was not broken off, but held
forth in a promise till the day of performance, The seed of the woman shall
bruise the Serpents head, and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed.

3. In the fullness of time his love was manifested; the seed then blossomed,
and the birth came out in an high expression of love; the man-child, the love
of Christ was born, Tit. 3.4.
and saw the light. After that (says the Apostle) the kindness and love of God
our Savior toward man appeared. I shall not need sure to instance in
succeeding passages; so far as we have gone, we have clearly seen Christ's life
was a perfect mirror of his love, as there is no beam in the Sun, in which
there is no light, so there was no act in the life of Christ, but to a
spiritual eye it shines with the light of love. But above all, O the love of
Christ in his death! ask a Malefactor, if the Princes Son should go to his
Father, and say, Father, I confess this wretch has deserved to dye, but I see
a willingness in thee that he should live; only I perceive it sticks with thy
justice; why, for that, Father, here I am; and to satisfy thy justice I will
dye my self, only let this poor wretch live to the glory of thine, and my free
grace. Ask (I say) the Malefactor what kind of love were this? Surely Christ
dyed for our sins, and Christ rose again for our justification, and he
ascended, and sat down at God's right hand, and sent down his holy Spirit, and
all for us; there was not one passage in all these transactions, but held forth
the breakings and breathings out of a strong fire of love.

4. At this time there is a coal of burning love in the breast of Christ: this
fire was indeed from everlasting, but the flames are as hot this day as ever;
now it is that Christ loves, and lives; And wherefore lives? but only to love
us, and to intercede for us. Christ makes our salvation his constant calling;
he is ever at his work. Yesterday, and to day, and for ever: there is not one
hour in the day, nor one day in a year, nor one year in an age, wherein Christ
is not busy with his Father in this heavenly employment of interceding for us.
He loved us before he died for us, his love being the cause why he died for us;
and he loves us still, in that now he intercedes for us: it is as much as to
say, Christ has loved us, and he repents not of his love: love made him dye
for us, and if it were to do again, he would dye over again; yea, if our sins
had so required, that for every elect person Christ must have dyed a several
death, Love, love would have put him willingly upon all these deaths; O the
loves of Christ toward our poor souls! If I might but stay, and take some
turns in this large Field of love: How many thousands of particulars might I
draw out of Scripture, expressing Christ's love to us in this respect? though
he be in Heaven, yet by virtue of his intercession, he bears us in his hands:
yea, he leads us by the hand, and arms too. I taught Ephraim to go, taking them
by their arms, but they knew not that I healed them; he dandles us on his
knees, Isa. 40 11. Hos. 11.3. Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12.
he bears us on his wings; As an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over
her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, and bears them on her
wings, so the Lord alone does lead us; he carries us on his shoulders, as the
man found his sheep, and laid it on his shoulders rejoicing. Nay, I must yet
come nearer, Luke 15.5.
for Christ by his intercession sets us nearer yet; His left hand is under us,
Cant. 2.6.
and his right hand does embrace us; he wears us in Heaven, as a bracelet about
his arms, which made the Spouse cry out, O set me as a seal upon thine arm;
Cant. 8.6.
he stamps and prints us on the palms of his hands, Behold I have graven thee
on the palms of my hands; Isa. 49.16.
as if our names were written in letters of blood upon Christ's flesh; he sets
us as a seal upon his heart, that is the expression of the Spouse too, O set me
as a seal upon thine heart; Nay, Cant. 8.6.
so precious are the Saints to Jesus Christ, that they lodge in Heaven in his
bowels, and in his heart; for they dwell in Christ, Hereby we know that we
dwell in him; 1 John 4.13. 1 John 4.16.
and they dwell in God, and dwell in love, For God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God. I know not what more to say; you know the
manner of the high Priests, was to carry the names of the children of Israel
into the Holy of Holies on their shoulders, and on their breasts: but was it
ever heard, that any high Priest, besides the great high Priest of our
profession, should carry the names of thousands, and millions on his shoulders,
and on his arms, and on his hands, and on his wings, and on his bosom, and on
his heart, nay in his heart, and in his bowels, as a memorial before the Lord?
O unmatchable love!

Methinks this love of Christ should now change my soul into a Globe or Mass of
Divine love toward Christ, as it were by the Spirit of the Lord. Methinks a
sight of Christ in his presenting himself, and his sacrifice to his Father for
me, should so enamour my soul as that I should delight in no other sight but
this; then is a Christian sweetly exercised, when as the golden Ball of Divine
Love is tossed to and again betwixt Christ's bosom and his; and in this respect
it is a wonder that before this I am not sickned, and overcome with love, and
ready to cry out with the Spouse, O stay me with flaggons, Cant. 2.5.
and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. O I am wounded with the
arrows of love, so as neither grave, nor death, nor hell; neither Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come can ever
lick these wounds, or enbalm, or bind them up. O my Christ, my Lord, my Jesus,
What should I do but yield over my self as a Spouse under the power of her
husband? what should I do but lose my self in such a deep Ocean of loves,
stronger than wine, hotter than coals of Juniper, which has a most vehement
flame?

2. Another motive of our love to Christ, it is our propriety in Christ. 1 Cor.
6.19.
Ye are not your own, said the Apostle of us; and he is not his own, may we say
of Christ: If any ask how may this be? I answer, That the soul in loving Christ
is not her own, and in regard of loving, Christ is not his own; every one makes
over it self to another; and propriety or interest to it self on both sides
cease: My Beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant. 2.16.
says the Spouse; not as if Christ should leave off to be his own, or to be a
free God, when he becomes ours; no, no; but he so demeans himself in respect
of his loves, as if he were not his own; he puts on such relations, and
assumes such offices of engagement, as if he were all for us, and nothing for
himself; thus he is called a Savior, a Redeemer, a King, a Priest, a Prophet,
a Friend, a Guide, an Head, an Husband, a Leader, Ransomer, Intercessor; and
what not of this nature?

O my soul come hither, and put thy little candle to this mighty flame; if thou
had ten hearts, or as many hearts in one, as there are elected Men and Angels
in Heaven and Earth, all these would be too little for Jesus Christ: only go as
far as thou can, and love him with that heart thou have, yea love him with
all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy might; and as Christ in loving
thee, is not his own, so let thy soul in loving Christ be not her own; Come,
love thy Christ, and not thy self; possess thy Christ, and not thy self; enjoy
thy Christ, and not thy self; live in thy Christ, not in thy self; solace thy
self in Jesus Christ, not in thy self; say with the Apostle, Gal. 2.20.
I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me. Certainly, if ever thou come to love Christ truly, thou can not but
deny thy self, and all created lovers. This love will screw up thy soul, so
high above the world, and above thy flesh, and above thy self, and above all
other lovers, that nothing on this side Christ, whether in heaven or on earth,
will come in competition with him. Suppose a man in the top of a Castle higher
than the third Region of the Air, or near the Sphere of the Moon, should look
down to the fairest and sweetest Meadows, or to a Garden rich with Roses and
Flowers, of all sweet colors and delicious smells; certainly he should not see
or feel any sweetness, pleasantness, color, smell, because he is so far above
them; so the soul filled with the love of Christ is so high above all created
lovers, that their loveliness cannot reach or ascend to the high and large
capacity of a spiritual soul. O for a soul filled up with all the fullness of
God! O for a soul stretched out to its widest capacity, and circumference for
the entertainment of God! Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
O my soul, that thou were but able to comprehend with all the Saints, what is
the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ
that passes knowledge! Surely if Christ be mine, if his death be mine, his
resurrection mine, his ascension mine, his session mine, his intercession mine,
How should I but love him with a singular love? farewell world, and worldly
glory; if Christ come in room, it is time for you to vanish; I shall little
care for a Candle when the Sun shines fair and bright upon my head: What? is my
name written on the heart of Christ? does he wear me as a Favor and Love-token
about his arms and neck? is he at every turn presenting me and my duties to his
heavenly Father? Cant. 4.9.
O thou have ravished my heart, my King, my Jesus, thou have ravished my heart
with one of thine eyes, and with one chain of thy neck.

Suppose, O my soul, thou had been with Christ when he washed his Disciples
feet, and that he should have come, and have washed thy feet; Would not thy
heart have glowed with love to Jesus Christ? why, Christ is now in glory, and
now he takes thy filthy soul, and dirty duties, and washes (as it were) the
feet of all, that he may present them to his Father; thou can not shed a
tear, but he washes it over again in his precious blood, and perfumes it with
his glorious intercessions. Oh what cause have thou to love Jesus Christ? Oh
you that never loved Christ, come, love him now; and you that have loved Christ
a little, O love him more: Above all, let me, O my soul, charge upon thee this
duty of love; O go away warmed with the love of Christ, and with a love to
Christ.

SECT. VII. Of joying in Jesus in that respect.
7. LEt us joy in Jesus, as carrying on this work of our salvation in his
intercession. Surely this is glad tidings of great joy: when wicked Haman
procured letters from King Ahasuerus for the destruction of all Jews, then
Esther, the Queen, makes request to the King, that her people might be saved,
and Haman's letters revoked; Esther. 5.3. -- 8.15, 16, 17.
And the King said to her, What will thou Queen Esther? and what is thy
request, and it shall be given thee? O the joy of Jews at this happy tidings!
Then the City of Shushan rejoiced, and was glad; then the Jews had light, and
gladness, and joy, and honor; in every province, and in every City,
whithersoever the Kings Commandment, and his Decree came, the Jews had joy, and
gladness, a feast, and a good day. Is not this our very case? was there not a
Law against us, an handwriting of Ordinances, a sentence of a double death, of
body and soul? had not Satan, as wicked Haman, accused us, and sought by all
means our condemnation? but yet behold, not only an earthly Esther, but Jesus
the Son of God was willing for our sakes to come down from Heaven; and he it
was that took away the handwriting of Ordinances, and cancelled it upon the
Cross, that ascended into Heaven, and there makes requests for us, and he it is
in whom his Father is well pleased; never comes he to his Father, but he
obtains the grace of the golden Scepter; no sooner he cries, I will that these
poor souls may be eternally saved; but his Father answers, Amen; Be it so: be
it, O my Son, even as thou please. O that we could joy at this! O that we
could imitate the Jews! O that light, and gladness, and joy, and honor, would
possess our souls! if at Christ's birth was such, and so much joy, because a
Savior was proclaimed: Is not our joy to be heightened, when salvation is
effected? if the first act of Christ's mediation was so joyous, shall not the
last act of his mediation be much more joyous? -- But I hear many objections,
which keep back joy, they are as bars and hindrances at the doors of many heavy
hearts, that joy cannot enter in; I shall instance in some.

O I am much opposed here in this world (says one) men are as wolves, and
devils; Psalm. 22.16.
Dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me; they have
no bowels; they persecute, reproach, revile, so that I am killed all the day
long -- And what then? what matters oppositions of men, so long as Christ does
intercede for thee in Heaven? O remember Christ's bowels; it may be he suffers
men to be merciless on earth, that thou may look up, and behold how merciful
he is who sits above; and tell me, have thou no experience of this truth? does
not relief strangely come in now and than? why, write upon the forehead of such
favors, I have a merciful, and compassionate Mediator in heaven.

O I am much tempted (says another) that I cannot pray; had I now the key of
prayer, I could then unlock the cabinet where all God's treasures lie, and take
out what I pleased; but alas, my prayers are dull, and weak, and dry, and
without spirit and life, I cannot pray. -- If so, be humbled for it; and yet
know this, that when thou can not pray, Christ then prays for thee, and he
prays that thou may pray: And tell me, have thou no experience of this
truth? has not sometimes thy spirit been enlarged in prayer? have thou not
sometimes felt thy heart warmed, or savingly affected? have thou not sometimes
in prayer been lifted up above thy self, and above the world? conclude then, My
Intercessor above has sent me this gift and Spirit; it is not I, but Christ's
Intercession that by an admirable and secret operation has given me the Spirit
to help my infirmity; these are the intercessions of the Spirit of Christ, and
they are the very Echo of the intercessions of Christ in his own person.

O but I labor under such, and such corruptions (says another) and the Devil
is busy, exceeding busy, and he exceedingly prevails; how am I overcome with
these corruptions, and with these and these sins? It may be so, and yet do not
altogether despond; for Jesus Christ is at God's right hand, and there he sits
till all his enemies be made his footstool; and what? are not thy sins his
enemies? O be of good comfort, for Christ will prevail; it is one piece of his
prayer that he puts up for thee, John 17.15.
To keep thee from evil; and surely he will either keep thee from it, or keep
thee in it, that in the issue thou shall have the victory. Ver. 12. Isa. 55 3.
Those that thou gave me I have kept (says Christ) and none of them is lost;
if he undertake for thee, thou art safe and sure; His Covenant is everlasting,
even the sure mercies of David: and therefore if yet thou do not, certainly
thou shall feel the virtue of Christ's intercession; sin must be subdued,
hell-gates shall not prevail against thee, he will not quench thy sparks until
he bring forth judgment unto victory.

Oh but I am in a suffering condition (says another) and there is none that
regards, or takes pity on me; all my friends have dealt treacherously with me,
among all my Lovers there is none to comfort me: they have heard, that I sigh,
and there is none to refresh me; I stand for Christ, but there is none stands
by me; I own him, but there is none owns me. Bleeding Christian, bear up! is
not Christ's intercession a sufficient answer to this case? alas thou would
be pitied for all thy weaknesses; why, know that compassion is natural to Jesus
Christ: he is a merciful high Priest, and can be no other to thee; God ordained
him to officiate in such a Tabernacle as wherein thou dwell, he was in all
things like unto thee, sin only excepted; it may be thou art in want, and so
was Christ, he had no house; thou art persecuted, and so was Christ; sin loads
thee, and so it did Christ. A Christians condition needs compassion, and Christ
knows how much, and it is his work continually to lay it open above; O my
Father, thus, and thus it is with the Militant Church, not a Member in it, but
he is under sin and affliction; see here the tears, hearken to the sighs, and
groans, and chatterings, and mournings of my Doves below; I present here their
persons and performances; and oh that they may find acceptance through my
merit! Some speak of Heavens Music, some tell us of Saints and Angels singing
and warbling in lively notes the praises of Christ in Heaven; and if any such
thing be, certainly, it is ear-tickling, heart-ravishing music; O the melody,
O the joy of Saints to hear such heavenly airs with heavenly ears! but be it
as it will be, of this I am confident, that Heaven it self yields no such
music as is the intercession of Jesus Christ; this (if any thing in Heaven do
it) makes melody in the ears of God, and of all celestial Spirits, Saints or
Angels: And (O my soul) suppose thy self within the compass, if now thou
could but hear what thy Jesus is saying in thy behalf: Is not this a brand
newly plucked out of the fire? was not this poor soul but the other day in a
state of nature, defiled with sin, within a step of hell? and did not I send my
Spirit to recall him? was not this precious blood shed for the redemption of
him? and what though sin stick and cleave to him to this day, yet have I not
given thee charge to take away his filthy garments from him, and to cloth him
with changes of raiment, even with the shining robes of mine own righteousness?
O my Father, let this soul live in thy sight! O cast him not away for whom I
have suffered, and done all this, I cannot rest satisfied without his society,
I am not right till he is with me in glory; he is my darling, my purchase, my
portion, my delight, and therefore let him be saved. Is not this enough to
cause thy very heart to leap in thy bosom? Bonaventure fondly reports, that
Francis hearing an Angel a little while playing on an Harp, he was so moved
with extraordinary delight, that he thought himself in another world. O but
suppose thou should hear the voice of Jesus thy Intercessor thus pleading for
thee, would thou not be cast into an ecstasy? would not this fill thee with
joys unspeakable, and full of glory? -- Come, realize this meditation?
certainly if thou art Christ's, he is thus, or in some other manner interceding
for thee; as sure as Christ is in Heaven, he is pleading with his Father in
Heaven on thy behalf: O the joys, the joys, the joys that I should now feel!
-- Tell me, is it not a comfort, for a poor beggar to be relieved at a rich
man's door? we are all beggars in regard of Heaven, and Jesus Christ does not
only come forth and serve us; but he takes us poor beggars by the hand, and
leads us in to his heavenly Father: Oh what comfort is here!

SECT. VIII. Of praying to, and praising of Jesus in that respect.
8. LEt us pray, and praise our Jesus in this respect.

1. Let us pray or sue our interest in this intercession: it is a question
amongst the Schools, whether we may conveniently pray to Jesus, to pray to his
Father in our behalf? And thus far is granted, that we may pray to Christ to
make us partakers of his intercessions, and to mingle our prayers with his
prayers, that they may find acceptance with God his Father. 1 Cor. 11.6.
But that we may use such a form, as ora pro nobis, O Christ pray for us, it is
looked upon as inconvenient in this respect. 1. Because cause we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. 2. Because it favors too much of the
error of Arrius, Nestorius, and indeed of the Romanists themselves. 3. Because
our prayers are most-what directed to Christ in his person or divine
subsistence, whose part is rather to give, than to ask; or if they are directed
to Christ as Mediator, and not simply as the only begotten Son of God, then I
see no incongruity (though in the former respect some inconvenience) but that
we may pray to Christ to intercede for us; for so he is God and man; and he is
considered according to both Natures; only the difference of both Natures is
still to be kept and maintained; intercession is the office of the whole person
of Christ, and of the two natures of Christ. But he performs this office one
way according to his Divine nature, and another way according to his humane
nature. I list not to quarrel about niceties; it is thus agreed on all hands,
and that is enough to our purpose, that we may call on Jesus, or on God the
Father in and through Jesus, that Christ's intercessions may be ours, and that
he would make it out to us in a way of assurance every day more and more.

2. Let us praise; let us bless God, and bless Christ for every transaction in
Heaven for us. It is a wonder to observe what songs of praise were chanted to
Christ in Heaven for that one transaction of opening the Book, and loosing the
seven Seals thereof: first, The four beasts, Rev. 5.8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14.
and then the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every
one of them harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of
the Saints, and they sung a new song; saying, thou art worthy to take the book,
and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy blood. -- And then the Angels round about the Throne, whose number was
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, came on, saying,
worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. -- And then every creature which
is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the
sea, came on, saying, blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be unto him
that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever; and the four
beasts, and four and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives for
ever and ever. I cannot tell what other transactions may be in Heaven, we have
but hints of them here, nor shall we fully or particularly know them till we
come to Heaven; but for this one transaction of Christ's intercession, we
cannot imagine less praise to be given to Christ than for any other; O then let
us do this duty on earth, as it is done in Heaven! what, is Christ praying for
us? O let us be on the exercise of praising him; is Christ interceding for us?
let us give him the glory of his intercession; Heaven is full of his praises, O
why should not earth ring with the sound thereof? Praise the Lord, O my soul,
and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

SECT. IX. Of conforming to Jesus in that respect.
9. LEt us conform to Jesus in respect of his intercession. I cannot think but
in every action of Christ there is something imitable of us. And as to the
present work, I shall instance only in these few particulars. As --

1. Christ appears in Heaven for us; let us appear on earth for him. Is there
not equity, as well as conformity in this duty? O my soul, consider what thy
Christ is doing, consider wherein the intercession of Jesus Christ consists! is
not this the first part of it? why, he appears in Heaven before Saints and
Angels, and before God his Father in thy behalf; and art thou afraid to appear
before worms, mortals, dust and ashes in his cause, or for his truth? shall
Jesus Christ own thee in Heaven? and will thou not own Jesus Christ here in
this world? shall Jesus Christ, as thy great high Priest, take thy very name,
carry it upon his breast into the presence of God? and wilt not thou take the
Name of Christ, and hold it forth in profession and practice to all men? Oh
what a mighty engagement is here to stand to Christ, and to appear for Christ,
and to own his cause in these backsliding-times; in that Christ, who sits at
the right hand of God, is willing and ready to appear in person for us, both as
a Mediator, and Sponsor, and Solicitor, and Advocate, and Leiger Ambassador?

2. Christ spends all his time for us and our salvation, let us spend all our
time for him, and in his service; the Apostle tells us, that He ever lives to
make intercession for us; Heb. 7.25.
it is not for a day, or a month, or a year, but he lives for ever upon this
account; for ever (i.e.) during all the time from his Ascension until the end
of the world; he is still interceding; he spends of all that time for us, and
shall we think it too much time to spend a few days that we have here to live
upon the earth for him? one thinks this the greatest Argument in the world to
make us to walk closely with God in Christ; He spends of his eternity for us,
and shall not we spend of our whole time for him? surely people do not think
what Christ is doing in Heaven for them; if you who are Saints would but
seriously consider, that Christ this Sabbath, this day of rest, is at his work,
that without any weariness or intermission from morning till evening, and from
evening till morning he is ever, ever interceding; how would this engage you in
his service? Ah Christians! if you should continue praying, praising, reading,
hearing all this day without any intermission or breaking off. Oh what
weariness! O how would you say, When will the day be done, when will the
Sabbath be at an end? Well, but Christ is not weary of serving you; this
Sabbath, and the last Sabbath, and the other Sabbath, and every Sabbath, when
you had done your duties, he took your persons, and duties, and presented all
unto his Father; he prayed over your prayers, and continued praying, and
saying, Lord accept of a short, poor, lean, imperfect service done on earth for
my sake, and for those merits sake, which I am continually presenting to thee
here in heaven. Oh why do we not come up to this conformity? Oh why are we so
uncomformable to the actings of Christ? he is preparing Mansions for us in
Heaven, and are we digging in this world? he is making mention of our names to
God, and are we sinning against him and God? his blood cries, O that these
souls may be saved; and shall our sins cry, It is just that these souls should
be damned? O mind the exemplar! Christ spends all his time for you, do you
spend all your time for him: we cannot but judge this to be most equal, that
they who live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who ever
lives to make intercession for them.

3. He prays for us, and for all believers, to his Father; let us pray for our
selves, and for all our brethren, and for all sorts of men, though they be our
enemies, for we were no better to jesus Christ: Learn of me (says Christ) and
so far as he is imitable let us follow him; does Christ pray? let us pray; does
he pray for us and others? let us pray for our selves, 1 Timothy 2.1.
and then let us pray one for another, I exhort therefore (says the Apostle)
that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men. Isa. 27.4. Romans 15.30. Isa. 62.7.
And come, lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left, said the King to
Isaiah; and Wrestle together in prayer for me, said Paul; and Give the Lord no
rest till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, said the Prophet: Christ
intercedes, and there is no question but we should intercede for the living
Saints. Brethren pray for us, 1 These. 5.25.
said the Apostle; whosoever thou art that read, I beseech thee remember me
in thy prayers, it may be thou art nearer God, and more in favor with God than
such a poor sinner as I am; as Mordecai set Ester on work to intercede for him
with the King, and for his people; so it is our duty to crave the prayers of
such who are upon better terms (possibly) with the Lord, than we our selves are
at the present; Only I could wish thy prayers at such a time, when thy heart is
got nearest to God, by special stirrings of faith and love; I suppose thou
can not have a spirit, and power of prayer, but sometimes or other thou art
(as it were) in the lap of Christ, upon the Spouses knee, in the Beloveds
bosom; O then make a request for an unworthy one; O then, if ever, intercede
for me, because then I read Christ's own intercession in thy intercession; what
is thy prayer then but as the echo of Christ's prayer, the Amen to Christ's
intercessions; which he makes in heaven? Christians! it is our duty to put one
another upon praying one for another, Christ intercedes for us, and so should
we intercede for his, called, or uncalled, if so they belong to the election of
grace.

4. Christ takes our prayers, and mingles them with his own prayers,
intercessions, incense, and so presents all as one work mingled together unto
God the Father; O let this be our care to put up all our prayers to God in the
Name of Christ, and to stay our selves upon the intercessions of Christ; when
all is done, let us beg the acceptance of our prayers, not for our sakes, nor
for our prayers sake; but for his sake, who perfumes our prayers, by
interweaving them with his prayers. Many a poor soul is many time afraid to
pray to God for want of the due consideration of this conformity; such a one
goes to prayer, and he looks upon it as it lies upon his own heart, or as it
comes from himself, and then he cries, Oh what a poor, weak, sinful, imperfect,
impenitent prayer is this? well, but if this weak prayer of thine be once
mingled with the glorious and heavenly prayer of Jesus Christ, the weakness
will soon vanish, and thy prayer will find acceptance with God the Father; it
is with your prayers and duties as it is with your fire; your kitchin-fire is
troubled with abundance of smoke, but if ever it could ascend into the element
of fire above, it would smoke no more; so your prayer while it lies upon your
own hearth, there is a great deal of smoke in it, but if ever it get up into the
hands of Jesus Christ, there it is in its own element, and so it is freed from
all its smoke, and so the weakness of it is done away. O conform to Christ in
this point; he will not present thy prayers to God, but he will first mingle it
with his own prayers; no more should thou present a prayer to God but in
Christ's Name, considering that all thy prayers find acceptance in, for, and
through the intercession of Jesus Christ. If it were not for this, I profess I
knew not how to answer the cavils of our dissolute adversaries, who throw down
prayers, as of no use at all; for us they object --

Thou can not pray (say they) by thy own confession without some defect,
imperfection, Object.
sin: and if so, there is need of a new prayer, to beg pardon for the defects
of that prayer; and then another prayer to heal the flaws of that prayer; and
then another to do as much for that; and so in infinitum; by this means there
would be an infinite progression without any stop at any prayer to all.

Answ.
I answer, This Objection were valid if there were no intercession of Christ to
stay our selves, and our prayers on: but as we grant requests many times for
some friends sake, rather than for the parties sake; so God does always grant
requests for Christ's sake, never for our own sakes: Thou objectest there are
many defects in our prayers as made by us: but I answer, there is no defects in
the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ, for whose sake alone they are
granted of God; and therefore our prayers being made in Christ's Name, they may
stay their heads in Christ's bosom; in this respect we need not still to run
our selves in a Circle, this being the last resolution, Christ's merits, and
Christ's intercession. Christ offers up our persons and wooden prayers in his
golden Censer to his Father; Christ's intercession therefore is that which does
the deed. Now to say our prayers are of no use, it is all one as to say his
intercession is of no use; not that we are so good, that he cannot take
exception against us, and our prayers; but because Christ is so good, and his
intercession for us is so good, that he neither can, not will take exception
against him, or his intercession for us; and in this case Christ and Christians
make one person (as it were) in law; his intercession for us; and our
intercessions for our selves, are but one intercession: and indeed he so
mingles them that they seem but one, for the smoke of the incense, and the
prayers of the Saints ascend up together before God out of the Angels hand,
Rev. 8.4. Rev. 8.4.


5. Christ pleads the cause of his people, and answers all the accusations of
Satan against them; Oh let us plead for them for whom Christ pleads, and answer
the accusations of Satan's, or his instruments against their persons, or their
ways. We have a strange generation of men abroad, whose very Religion consists
in railing, reviling, reproaching the Servants of the living God; not the best
men, nor the best Ministers under Heaven escape them; Are they not all, say
they, I lately received a paper wherein the Quakers gave the Ministers of
Christ these following names. Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists,
Witches, Blind guides, Devils, Liars Baal's Priests, Sir-Simonds, Dissemblers,
Vpholders of the seven headed, and tenhorned beasts, a Viperous, and Serpentine
generation, bloody Herodians, Blasphemers, Scarlet-colored beasts, Babylons
Merchants, Busiebodies, Whited Walls, Painted Sepulchers, Ravening Wolves,
Persecutors, Tyrants, Greedy dogs, Pharisees.
Wolves, Dogs, Hirelings, Priests of Baal, Covetous, Carnal, Damned; and what
not? Are they not all, say they (as the Devil said of Joshua) clothed with
filthy garments? defiled totally, utterly defiled with the pollutions of
Babylon? Christian! when you hear this language, learn you to conform to
Christ; go you first to God with the Lords own plea, Now the Lord rebuke thee O
Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee: Zach. 3.2. And
then go on in vindication of their persons and their cause; are they not
precious, gracious, holy able, shining, and burning lights? it may be some of
their persons have been faulty; but say of such, Is not this a brand newly
plucked out of the fire? failings, and humane frailties have been in the best,
yea in most of the Prophets and Apostles; but shall we therefore condemn to
hell the generation of God's dear Children? or howsoever it may be with their
persons, yet is not their cause and office of Christ's own institution? in this
respect he that despises you, despises me, says Christ, and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10.16. Are not the Ministers of
Christ as stars in the right hand of Christ? they that would do them any deadly
harm, must pluck them thence. Christians! conform you to Christ in this point;
you see how Satan stands at the right hand of our Joshua's to resist them, now
then plead you their cause, and answer the Adversaries accusations.

6. Christ by his intercession saves us to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. O let us
serve him to the uttermost; surely all we can do is too little to answer so
great a love as this. Oh Christians! why should it be esteemed a needless thing
to be most rigorously conscionable, and exactly circumspect? Christ paid our
debt to the uttermost farthing, drunk every drop of our bitter cup, and now
presents all unto his Father by way of intercession, and saves us, (...),
thoroughly, to the uttermost; why should not we labor to perform his service,
and to fulfill every one of his commandments, thoroughly and to the uttermost
also? certainly there is a duty which concerns us Christians, as to be hot in
Religion, Rev. 3.16. to be zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. to walk
circumspectly, or precisely, as the word carries it, Ephesians. 5.15. to be fervent
in spirit, Romans 12.11. to strive to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. to
contend for the faith, Jude 3. with an holy kind of violence to lay hold upon
the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 11.12. Oh what ever men should be afraid of taking
God's part too much, or fighting too valiantly under the Colors of Christ, of
being too busy about the salvation of their own souls, of being singular (as
they call it) in the duties of Religion; I observe men are content to be
singular in any thing, save in the service of God; you desire and labor to be
singularly rich, and singularly wise, and singularly valorous, and singularly
proud; but you can by no means endure singularity or eminency in zeal, and the
Lord's service; in matters of Religion you are resolved to do as the most do,
though in so doing you damn your own souls, Mat. 7.13. O come and learn this
lesson of Christ, he saves us to the uttermost, and let us serve him to the
uttermost; with all our hearts, and with all our souls, and with all our might.

Thus far we have looked on Jesus in his intercession, our next work is our
last work, which is to look on Jesus as carrying on the great work of our
salvation for us in his coming again, the very end of time to all eternity; he
has no more now to do, but to judge the Saints, and to lead them into glory,
and to deliver up his Kingdom to his Father, and so to live with his redeemed
ones for ever, and ever, and ever. LOOKING UNTO JESUS In his Second Coming.
Book X. Part VII.
CHAP. I.
Job 19.25, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another.
SECT. I. Of Christ's preparing for Judgment.
AND is not yet all done? O the unwearied patience, love, mercy, free grace of
Christ in carrying on this mighty work! he begun it before the beginning of the
world; since then he has been laboring in it about six thousand years; and
now the time of restoring being come, he will perfect what he has begun, and
bring on the other end of the Golden chain; Moreover, whom he did predestinate,
them he also called; Romans 8.30.
and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he
also glorified. In this piece also as in the former we shall first lay down the
object, and then give directions how to look upon it.

The Object is Jesus, carrying on the great work of our salvation in his coming
again to earth, and taking up with him all his Saints into Heaven. In this work
I shall set before you these particulars: 1. Christ's preparing for judgment.
2. Christ's coming to judgment. 3. Christ's summons of the Elect to come under
judgment. 4. Christ and the Saints meeting at the judgment day. 5. Christ's
sentencing or judging the Saints for eternal glory. 6. Christ and the Saints
judging the rest of the world. 7. Christ and his Saints going up into Heaven;
when shall be the end of this world. 8. Christ surrendering and delivering up
the Kingdom to God even the Father. 9. Christ's subjection to the Father, that
God may be all in all. 10. Christ (notwithstanding this) being all in all to
his blessed, saved, redeemed Saints to all eternity.


1. For his preparing for judgment. When once the number of all his Elect shall
be completed, and the work of his intercession shall be at an end, then
immediately will follow these particulars. As --

Rev. 16.17.
1. A great voice comes out of the Temple of Heaven, saying, it is done. It
comes out of the Temple of Heaven, that we may understand it to be the voice of
Christ. And if this speech be directed unto God, it is as if Christ had bespoke
his Father thus. And now, John 17.12.
O my Father, I have done; that office of the Priesthood which by agreement we
erected, is now at an end: here I have sat at thy right hand interceding for
my Saints ever since my ascension; and of all that thou have given me by thine
eternal election I have not lost a Saint; in their several ages I produced them
and gave them a being, and in their times I remembered them, and presented their
conditions and necessities before thee; and now I have not a Saint more; in the
Book of life there is not another name written to be born on earth; and to what
purpose should I now continue the world? the Saints are they for whom I made
the world, the Saints are they that hold forth the light of my glory in the
world, the Saints are they for whom my eternal counsels before the world did
work, the Saints are they for whom I was content to shed my precious blood when
I was in that world below; and now their number is completed, I am resolved to
unpin the fabric of the world, and take it down; it stands but for their
sakes, and therefore now let the seventh Angel blow his trumpet, that the
mystery of God may be finished. I swear by him that lives for ever, Rev. 10.7.
ver. 6.
that time shall be no longer.

Rev. 11.15.
2. No sooner this said, but the seventh Angel sounds. This seventh Angel (says
Pareus) is the Archangel that proclaims Christ's coming, with a great and
mighty shout; 1 These. 4.16.
For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel, and with the trump of God. The Lord shall descend with a shout;
but before he descend, and I believe upon the very discovery of his coming
down, there will be a shout in Heaven; for so it follows, And the seventh Angel
sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven; Pareus in loc.
if we may believe Commentaries, these are the voices of blessed souls, and
blessed souls, and blessed Angels in heaven; no sooner Christ bids the Angel
sound] q. d. summon those blessed souls that were slain for the Word of God,
Rev. 6.10. Rev. 22.20.
and therefore cried, How long Lord, holy and true? summon those blessed souls
that have cried so long, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; summon all souls, and
summon all Angels, and bid them wait on me, now I resolve to go down, and to
judge the world:) no sooner I say Christ bids the Angel sound, but presently at
the joy of this command, all the voices in Heaven give up a shout; why, this is
the long-look'd for day, the day of perfecting the number of the Saints; the
day of joining the souls and bodies of the Saints together; the day of
convening all the families both of Saints and Angels under one roof; the day of
bringing up the Bride unto the Lamb, and of completing the Marriage in its
highest solemnity: and therefore no wonder if at this news great voices and
cries (such as are used by Mariners, or gatherers of the vintage) were made in
Heaven. O what an addition of joy is this to Heavens joy it self! the spirits
of the just, and the blessed Angels that have lived together in heavens bliss,
had never such an adventitious joy as this before; now they shout and sing a
new and blessed Song, Rev. 11.15.
The kingdoms of this world, are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. We may call this Heavens triumph
for the finishing of God's mystery. Now is it that Christ will vindicate his
Kingdom, and overthrow the power of his enemies; they had long set themselves
against the Lord, and against his anointed; the Kings of the earth, and the
Rulers confederated; they ruled all, and as much as in them lay, excluded
Christ; but now the Kingdoms of the world will return to Christ, and he alone
shall rule; and thence the winged Choristers of Heaven chant forth this Anthem,
The Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms of Christ.

Rev. 11.16, 17, 18.
3. After this shout, The four and twenty Elders which sit before God on their
seats, fall upon their faces, and worship God, saying, we give thee thanks O
Lord God Almighty, w^^^h art, and wast, and are to come, because thou have
taken to thee thy great power, and h^ (...) ^^ned; and the nations were angry,
etc. By these four and twenty Elders we un^^ (...) ^ll Gods Saints of the Old
and New Testament, comprehended under the twe^^^ (...) ^riarchs, and twelve
Apostles; others would have them to be only those Saints (...) Old Testament,
and therefore called Elders; whosoever they are, we find they are so glad at
this news, that Christ will now judge the world, that presently they rise off
their seats, and fall on their faces; and first they praise, and then they
pray: 1. They praise God for taking to himself his own power; Christ connived
(as it were) till now at the power of his enemies; Antichrist, and not Christ
seemed to rule, and to sit in the Temple of God; but now Christ is resolved to
rule himself, and to make all his enemies his footstool: and therefore now We
give thee thinks, O Lord God Almighty, Rev. 11.18.
2. They pray Christ to go on to judgment. 1. Because the nations were angry,
q. d. they have been angry long enough, they have set themselves against Christ
and against his Church, and therefore now it is time to bridle their wrath, and
to break them with a rod of Iron, O let thy wrath come. 2. Because the time of
judgment is now accomplished which God had decreed in his eternal counsel, and
which the Father had put in his own power; This time was not for mortals to
know, Mortalibus ignotum; caelestibus vero nunc revelatum a Christo. Paraeus in
loc. Psalm 110.1.
but now 'twas revealed to these celestial spirits by Christ, and therefore
they beg, Go on Lord Jesus; reward now thy Servants, Prophets, Saints; and
destroy them which destroyed the earth.

4. God the Father is well pleased with Christ's purpose of judging the world.
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. I know these words were spoke to Christ at his ascension
into Heaven, yet that hinders not but that now God speaks them again to Christ;
Heb. 2.8.
for as yet (says the Apostle) we see not all things put under him; and God's
purpose was that Christ should rule, until he had put all things in subjection
under his feet. Nay, why not these words spoken now rather than before? Christ
indeed reigned as King ever since his Ascension, but now more especially he is
to manifest his Kingdom, for now is he to judge among the heathen, Psalm. 110.6.
now is he to wound the heads of many countries, now is he to overthrow Pope,
Turk, and all his enemies, and he alone with the Father and the Spirit is to
reign in his Elect Saints and Angels. Thus all agree, that Christ in the latter
days shall be fully honored in his Kingly power; hitherto Christ has been
much honored in his Prophetical and Priestly office, but not so much in his
Kingly; but now he must be fully honored in his Kingly office; Rev. 11.15.
now especially The Kingdoms of this world must become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ; and so he shall reign for ever and ever. Certainly
there is a difference betwixt Christ's reign before, and his present reign at
the day of judgment, Christ has a double Throne wherein he sits and reigns,
Rev. 3.21.
To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me in my throne, as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. That Kingly rule that
Christ has from his ascension is upon his Fathers Throne, but the Kingdom that
Christ shall have at the day of judgment and ever after, it is the joint reign
of him with the Father, he shall have a Throne himself, and the Saints shall
sit with him in his own Throne: And now says the Father, John 5.22.
Sit thou at my right hand, q. d. sit on thy own Throne by me; go on to judge
the Nations; I will not judge them, but only in thee, and by thee; Lo I have
committed all judgment unto the Son, and do thou judge them, until thou have
rewarded thy friends, and made thine enemies thy footstool. Mark, He has
committed all judgment unto the Son; the Father gives the Son a Commission;
wherein is written (as it were) these words, My Son, now is the time or season
which I had put in my own power; and my pleasure is, 2 Pet. 3.10, 13.
that all the world shall be set on fire: these heavens under thee shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the
earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up; and I will have
new heavens, and a new earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness; go too then,
put on thy robes, appear in thy glory; empty thi^ heaven of all those glorious
spirits that are therein, and let them wait on thee to thy judgment seat; go,
pass thy doom upon all flesh, and send reprobates to hell, and bring up hither
all thy Saints, that they may live with thee, and here behold thy glory for
ever and ever. Lo here is thy commission; be gone, and return no more hither
until it be accomplished.

Christians, I cannot but wonder at this joy and exultation in Heaven, Use.
and that we have so little or none of this on earth; we say with cold lips,
and frozen hearts, Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven; but if our prayers were real and fervent, if we could but imitate those
heavenly Citizens, what longings would be in our hearts after Christ's coming?
how should we rejoice at the very thoughts hereof? Christ comforting his
Disciples in respect hereof, he speaks these words, Luke 21.28.
When these things begin to come to pass, then look up (said he) and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. The fullness of our redemption is
a ground of consolation; all the spirits above are sensible of this; God, and
Christ, and the Angels, and Saints rejoice, Rev. 12.19. Ver. 20.
and again rejoice. The Spirit and the Bride say, come; and Christ himself
says, Surely I come quickly; O let us say Amen to it; Even so come Lord Jesus.

SECT. II. Of Christ coming to judgment.
2. FOr Christ's coming to judgment; no sooner Christ prepared, and all in
readiness, but down he descends from his Imperial throne to the Judgment Seat.
In this passage I shall observe these particulars.

1. He descends with his Train: He comes with his Royal Attendants out of
Heaven. This is the glory of a Prince, that has so many Nobles waiting on him;
and this is the glory of Jesus Christ, that when he comes to judge the world,
he shall have his Saints and Angels (the glory of the creation) to be his
Attendants in that work. Behold the Lord comes with mighty Angels. 2 These. 1.7.
Jude 14.
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all. Certainly a numberless number shall wait upon him: Daniel tells us of
a thousand thousand that this day Minister unto Christ, A thousand thousands
ministered unto him, Dan. 7.10.
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: or if Heaven have more,
I believe Heaven will empty it self of all the Saints, and all the Angels; not
one Spirit, whether Saint or Angel shall stay behind when Christ descends:
Matthew. 25.31.
The Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him. Oh
what a glorious day will this be! if one Sun make the morning Sky so glorious,
what a bright, shining, and glorious morning will that be, when so many
thousands of Suns shall shine over all our heads, the glorious Body of our
Christ surpassing them all in splendour and glory? here is a new Heaven of Sun
and Stars, such as this nether-world never saw, Lo yond the Sun of
righteousness with all his Morning-stars, singing and shouting for joy: Heaven
now empties it self of all its created Citizens, and cleaves asunder to make
way for Christ, and all his Train.

Matthew. 24.29.
2. In his descent through the Heavens, he shakes the Heavens. And the powers of
the heaven shall be shaken. The whole frame of Heaven, most strong and
immutable in its being and motion; or the mighty bodies thereof, most mighty in
their substance, lastingness, motion and operation shall be shaken. I know by
the powers of heaven some mean the Angels, who at this wonderful descent of
Christ shall admire and move; but I rather think the Heavens themselves are
meant hereby, whose very nature shall be moved, Job 26.11.
and shaken at that day: At his nod the pillars of heaven tremble, and are
astonished. As yet they are Subject to vanity and therefore it is no wonder if
at the coming of Christ they tremble and are moved. In this moving or shaking
the Evangelists adds, that the glorious lights of Heaven shall be altered,
Matthew. 24.29.
The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, Adventum
Christi tantam lucem allaturam ut ea solis and lunae splendour obscuretur.
Aretius in loc. Certissimum autem diem judicii magna majestate sore, ut read
and sol and luna dicantur obscurandi. Aretius in loc. Psalm. 50.3.
and the Stars shall fall: Many interpretations are given of this: I am not for
Allegories, but rather conceive these things are real; the very coming of
Christ shall bring with him such a light, that the splendour of the Sun and Moon
shall be obscured: this is most certain, says Aretius, that both Sun and Moon
shall really be darkened at that day; it is the glory of his Majesty that will
dazzle those Candles.

3. As he passes through the Elementary world, a fire does usher him. Our God
shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour before him, and it
shall be very tempestuous round about him. Whence this fire should come, I
shall not dispute, only one tells us with some confidence, Suarez de
renovatione mundi, in 3. part. Thomae. Psalm. 97.3. Isa. 66.15. 2 These. 1 7, 8.
Dan. 7.9, 10. 2 Pet. 3.10. 2 Pet. 3.11, 12.
that it is begotten in the middle Region of the Air by Divine command; and that
first it goes before him, ushering the Judge to the Judgment Seat, and that
there it stays during the judgment; and that ended, and the doom passed on all
flesh, then it sets on fire all the world. Let this pass as it may, Scripture
goes thus far, that a fire goes before him. -- Behold the Lord will come with
fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind. -- And the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire. In which respect
Daniel saw his throne like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire; a
fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him: and at last this fire
shall have that effect, that the very Elements shall melt with fervent heat,
the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. O Christians!
what cause have we to make the Apostles use on this point, Seeing all these
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the
day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat?

4. He descends lower and lower till he is inwrapt with clouds. Matthew. 26.64.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of heaven. When he went up into Heaven it is said, that a
cloud received him out of their sight; Act. 1.9.
and the Angels then said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come,
Act. 1.11, 12. Dan 7.13.
in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. He went up in clouds and he
shall come down in clouds. I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the
Son of man came with the clouds of heaven. Here is the first sight of Christ to
men on the earth, when once he is come down into the clouds, then shall they
lift up their eyes, and have a full view of Jesus Christ; a cloud first
received him out of their sight; and a cloud now discovers him to their sight;
Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, Matthew. 24.30.
and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory: is it not plain that the first appearings, and sight of Christ
at his second coming from Heaven, is in the midst of clouds? Behold he comes
with clouds, and every eye shall see him, Rev. 1.7.
and they also which pierced him. Some controversy there is about these
clouds, as whether they be Angels? when the Psalmist speaks of all sorts of
Meteors, as of Waters, Clouds, Winds, Flames, some say, all these are Angels;
and of the Angels he says, who makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a
flame of fire. For my part I take it in the literal sense, that upon the very
backs of clouds Christ shall come riding along at the general day; and
howsoever this may seem a small matter unto us, yet I cannot look on any
circumstance of this transaction as small and trifling! the very clouds on
which Christ rides, speaks terror, and comfort.

1. Oh what a terror is this to the wicked? Heb. 1.7. Matthew. 24.30. Id de
impiis solum intelligo, ad quos planctus and luctus ille miserandus solum
pertinet. Aretius in locum.
They shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds, and then shall all the
Tribes of the earth mourn. These Tribes of the Earth are the Tribes of the
wicked; no sooner shall they look up, and see Christ in his clouds, but with
unconceivable horror will they cry it out, O yonder is he whose blood we
neglected, whose grace we resisted, whose counsels we refused, whose government
we cast off. O yonder is he that comes now in clouds, in tempestuous clouds; O
see how he storms! do not those very clouds in which he rides speak or threaten
a storm? In the eighteenth Psalm is a description of Christ's coming to
judgment. But O how terrible! in the seventh verse, we find the earth
trembling; in the eighth verse, a fire devouring; in the ninth verse, the
heavens bowing downwards* in the 12, 13, 14, 15. verses, are thick clouds
darkning the sky, thunders, lightnings, hailestones flying through the air,
the foundations of the world discovered; thus the Mighty God, our Jesus
descends. Oh how should the wicked but tremble at this, when but a
consideration of this has sometimes startled God's own people? behold Habakkuk
with quivering lips, trembling joints, Hab. 3.16.
bones mouldering into dust, when he had only a Prophetic representation of
Christ's second appearance! all the dreadful things that attended the presence
of God in Egypt, at the red Sea on Mount Sinai, through the Wilderness, are
made but types, but shadows of the terrible march of the Captain of the Lord of
Hosts; and therefore shall the wicked mourn.

2. Here is the patience, and faith, and joy of Saints. Rev. 1.7.
And all the kindreds of the earth shall mourn over him; even so, Amen. This I
cannot but understand of the wicked; only some tell us of a double mourning on
that day, the one of joy and love, and the other of sorrow and despair; I shall
not deny but there may be some sweet tears upon this sweet Subject, Christ's
apparition in the clouds: Such a shine will be from Christ in the cloud, that
the very shine will pierce the hearts of men with the golden-headed arrow of
love, and how may this work tears? Rev. 1.7. Hinc consequitur Christum in eo
judicio cicatrices vulnerum ostensurum tanquam trophaeum infallibile contra
omnes suos bostes. Aret. in loco.
from this Text of John, Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see
him, and they also which pierced him, and all the kindreds of the earth shall
wayle, etc. Some Divines gather, that Christ at that day, will show in his
glorified body the wounds of his crucifying, as an infallible trophy of his
victory over all his enemies; and hence the wicked who pierced, or crucified
the Lord of glory, by their sins, will weep and wail. I can think no less, but
that Christ at that day will open his bosom, and show those wounds of love,
which he had in his heart from all eternity, together with those wounds which
he received on the Cross, as they are glorified in his eternal love: and then
as at the discovery of Joseph, he and his brethren fell upon the necks of earth
other and wept; so will this discovery in the appearances of Christ bring a
sweet confusion upon the Spirits of Saints; then shall a Saint fall at the feet
of his Savior, and weeping say, O my Jesus! thou art my Father, Brother,
Husband, Self; while there were other things, I loved other things besides thy
self, but alas! they are everlastingly gone, and have left me alone, yet now
thou ownest me; O my Jesus thou breakest my heart: oh I cannot but weep out
tears of love, and tears of joy at this appearing; O welcome, welcome, sweet
Jesus into these clouds! oh welcome, welcome, sweet Jesus into this nether
world.

In these Clouds I must leave our Savior for a while, and the rather, because
I believe he will descend no lower: only before I pass, one word of Use to all
his Saints. Use.
You see him still upon his old design; though the world now end, yet hitherto
there is no end of his great transaction; his first coming and his second
coming is to save your souls; his first coming was to purchase, his second to
give you the possession of Salvation. What, are you not glad of this
Gospel-news, that Christ will come at last from this Empyreal Throne to his
judgment seat, to give you the possession of salvation? is not the promise of
his coming comfortable? is it not comfortable to believe in him, and to hope
for him? why, muse then, what comfort will it be to see his person with all his
glorious train coming for you? Psalm 50.1, 2, 3, 4.
The Mighty God, the Lord has spoken, and called the Earth, from the rising of
the Sun, to the going down thereof; out of Zion the perfection of beauty has
God shined; our God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour
before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him; he shall call to
the heavens from above, and to the earth that he might judge his people. It is
indeed a most terrible day unto the wicked, but oh how sweet, and pleasant, and
comfortable to his Saints? Christians! do we not long to have Christ's Spirit
come into our souls with life? do we not droop while Christ is absent from our
souls? are not the feet of them beautiful that bring glad tidings of peace, and
of salvation by Jesus Christ? Oh then what will it be to see the King, not in
his Ambassadors, but in his own person coming for us to fetch us into Heaven?
if we have but a dear friend returned from some far Country, how do all run out
to meet him with joy? Oh says the child, my father is come; says the wife, my
husband is come; and shall not we, when we see our Father, our Husband, our
Head, our Savior returning with great glory, and glorious Majesty, cry out, he
is come, he is come? shall not we at the first view of him in his clouds, cry
out, O yonder is he whose blood redeemed us, whose Spirit cleansed us, whose
prayers prevailed for us, whose Law did govern us? yonder comes he in whom we
trusted, and now we see he has not deceived our trust, yonder is he for whom
we waited long, and now we see we have not waited in vain.

I verily believe thus it will be with us one day; we shall have comfort then,
oh let us comfort our selves with these words; and ever and anon cry, Come Lord
Jesu, come quickly! Cant. 8.14.
make have my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
Mountain of spices.

SECT. III. Of Christ's summoning of the Elect to come under judgment.
3. FOR Christ's summons of the Elect to come under judgment: no sooner is he
in the clouds, his Throne of judicature, but there he stands, and thence he
sends his holy Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, Mat. 24.31.
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of
the heaven to another. Christ's summons are effectual, if he will have the
elect to meet him, they must come; to this purpose he sends his Angels, and
they return with his Saints back again to the judgment seat. In the carrying
on of this affair, we shall discuss these particulars. 1. His mission of the
Angels. 2. The manner of the mission. 3. The resurrection of the world. 4. The
collection of the Saints; wherein, 1. whence, 2. whither they are gathered.

1. For Christ's mission of his Angels; he shall send his Angels. This was
their office from their first creation; they were still sent of God this way,
and that way; and indeed herein is one difference betwixt Christ and the
Angels, he was to fit on God's right hand, but they were sent abroad to
Minister to the Saints and people of God; Heb. 1.13, 14.
To which of the Angels said he at any time, sit on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool? are they not all Ministering Spirits, sent forth
to Minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation? Now according to their
office, Christ puts them upon employment at this day. q. d. O my Angels! you
that wait upon me, that excel in strength, Psalm. 103.20. Psalm. 50.5.
that do my commandments, and hearken to the voice of my Word: go your ways
now into all the four winds of the World, gather all my Saints together unto
me, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice; search into all the
dusts of the earth, and leave not behind one dust that belongs unto any Saint;
search into the bottom of the Sea; see what becomes of those drowned bodies of
my dear ones; if either worms have eaten those in graves, or fishes have
devoured them in the deep, why now restore them; am not I as able to recover
them, as I was to create them? is it not as easy for me to raise the dead, as
to make Heaven and Earth, and all of nothing? go then and gather together all
those dusts and let every dust be brought home to its own proper body, and
compact those dusts as soft as they are into solid bones; and prophecy upon
those bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord; thus
says the Lord, behold I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall
live, Ezekiel. 37.4, 5, 6.
and I will lay sinews upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in
you, and ye shall live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord; why this is my
will and pleasure, and therefore be gone, O my Angels, do your office, what?
have not I commanded you?

2. The Mission, or commission, or dismission given, the Angels, swift
messengers of his will fall on the execution; and to that purpose immediately
they sound the Trumpet; so it follows, And he shall send his Angels with a
great sound of a Trumpet. Here is the manner of their mission; they go, and as
they go they give a shout; what this shout is, or how it is made, is a curious
question, and sets many wits on work: in this Scripture it is set out by the
sound of a Trumpet. Anselmus in elucidario. Suarez. tuba ex aere. Doctor
Slater, who faith I see not, but we may take it properly, etc. Cornelius a
lapide. Mat. 24.31. 1 Cor. 15.52. 1 These. 4.16.
Now some would have it to be a material Trumpet, because the Scriptures
frequently call it a Trumpet; He shall send his Angels with the sound of a
Trumpet, says Christ; and in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump we shall be changed (says Paul) for the Trumpet shall sound, and the
dead shall be raised. And the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a
shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God: But
whether this Trumpet shall be of Silver or of Brass, or of the Air, or of the
Cloud and Meteors whereon Christ rides, they cannot agree: Piscator, Estius,
Aretius and alii fere omnes.
others more probably look upon this Trumpet as nothing else but a metaphor; or
a sound formed in the Air, like the sound of a Trumpet. A voice it is without
all controversy; and metaphorically it may be called a trumpet, both from the
clearness and greatness of the sound; so loud shall it be, that 'twill pierce
into the ears of the dead in their graves; It will shake the world, rend the
rocks, break the mountains; dissolve the bonds of Death, Cui omnia obediunt
elementa, petras scindit, inferos aperit, etc. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 15.
burst down the gates of Hell, and unite all spirits to their own Bodies. An
horrible terrible voice shall it be: But how should Angels who are spirits make
a voice? by a collision of the Air which the Angels can move at their pleasure;
and who can tell, say some, but there may be some new-created instrument
trumpet-like, adapted for the Angels; at the sides of which, by a force, and
collision of the air, this great shout may be, to convene all the World? or who
knows (say others) but that the Lord Jesus may fill the Angels, even as
trumpets are filled with a loud blast, and that through them this loud blast
shall come rushing like a mighty wind upon the dead Saints, and so awaken their
bodies out of the dust? we all know this was usual in all the Jews solemnities
to convene the people by the found of a trumpet. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, Make thee two trumpets of silver, Numb. 10 1, 2, 3, 9.
-- That thou may use them for the calling of the Assembly; -- And when thou
shall blow them, all the Assembly shall assemble themselves; and if ye go to
war, then ye shall blow an alarm with the Trumpets; and in the same way (say
they) Christ now will convene all the World with the sound of a trumpet, or
with the sound of some such instrument of divine power and virtue, whereby the
dead shall be raised, and their bodies and souls reunited. Amidst all those
Authors, if I may deliver my opinion; I suppose the Text that will clear all to
us above all that is written, is that of 1 Thessalonians 4.16. For the Lord
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 1 These. 4.16.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God. Give me leave to
insist on it, that we may come up yet to a more full and perfect knowledge of
this passage. In these words is showed, or held forth the coming of Christ in
three particulars: with a shout, with a voice, and with a trumpet; some think
this to be one and the same set out in variety of expressions; but I am of
another mind. It is agreed by most that the transactions at the giving of the
Law on Mount Sinai, were a representation of the proceedings which shall be at
the great day of Judgment; now in that transaction we read of a threefold
voice, The voice of God, the voice of Thunder, and the voice of a Trumpet,
(Exodus 19.16. compared with Exodus 20.1.) and accordingly we find the Apostle
speaking of a threefold voice, Of the voice of Christ, of the voice of
Thunder, and of the voice of a Trumpet.

1. The Lord himself shall descend with a shout: Arius Montanus, and the vulgar
translate it with a command; Lyra and others think this to be the voice of
Christ himself, saying, John 11.48.
with a loud voice, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment. Thus Jesus cried with
a loud voice, Lazarus come forth; and with such a voice will he call on the
dead at the last day. J^hn 5.25.
So much Christ himself has taught us; The hour is coming, and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.
The hour is, because by his voice he raised some at his first coming: and the
hour is coming, because in the like manner he will raise up all men at the last
day; Marvel not at this (says Christ) for the hour is coming, John 5.28.
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall
come forth. As at the creation of the World, he said, Let there be light, and
there was light; so at the dissolution of the World, he will say, Let the dead
arise, let the Sea give up the dead that are in it, and Death and Hell deliver
up the dead which are in them; and it will be so.

2. The Lord shall descend with the voice of the Archangel. Two questions here;
1. Who is this Archangel? 2. What is this voice?

For the first, some argue this Archangel to be Gabriel, others Raphael, others
Michael. The Jews have an ancient tradition, that there are seven principal
Angels that minister before the throne of God, and therefore called Archangels.
The Scriptures seem to speak much that way, Revel. 4.5. Rev. 5.6. Zach 4.10.
Rev. 8.2.
calling them, seven Lamps of fire burning before the throne: and seven horns,
and seven eyes of the Lamb; and the seven spirits of God sent for^h into all
the earth; and seven eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole
earth; and yet more plainly, seven Angels that stand before God. Now which of
these Seven is the Archangel, here spoken of, is hard to determine; only
probable it is, that all the Archangels, and all the angels are hereby
understood, as comprehended under that one; to which agrees, Matthew. 24.31. Mr.
Aynsworth observes, that when things are done by a multitude; where one is
chief, that the action is frequently ascribed either to the multitude, or to
him that is chief indifferently; as Jehoiadah brought forth the Kings Son, and
he put the Crown upon him, 2 Kings 11.12. or they brought forth the Kings son,
and they put upon him the Crown, 2 Chronicles. 23.11. so David offered
burnt-offerings, 2 Samuel 6.17. or they offered burnt offerings, 1 Chronicles. 16.1.
and so he shall descend with the voice of the Archangel; or he shall scend his
Angels with a great sound, Matthew 24.3.

That there are seven principal Angels, Master Mede affirms; and that there is
one which yet eminently, is called the Archangel; some others affirm, as among
Devils, there is one chief Devil, Mat. 25.41.
called the Prince of Devils; and therefore the fire is said to be prepared for
the Devil and his Angels; so from this Text of 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. and of Dan.
10.13. and of Jude v. 9. Some probably conclude that the good Angels have a
Prince, even Michael, whom Jude calls the Archangel. But of this no more; the
Lord keep me from intruding into those things which I have not seen. Collos.
2.18.
The day it self will discover it, and so I leave it, as having said enough to
satisfy the sober minded.

For the second, what is this voice of the Archangel? I conceive that thereby
we are to understand thunder: here is (as we have said) a manifest allusion to
the proceedings at the giving of the Law, now the voice there mentioned,
besides the voice of God, Exodus 19.16. -- 20.18. Heb. 2.2.
and the voice of a trumpet, is the voice of Thunder; And it came to pass on
the third day in the morning, there were thunders. In this sense some expound
these words of the Apostle, where the Law is said to be spoken by Angels,
because the Angels did raise up those extraordinary thunders, which happily
were the matters of the articulate voice, in which the Lord spoke to Israel: or
if the Law was spoken by Christ (as I have delivered my opinion elsewhere) he
being the Angel of the Covenant, Book 3. chapter 1. Sect. 4.
Mal. 3 1, And the Angel of his presence, Isa. 63.9. Yet this hinders not, but
that created Angels might speak the Law too, if not in respect of the
articulate voice, yet in respect of the voice of thunders which attended on it;
thus thunder is often called the voice of God, and the voice of his excellency,
Job 37.4, 5. Psalm. 29.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

3. The Lord shall descend with the trumpet of God. Such a voice was used also
at the giving of the Law, Exodus 19.16. and Exodus 20.18. and so it will be now
when men are called to account for the keeping or breaking of it. For the
understanding of this, our last translation tells us, Mat. 24.31.
that Christ shall send his Angels with the great sound of a trumpet; but in
four Greek copies, as Beza confesses, as also in the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew,
and in the Vulgar, and in the margent of our last translation, it is read, that
Christ shall send his Angels with a trumpet, and a great voice. And so the
latter words are exegetical, q. d. with a trumpet, that is, with a great voice,
like the voice of a trumpet; so that this reading very provably proves, that
the last trumpet is to be taken metaphorically. For the more full confirmation
whereof I argue thus; when any thing is ascribed to the Angels which is not
suitable to their spiritual nature, and which they have no need of for the work
they are about, is it to be taken metaphorically; unless the context or some
other Scripture force us to a proper acceptance, but a material trumpet of
Silver, Brass, or the like metal, is not suitable to the spiritual nature of
the Angels; neither have they need of such a trumpet for producing a great
sound in the Air; it is evident that without a trumpet they can make a great
sound like the noise of a trumpet; and there is nothing at all in the
Scriptures that will force us, or probably lead us to a proper acceptance of
the word; add yet to what has been said, that sometimes a great voice is set
out by the similitude of a Trumpet; I heard behind me a great voice, as of a
trumpet, Rev. 1.10. and the first voice which I heard, was as it were of a
trumpet, Rev. 4.1.

But why is this sound as of a trumpet, called the trumpet of God? I answer,
for the greatness of it; for its usual in the Hebrew Language for the setting
forth of greatness, excellency, or superlativeness of a thing, to add the Name
of God to the word, whereby the thing is signified; as Genesis 23.6. A Prince of
God, (i.e.) a Mighty Prince, Genesis 30.8. With the wrestlings of God, (i.e.) with
great wrestlings, Psalm. 36.6. Mountains of God (i.e.) Great mountains, Psalm
80.10. Cedars of God (i.e.) very high Cedars. So here, the trump of God (i.e.)
A very great sound, like the sound of a trumpet. It is said in the Law, there
were thunders, and lightnings, Exodus 19.16.
and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud,
so that all the people that was in the camp trembled; and if there was
trembling at the giving of the Law, oh what trembling will be at the general
Assize, when sinners shall be condemned for breaking of it?

3. No sooner the shout made, but the Saints arise; it is true, the Saints that
are alive need no resurrection, but upon them will this trumpet have its
effect. Something like death shall ceaze upon them, and they shall be changed.
The order of this is given in by the Apostle from the Lord; This we say unto
you by the Word of our Lord, 1 These. 4.15.16, 17.
that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not
prevent them which are asleep, for the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and
the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive and remain shall
be caught up together with them into the clouds. The first that shall be called
are the Saints that sleep, and then the Saints that are alive shall be
immediately changed. Oh what a day will this be? what a strange sight to see all
the dead ever since the beginning of the World rise out of their graves? for
the wicked I believe they shall rise like Toads from their holes, in a black,
swarthy, ugly, color: A question is amongst the Schools, whether Reprobates
shall rise again with all their deformities which they had in this life? as
some of them being blind, halt, lame, maimed, deaf, dum, etc. Whether now they
shall rise in the self-same condition? for my part I conceive that whereas God
the author of nature, will at that day restore humane nature, that therefore
there shall be no defects of natural parts; certainly nothing shall be wanting
in the damned, which may impede the sense of torment in any part; now a defect
of any member would hinder these universal torments that must ceaze on every
part of the bodies of the damned in Hell; their bodies therefore shall be
whole, only the bodies of such shall be foul, ugly, heavy, lumpish bodies, as
opposed to the glorious qualities of the bodies of Saints; why, what bodies
(you will say) have they? I answer, glorious bodies: no sooner shall the bodies
of the Saints arise, but they shall exceed with singular qualities; 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44
They were sown in corruption, but they are raised in incorruption; they were
sown in dishonor, but raised in glory; they were sown in weakness, but raised
in power; they were sown natural bodies, but raised spiritual bodies. The Sun
in its shinings, does but shadow forth the glory of their bodies; and this will
in some measure torment Reprobates, to see the difference of their bodies, and
the bodies of the Saints. O (will they say) yond are they, whom we despised,
and now are they honored. See a world of Suns rising at once out of all parts
of the Earth; sometimes we lived on Earth, and we never saw but one Sun rising
in the East, but lo millions of Suns on East, and West, and North, and South; O
those are the glorious Saints of Heaven: see with what swift and agile bodies
they are preparing to fly into the Air, to meet their Lord and Savior there;
whilst in the mean time we rise with such heavy, dull, and deformed bodies,
that we cannot mount. O what will become of us? why this is the day of
resurrection. The Angels have been here to unseal our graves to roll away the
stones, and at their shout, and sound of the Trumpet, our scattered dusts have
met together: and lo now we stand upon the Earth.

4. No sooner the Saints raised, and their souls and Bodies reunited with
excellent Majesty, but then shall all the elect of God, from first to last be
gathered together: if you ask whence? and whither? I answer --

1. To the question whence? from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to
another. (i.e.) From all parts of the world, from East, and West, and North,
and South, from one end of Heaven to another; a Vulgar term, in regard of our
sight; for in it self Heaven is round, and has no end: the meaning is, that
not one Saint in all the world, from Adam to the last man shall be concealed,
or lie hid; from the most hidden, inward, secret bosom of the earth all shall
be gathered; howsoever their dusts may be scattered into a thousand thousand
parts, yet the power of Christ shall restore all those dusts, and bring them
together into their several compacted bodies.

2. To the question whether they shall be gathered? Some say to the Valley of
Jehoshaphat, Joel. 3.12.
from that Text, Let the Heathen be weakened, and come up to the Valley of
Jehoshaphat, for there, will I sit to judge the Heathen round about; but I
believe this Text has reference to a particular judgment of God upon Isreal's
enemies which dwell round about Jerusalem, and not to the general day of
Judgment. Others say, Acts 1.11, 12.
to Mount-Olivet from that Text, This same Jesus which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven;
then returned they unto Jerusalem from the Mount called Olivet. But I believe
this Text speaks only of the manner how Christ shall come, and not of the
place to which he shall come. Indeed it is not probable that either the valley
of Jehoshaphat, or the Mount of Olivet can be sufficient places to contain all
the men that ever were, are, and shall be; and therefore if such a thing can be
determined, I should rather appeal to that Text, 1 These. 4.17.
Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them
(that are raised) in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. When Christ was
asked this very question, where Lord? whither shall the Saints be gathered?
where shall the general Judgment be? he answers, wheresoever the body is,
thither will the Eagles be gathered together. By the body, Christ meant
himself, and by the Eagles Christ meant his Elect, because their youth is
renewed as the Eagles; now the elect must resort to Christ wheresoever he is;
and the Apostle is express, that Christ is in the air, and in the clouds: and
therefore thither must the elect be gathered; Luke 17.37.
they shall be caught up by the holy Angels into the clouds, to meet the Lord
in the air.

Use.
O my brethren, what sights are these! what changes, wonders, strange face of
things will be this day? how is it that we are not as frequent in the
meditation of this Summons as Jerome was, who as he thought, heard daily that
sound, Arise ye dead and come to Judgment? methinks a sad and serious
consideration of these passages might keep us close to Christ; come try a
little, if in the hurryings of the day we are so distracted, that we cannot
reach the spiritual part of a meditation, yet in the evening or morning when
all is still, or in the night-season when all is quiet, then labor to prevent
the day of doom; so realize it, as if then we saw Christ in the clouds, sending
his Angels on this errand, Away, and bring hither all the men, and women in the
world; and in the first place, gather my Saints together unto me, Adam and
Abraham, those Fathers of the world and of the faithful, let them see all their
children, and let all their children see them, and bring them all to my Throne;
awaken the world, let them who have slept in their graves, some thousand of
years be now rouzed, and raised. Imagine then, as if we heard the Trumpet of
God founded by the Angels of God, and as the sound of it waxed louder and
louder, that we saw the Mountains skip like Rams, and the little Hills like
young Sheep. That we saw all the graves in Churches, or Churchyards, in
Fields, or Plains, or Seas fly open, that we saw all the bodies of the dead
beginning to stir, and to stand upon their feet, and presently the Angels
coming, and taking all the Saints upon their wings, and so flying with them
through the air till they came to the Throne, and judgment seat of Christ: is
it possible that such a meditation should pass without some tincture of it on
our spirits? if my ears shall hear that sound, and if my eyes shall see these
sights, is it not time for me to lay these things to heart, that I may be found
faithful and well-doing? as sure as I have this Book in my hand I must be one
of those that shall hear the sound of the Trumpet, and away I must from the
mouth of my grave, where ever I shall be buried, to the cloud where Christ does
sit; come then, how would I rise? as foul as a toad? or as an Angel of God? O
my God! set this home on my soul! O where is my Lamp? and where is my oil? are
all ready? and am I ready, furnished, and prepared to meet the Lord in the Air?
Christians! if we have any life in us, let us act and realize this to the life;
O this would keep us close to Christ, and to the Banner of Christ; who would
not march under this Banner, and adhere to him, that but reads over these
summons of souls at the last dreadful day.

SECT. IV. Of Christ and the Saints meeting at the judgment day.
4. FOR Christ and the Saints meeting at the judgment day; no sooner are the
Saints lifted up, and set before the Judge, but these things follow --

1. They look, and gaze, and dart their beams: and reflect their glories on
each other. Oh the communications! Oh the darting of beams betwixt Christ and
his Saints! look as when two admirable persons, two lovers meet together, their
eyes sparkle, they look on, as if they would look through one another. So
Christ and his Saints at first meeting, they look on, as if they would look
through one another. And such is the effect of these looks, that they give a
luster to each other by their Looks. Did not Moses face shine when he had been
with God? and shall not the faces of the elect glitter and shine when Christ
also looks on them? nor stays it there; but as they shine by Christ, so shall
their shine reflect on Christ, and give a glory to Christ, and this I take it
to be the meaning of the Apostle, That when Christ shall come, 2 These. 1.10.
he shall be glorified in his Saints; not only in himself, but in his Saints
also; whose glory as it comes from him, so it redounds also to him, For of him,
and through him, Romans 11.36.
and to him are all things.

2. They admire at the infinite glory, and beauty, and dignity, and excellency
that is in Christ. The glory they reflect on him is nothing to the glory that
is in him. Oh when these Stars the Saints shall but look upon Christ the Son of
righteousness, they exceedingly admire. So the Apostle, When he shall come, 2
These. 1.10.
he shall be glorified in his Saints, and he shall be admired in all them that
believe. All that believe shall break out into admiration of Jesus Christ: they
shall at the first sight observe such an excellency in Jesus Christ, as that
they shall be infinitely taken with it: here we speak of Christ, and in
speaking we admire; but how will they admire, when they shall not only speak
or hear, but see and behold him who is the Express image of God, Heb. 1.3.
and the brightness of his Fathers glory? O the lustres that he casts forth
each way! is not his very body more sparkling than the Diamond before the Sun?
yea, more than the Sun it self now shining at noonday? how should the Saints
but wonder at this sight? Oh there is more beauty, and glory in Jesus Christ
than ever their thoughts or imaginations could possibly reach; there is more
weight of sweetness, joy, and delight in Jesus Christ, than either the seeing
Eye, or hearing Ear, 1 Cor. 2.9.
or the vast understanding Heart (which can multiply and add still to any
former thoughts) can possibly conceive: every soul will cry out then, I
believed to see much glory in Jesus Christ, when ever I saw him; I had some
twilight, or Moonlight glances of Christ, on Earth; but O blind I! O narrow I!
that could never have faith, opinion, thought, or imagination to fathom the
thousand-thousand part of the worth, and incomparable excellency that I now see
in him. Why, this causes admiration, when we see more, than ever we could
expect; the Saints shall then cry out, and say, I see more ten thousand times
more than ever I expected; I see all the beauty of God put forth in Christ, I
see the substantial reflection of the Fathers light and glory in Jesus Christ,
I see thousands of excellencies in Jesus Christ that never were revealed to me
before. This is the very nature of admiration; it is eve^ wondering or admiring
at some new and strange thing: the glory of Christ will then exceed all former
apprehension. O they admire to see the King in such a beauty, they admire to
see the Judge in such a glittering and glorious Robe of Majesty, they admire,
and they cannot but admire.

3. They adore, and magnify the grace and glory of Jesus Christ; as it is said
of the twenty four Elders, that they fell down before him that sat on the
Throne, and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns
before the Throne, saying, thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, Rev. 5.10.
and honor and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are and were created. So all the Saints, now advanced to come up to
Christ, and to stand before the Throne, they fall down before Christ, and they
worship him that lives for ever, shouting and singing about Jesus Christ, and
setting out his glory, Rev. 7.9, 10, 11, 12.
grace, and goodness. After this I beheld (says John) and lo a great
multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindred, and people,
and tongues stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb -- and cried with a
loud voice, saying, salvation to our God, which sits upon the Throne, and
unto the Lamb; and all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the
Elders, and the four Beasts, and fell before the Throne on their faces, and
worshipped God, saying, Amen; blessing and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving,
and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever, and ever, Amen.
Saints and Angels will both give glory to Jesus Christ that day; every elect
man will then acknowledge, here is Christ that shed his blood for me, here is
the Savior that laid down his life for me, here is the Sacrifice that gave
himself a propitiation for me, here is the Person that mediated, and
interceded, and made peace for me, here is the Redeemer that delivered, and
redeemed me from the wrath to come; Rev. 19 7.
and then they begin those Hallelujahs, that never shall have end: Hallelujah,
and again Hallelujah; and Amen Hallelujah; for the marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his wife has made herself ready.

4. Christ welcomes them into his glorious presence; if the Father could
receive his Prodigal but repenting with hugs and kisses, how will Christ now
receive his Saints, when they come as a Bride to the solemnization of the
marriage; his very heart springs (as I may say) at the sight of his Bride; no
sooner he sees her, and salutes her, but he welcomes her with such words as
these: O my love, my dove, my fair one, come now and enjoy thy Husband, Hos.
2.19, 20.
many a thought I have had of thee, before I made the world, I spent my
infinite eternal thoughts on thy salvation, when the world began I gave thee a
promise, that I would betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment;
in loving kindness, in mercy, and in faithfulness; It was I that for thy sake
was incarnate, and lived, and died, and rose again, and ascended, and since my
ascension that have been interceding for thee, and making ready the
Bride-chamber where thou and I must live, for ever and ever: and now I come
higher into the clouds, to meet thee more than half the way; and my meaning is
to take thee by the hand, and to bring thee to my Father; now do I take thee
for my own; O my Sister, my Spouse, thou art as dear to me as my own dear
heart; come, see into my bosom, see here Love written in the golden letters of
free grace; come near, for I must have thee with me; and I will never more be
so strange to thee as to this day; sometimes thy sins have made a wall of
partition between me and thee; sometimes I withdrew and was gone, and I hid my
self beyond the curtains; and for a time thou have layen hid in the closset of
the grave; but now we will never part more; anon I will bring thee to my Father,
and I will say to him, Father, behold here my Spouse that I have married unto
my self; in the mean time welcome to thy Jesus, I have purchased thee with my
blood, I have paid dear for thee: and now I Will wear thee as a Crown, and
ornament for ever.

5. Christ sets them on his right hand; Psalm 45.9.
Upon thy right hand does stand the Queen in Gold of Ophir. This is the sign of
Christ's love, and respect to his Saints; when he himself ascended up into
Heaven, then said the Father to him; Son, sit thou down at my right hand; and
no sooner the Saints are ascended up to Christ, but he speaks the same to them,
Sit thou down at my right hand; Christ entertains them, as God the Father
entertained him, he at the right hand of God, and they at the right hand of
Christ. And herein is set forth the great exaltation of the Saints; as Christ
being set at God's right hand, God highly exalted him and gave him a Name above
every Name, so now are the Saints highly exalted by Jesus Christ, now are they
filled with unmatchable perfections, now is the (...), the fullness of
perfection, and fullness of honor and glory conferred upon them; Upon his right
hand is set the Queen in gold of Opnir, (i e.) in the best, richest, finest
Gold; the Lord now puts upon his Saints heavens glory; he adorns them with all
his ornaments fit for the marriage day; and indeed here is the beginning of the
solemnity of the marriage of the Lamb; not but that the contract was before,
but the solemnity was reserved for this day, and all the glory of this day is
for nothing else but to set out the solemnity of the marriage. As the
Bridegroom on the day of nuptials comes forth in his glory, and as the Bride on
the marriage-day comes forth in her best array; and as the servants, and
parents, and friends, and all appear on the marriage-day in as much glory as
they can; so Christ on this day comes forth in his glory, with all his Angels
in their glory; and the Saints, the Lambs wife, The Kings Daughter, is all
glorious, without and within. Psalm. 45.13.
Though Stars may lose their shining when the Sun arises, yet the glory of the
Saints shall be no less, because of the Sun of righteousness, but rather more.
This is the day that Christ shall honor his Saints before all the world; come
(will he say) and sit you down at my right hand; as a Shepherd divides his
Sheep from the Goats, so will I separate you from wicked reprobates; why you
are they for whom the eternal councels of my Father did work, you are they in
whom I am now to be gloryfied for ever; and therefore now will I exalt, and
advance, and honor you; sit here, or stand here on my right hand: O come, come
hither to the right hand of your Savior.

6. Hereupon Christ fully, and actually joys in them; and they in him; he joys
in them, because now he sees of the travail of his soul; he sees the issue of
all his doings and sufferings hereon earth, he sees now the great work he has
brought about, to wit, the glory of his Saints; and he cannot but rejoice
therein. As a man that makes a work that is very curious, and glorious, he
takes abundance of delight to look upon it; when God made the world; he lok't
upon what he made, and he saw it was good, and he delighted in it: So Christ
looks on his Saints, and when he sees what he has done, in raising so poor a
worm to so high an excellency, he takes infinite delight therein; now he sees
that he has attained his end in that great design, and deepest councels that
he had before the world: he was then resolved to save a number of sinners, and
to bring them at last to himself that they might behold him in his glory, and
manifest the riches of his grace; and to that purpose has he still been
carrying on the great work of souls salvation, as we have heard; and now that
he sees it accomplished, and fulfilled in them, he must needs delight: Ephesians.
3.17.
In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, fear thou not, and to Zion, let not
thy hands be faint, for the Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he
will save thee, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love,
he will joy over thee with singing.

And as he joys in them, so they cannot but rejoice in him; as he delights in
their glory, so they cannot but delight in his glory: are they not at Christ's
right hand? and is not that the place of pleasure, the Paradise of God? Psalm.
16.11.
In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore: The very setting them on Christ's right hand, is the beginning of
Heavens joy. Jude 24.
The presence of Christ makes joy, exceeding joy, says Jude; oh but what joy?
what fullness of joy, what exceeding joy will it be to be set at Christ's right
hand? now begins that joy, that never, never shall have end. O the complacency
which the blessed feel in their seeing, knowing, loving, and being beloved of
Jesus Christ. O my Christ, let me have tribulation here, let me here spend my
days in sorrow, and my breath in sighings; punish me here, cut me in pieces
here, burn me here, so that I may there be placed at thy right hand; for then
joy will come, and sorrow will vanish; sorrow is but for a night, this night of
life; but joy will come in the morning of the resurrection, and it never shall
be night again.

SECT. V. Of Christ's sentencing his Saints.
5. FOR Christ sentencing of his Saints; no sooner are they set on his right
hand, but he prepares for sentence; in the opening of which we must consider,
1. The preparative. 2. The sentence it self.

1. The preparative before sentence will be some exploration or trial of the
parties to be sentenced, as --

Rev. 20.12.
1. The Book must be opened. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before
God, and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened which is the Book
of life. It is spoken after the manner of men, in whose public Judgments are
produced all the writings of the process, informations, depositions of
witnesses, to show that all actions, Aug. l. 20. de civitate Dei, cap. 14.
even the most secret ones, shall then be rehearsed and made manifest;
Augustine thinks these Books to be the Books of the Old and New Testament,
wherein all things either to be done, or omitted, are prescribed by God: and
then shall these Books be opened, Romans 2.16. Orig. Com. ad Romans 14.
because according to them shall sentence be given; In that day God shall Judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. Origin, and all most
all with him, think these Books to be the Books of our consciences, which now
are shut up, and concealed from men; but then shall be made manifest to all the
world: whatever these Books are, we find here one Book opened which is proper
to the Saints, called the Book of Life; This Book contains in it the names of
all that are elected from first to last; Thou John, and thou Joseph, and thou
Judeth, and thou Mary, and thou Elizabeth, etc. you are all Book'd down; there
is the particularity, and there is the certainty; Your names are written in
Heaven, rejoice in it; Oh what is the joy of Saints when once they see this
book opened, and their names enrolled, engraven there in letters of glory. This
very Book clears it to me, that God from all eternity made choice of a
particular and determinate number of Persons, to save them; and that none other
can be saved, but those who were so elected; and whosoever are so elected, Rev.
13.8. -- 17.8.
they shall not fall away. All that worship the Beast, their names are not
written in the Book of life of the Lamb, from the foundation of the world. On
the other side, Rev. 3.5.
He that overcomes, the same shall be written in the Book of life, and I will
not blot out his name, but I will confess his name before my Father and before
his Angels. This is the day when that book of life shall be opened, and Christ
shall read the names of every elect person before God and Angels; not that
Christ needs a book, or indeed reads a name, but that his Election stands so
firm, that he knows every predestined Saint as well, as we know their names,
whom for our memories we commit unto our books: and then he will so honor his
Saints, that he will publish their names to all the world.

2. All the actions, demeanours, graces, duties, and (it may be) sins of Saints
shall be produced and laid open: the holy Ghost tells us, that the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the Books. It appears hence,
that not only names, but things were written, and these things were produced,
and accordingly they were judged.

1. As to evil things, unfruitful works of darkness. It is a question, and I
dare not be too positive in it, viz. Whether the sins of God's People shall be
manifest at the day of Judgment? Some are for the negative, because God in his
promises speaks so expressly, Isa. 43.25. -- 44.22.38.17. John 5.24.
Of forgiving iniquities, of remembering them no more, of blotting them out, of
throwing them into the bottom of the Sea, of casting them behind his back: in
which respect say they, the Godly are said not to come into Judgment. I
suppose this last Text is ill urged, for by Judgment is not meant discussion,
but condemnation; and in our best Translations so it is rendered; others are for
the affirmative, upon these grounds. 1. Because many of the Godly and wicked
men's sins are mingled together, and there cannot be a Judgment of discussion,
preceding that of condemnation, unless Godly men's sins are also produced. 2.
Because it is spoken generally in respect of all sorts, that the Books were
opened; By which Books most understand the consciences of men, and by the
opening of those Books, they understand the manifesting, clearing, and
discovering of consciences at that general day.

3. Because the Scriptures are express for the affirmative; not but that those
Texts are truths, that sins are forgiven, blotted out, thrown away, to be
remembered no more, (i.e.) as to condemnation; but as for exploration or
discussion the Lord speaks universally, that of every idle word that men speak,
Mat. 12.36.
they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment. If the balance
weigh down on this side (for my part I am not peremptory, but shall easily
submit to the spirits of the Prophets) yet this manifestation shall not be for
the shame, grief, trouble, ignominy, or confusion of the godly; but only for
the setting up of God's justice, and that the goodness and free grace of God in
Christ may be made more illustrious; how will Christ then be exalted, when all
the world shall see his righteousness and goodness, his truth and mercy, now
again meeting together, and kissing each other? it was so at his first coming,
and it will be so at his second coming; then shall his justice and mercy, his
righteousness and goodness be manifested to all; in that by his own merits,
notwithstanding their sins, he will bring all his Saints to his heavenly glory.

2. As for good things, whether good works, duties or graces, there is no
question but all these will be that day produced, and laid open. 1. We see
Christ enumerating the good works of them on his right hand; for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye took me in; naked, Mat. 25.35, 26.
and ye clothed me; sick, and ye visited me; in prison, and ye came unto me.
It is true, in this catalogue we find nothing of faith, but all of works; but
certainly faith is included, as the life of the Tree is included in the fruit;
not only, nor principally are works here mentioned for the goodness of the work
considered in it self; but as these works did express our faith and love to
Jesus Christ, in that by says we could see Christ in a poor beggar, or
prisoner, and could love Jesus Christ in these poor, better than all our
worldly goods, or liberties. I do not wonder that Paul advises his
Corinthians, See that ye abound in this grace of contribution to the Saints: 2
Cor. 8.7. Phil. 1.9. 1 These. 1.12.
and that he prays his Philipians, And this I pray, that your love may abound
yet more; And that he prays for his Thessalonians, now the Lord make you to
increase, and to abound in love one toward another, and toward all men; and
that he praises God in their behalf; We are bound to thank God always for you
brethren, as it is meet, 2 These. 1.3.
because that your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of
you all toward each other abounds. Christians! if we did but consider that
every duty done to God or Man, that every penny given to a poor naked Saint,
that every cup of cold water given to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
should not lose his reward, but this day should be reckoned up, or drawn (as it
were) into a full Inventory; Imprimis, For this piece of silver given such a
day to such a one; Item, For this piece of bread such a day given to such a
one, etc. Oh who would not abound in faith and love? oh who would think any
thing too much, too good, too dear to give to the needy members of Jesus
Christ? there is a charge laid upon Ministers to preach this Doctrine, I
beseech you give me leave to discharge my duty, and to lay it, and leave it at
your doors, where beggars usually stand; 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
Charge them that are rich in this world -- that they do good, that they be
rich in good works, ready to destribute, willing to communicate; laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
lay hold on eternal life. You to whom God has given the riches of this world,
as you would meet Christ with comfort, learn this lessen; consider whether of
these too reckonings will be more comfortable at that day; Item, So much given
to such and such a religious use? or so much given toward such a Feast, and
for the entertainment of such brave gallants? so much to promote the Gospel? or
so much at Dice, Cards, Horse-races? if one should tell you, that either you
must feed Christ in the poor, or you must starve in Hell; you must either
cloth naked Christ in the poor, or you must be laid naked to the fiery
indignation of the Lord for ever, oh what strictness would you call this? but I
recollect my self; if Christ set you at his right hand, he will then recount
all your charities, and all your labors of love to the Saints: you that are
poor, and had nothing to give, he will tell you of your good works, if it was
no more, but at such a time, you cast a mite into his Treasury, and at such a
time you carried a Letter for the Lord Jesus; he will produce and commend these
pittances of your poor charities to all the world.

2. Nor only good works to man; but all the Saints duties to God shall come in
remembrance. Oh then it will be known who served the Lord in spirit and truth,
and who did not; then Men and Angels shall know, such a day this poor Saints
performed such a spiritual service; every prayer in public or private, every,
tear shed for sin, every sob, or sigh, every spiritual meditation, or
self-examination every glance, ejaculation, or looking unto Jesus, shall be
recounted by Jesus: It was said of Cornelius, Act. 10.4.
that as well his prayers to God, as his alms to men came up for a memorial
before God; certainly every duty in reference to the first table is booked in
Heaven, and at this day the book being opened, it will appear, that such a
prayer thou made such a morning and such an evening in thy closet; Mat. 6.6.
and now will Christ say, Did not I tell thee, that if thou would pray to thy
Father in secret, then he that saw thee in secret, should reward thee openly?
why now shall thou have thy reward in a full view, I will divulge here all thy
secret duties, to Men and Angels; all the world shall know it, thy wanderings I
told them, Psalm. 56.8.
and thy tears I bottled them; lo here, are they not all written in my Book?

3. Nor only duties, but graces shall now be rehearsed; thy Knowledge, Faith,
Hope, Love, spiritual Joy; thy Fear, Obedience, Repentance, Humility, Meekness,
Patience, Zeal, Perseverance shall be fully discovered; time was that in the
incense of such a Prayer many sweet spices were burned together; therein was
Faith working by Love; therein was Humility, therein was Patience in submiting
to God's will and pleasure, therein was Hope of a gracious answer in God's due
time, therein was Holiness, brokenness of Heart, Cant. 5.1.
and love to others, etc. Time was (says Christ) that I gathered my myrr with
my spices, that I eat my honeycomb with my honey that I both accepted and
delighted my self in thy heavenly graces; I shall never forget how thou did
ravish my heart, my sister, my spouse; how thou do ravish my heart with one
of thine eyes, and with one chain of thy neck. Why, thus shall the Lord set
forth, and tell all the world what gracious children he had; then will appear
indeed the Meekness of Moses, the Faith of Abraham, the Patience of Job, the
Zeal of Phineas, the Love of Magdalen; and according to the measure of grace
conferred upon thee, Christ will set thee out; We commend the graces of such
and such Saints at their death, but oh let Christ blazon me, and his graces in
me at the resurrection-day.

Thus far for the Exploration or trial before sentence.

Mat. 25.24.
2. For the sentence it self, then shall the King say to them on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Every word here is full of life and joy; 1. Come] this
is the King's invitation of his Saints to his Court; he had summoned them
before to his presence, and now they are about him, he will not part with them,
they must come a little nearer yet, they must go with him into his presence
chamber; the mansions are ready, the Supper of the Lamb is ready, and now he
begins the solemn invitation to his bride, Come. 2. Come ye blessed of my
Father] Christ blessed them when he went up to Heaven, Luke 6.20, 21.
and whiles yet on earth he pronounced them blessed many a time; Blessed be ye
poor; Blessed are ye that hunger; Blessed are ye that weep; but now he calls
them the blessed of his Father; not only Christ, but God the Father has ever
looked upon them as his children; it is the Father's will as well as Christ's
that they should be blessed, Ye blessed of my Father. Luke 12 32. Romans 8.17.
3. Inherit the Kingdom] Christ had told them before, It is your Father's
pleasure to give you the Kingdom; but then they were only as servants, or as
children under age but now they are heirs, Ephesians. 4.13.
Heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; and now they are come to full age,
To the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; and therefore they must
have the inheritance in possession, they must all be Kings; this very word
speaks them Kings, and makes them Kings; it is the solemn coronation of the
Saints. It is the anointing, the setting of the Crown upon the heads of the
Saints; Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, 1 Timothy 4.8.
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not for me
only, but unto them also that love his appearing. 4. Inherit the Kingdom,
prepared for you] as Tophet was prepared of old, so was this Kingdom prepared
of old; it was the first creature that ever God made, In the beginning God
created heaven; Genesis 1.1.
his first work was to make Heaven for himself and his Saints to dwell in; he
prepared it for them, and then he prepared them for it: but why for them? were
not the Angels the first creatures that possessed it? nay, were they not
created in it, or together with it? yes, but yet the Angels are not, properly
the heirs, sons, members, spouse of God and Christ, as the Saints are; the
Angels are but ministering spirits, and the servants of the Bridegroom, but the
Saints are the Bride her self, heirs and coheirs with Christ. 5. Prepared for
you from the foundation of the world.] This was the great design of God and
Christ from all eternity; before the foundations of the world, and at the first
stone laid, and ever since, they have been carrying on this mighty work: it is
not a business of yesterday only; No, no; the eternal thoughts of God have
been upon it, Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world.

Oh what thoughts are in Saints, when this sentence is propounded! Oh what joy
enters into them now they are to enter into their Masters joy? methinks if it
were possible that tears could be in a glorified estate, the Saints should not
see Christ reach out a Crown to set it on their heads, but they should weep,
and hold away their heads, but Christ will have it so; This honor have all the
Saints; praise ye the Lord.

SECT. VI. Of Christ and the Saints judging the rest of the World.
6. FOR Christ and his Saints judging the world: no sooner shall the Saints be
sentenced, Justified, Acquitted, Anointed, Crowned; but presently they must be
enthronized, and sit with Jesus Christ to judge the world. In the unfolding of
this we may observe these particulars. --

1. As Christ is on a Throne, so now must the Elect be set on Thrones; Rev.
3.21.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne. Thrones are
for Kings and Judges; and in that Christ has now lifted up his Saints to this
condition, he will have them sit with him as so many Judges, and as so many
Kings; or if it be more honor to have Thrones by themselves, than to sit with
Christ in his Throne; John in his vision saw many Thrones; And I saw Thrones,
and they sat upon them, Rev. 20.4.
and judgment was given unto them. And Christ himself told his Apostles, Verily
I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the
Son of Man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
Thrones, Mat. 19.28.
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Hence some argue that amongst all the
Saints, the Apostles shall have their Thrones seated next to Christ; howsoever
the rest shall not be deprived of their Thrones; for not only twelve Thrones,
but twelve and twelve are set about the Throne of Christ; And round about the
Throne were four and twenty Thrones (or seats) and upon the Throne I saw four
and twenty Elders sitting clothed with white raiment, Rev. 4.4.
and they had on their heads crowns of Gold. Only four and twenty Thrones, and
four and twenty Elders are numbered, but thereby is represented the whole Church
of Christ; It is plain enough, that all the Saints shall appear plainly in the
glory of Christ's Kingdom, having Thrones with him in the Air, during the time
of his judgment.

2. The goats on the left hand shall then be called to receive their doom. No
sooner the Saints enthronized, but then shall Christ say, Ye blessed Angels
bring hither all those mine enemies, who have said I shall not rule over them,
that I may bruise them with my Iron mace, and break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel. O the fear and trembling that will now seize on reprobates! do
but see the case of prisoners, when the Judge speaks that word, Come Jaylors,
bring hither those prisoners to the bar. But alas! what comparison can we make
to suite with the condition of these reprobates? now shall their hearts fail
them for fear; now shall they seek death (oh how gladly would they die again!)
but shall not find it; now shall they cry to rocks and mountains; Fall on us,
Rev. 6.16.
and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb. As a prisoner in a desperate case had rather remain in his
fordid stinking dungeon, than coming into the open air for execution; so the
reprobates newly raised from the earth, would fain return again into the earth,
glad to remain, though not on the face of it with pleasure, yet in the bowels
of it with rottenness and solitude; like malefactors pressing to death, they
cry out for more weight, Hills cover us, mountains fall upon us, yet more
weight, more rocks, more mountains; hide us, press us, cover us, dispatch us.
But all in vain; the command is out, Angels and Devils will force them to the
bar, for the Lord has spoken it; Those mine enemies which would not that I
should reign over them, Luke 19.27.
bring them hither.

3. They shall look on Christ, and his Saints, now sitting on their Thrones. As
prisoners that stand at the bar in the face of the Judge, so must these
reprobates look the Judge and all his Assessors in the very face.

1. For the judge, they shall look on him; Behold he comes with clouds, and
every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him. We heard before, that
no sooner Christ in the clouds but they saw him then; as the prisoners that see
the Judge riding to his Judgment Seat; Oh but now they shall see him in the
Judgment Seat ready with sparkling eyes, and thundering voice to speak their
sentence. Prisoners at the bar must not turn their backs on the Judge, when he
begins their sentence; no more must reprobates; In Majestate visuri sunt, in
humilitate videre noluerunt; ut tanto distrinctius virtutem sentiant quanto
contemptius infirmitatem deriserunt.
They must see him in Majesty whom they would not deigne to look upon in
humility; that by so much more they may feel his power, by how much more they
derided his weakness. Oh the difference betwixt Christ's first coming in the
flesh, and in his second coming in the clouds; then he came in poverty, now in
Majesty; then in humility, now in Glory; then with poor-Shepherds, now with
mighty Angels; then the contempt of Nations, now the terror of the World; then
crowned with Thorns, now with Majesty; then judged by one man, now judging all
men; then as a Lamb, now as a Lion; oh horror to conceive! how will the sight
of this Judge amaze the wicked? and the rather because they shall see him whom
they have pierced. Is not this the aggravation of their terror? conceive the
guilty manslayer coming to his trial, will not the red robes of his Judge make
his heart bleed for his bloodshed? does not that crimson cloth present a
monstrous hew before his eyes? O then what sight is this, when the man slain
sits in the Judgment Seat? the rosy wounds of our Savior still bleeding (at it
were) in the prisoners presence? well my they hang their heads, but they shall
not shut their eyes; They shall see him, says the Text; yea, they also which
pierced him shall see him. This very sight will be as convincing, as if they
heard Christ say, Thou art the man that did murder me, thou art the man have
pierced me, this wound, this skar, and this print of the nails in my hands and
feet were thy very doings in thy sinning against me. And who can tell but
Christ may speak in some such manner as this! Come all you on the left hand,
prepare you for the sentence; I am them an whom you did crucify afresh; I am
he whose person you despised, whose Commands you disobeyed, whose Ministers you
abused; whose Servants you hated, whose Offers you rejected; and of whom you
said, There is no beauty in him that we should desire him. Whatsoever he shall
say, this I believe, that Christ's sweet face will be most terrible to the
wicked at that day. Oh it will cut them to see him in the judgment seat whom
they basely shut out of doors, preferring a lust before his presence; then will
they begin with extremest grief and bitterness of spirit to sigh and say, Oh,
he that I look upon, and must look upon, and cannot choose but look upon: he
whom I now see sitting on yonder flaming, white, and glorious Throne, is Jesus
Christ, the Mighty God, the Prince of Peace, that true Messiah, whose precious
blood was poured out as water upon the earth, to save his people from their
sins: it is he, yea, the self same he that many a time whiles I lived on earth,
invited and wooed me by his faithful Ministers, that besought and entreated me
with tears of dearest love, to leave my lusts, and to bid the Devil adieu; that
knocked again and again at the door of my heart for entrance, offering himself
to be my all-sufficient, and everlasting husband, telling me that if I would but
have embraced him, at this time should have been the solemnity of the marriage,
and now he would have set an immortal crown of bliss and glory upon my head
with his own Almighty hand; but I alas! like a wilful desperate wretch forsook
my own mercy, judged my self unworthy of everlasting life, and wretchedly and
cruelly against my own soul, persecuted all the means which should have
sanctified me, and all the Ministers which should have saved me, as instruments
in the hands of Christ; and now happy I, if I were an hundred thousand millions
of miles distant from this sight of Jesus Christ: oh that these eyes in my head
were holes again, as they were but even now when I was rotting, or rotten in
the grave! oh that I could turn any way aside from this glorious sight! oh that
I were a Stone, or Tree, or Air, or any other thing that wanted eyes! oh that I
had no eye within, nor understanding faculty to conceive of Christ, or to know
Christ Jesus as my Judge, now ready to bid me go to Hell! certainly these will
be the woeful wishes of the wicked, when they shall look on Christ as sitting on
his Throne of Judgment.

2. For the Saints, they shall look on them. Indeed they sit so near their
Savior, that they cannot look on him, but they must look on them; the Saints
are on their Thrones, either in the Throne or about the Throne of Jesus Christ,
and the reprobates stand in a direct opposite line to the Saints, so that their
eyes cannot be off them; It is said in the parable, that the rich man being in
Hell, He lift up his eyes, Luke 16.23.
and saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom; but the distance being so
great as Heaven and Hell, that cannot be literally understood, but only
parabolically; it is otherwise here, for howsoever the separation be already
made, yet neither is the sentence, nor execution past upon the reprobates; and
indeed as yet, both the Saints and reprobates are in the Air; the one on the
right hand, and the other on the left hand of Jesus Christ, and therefore they
cannot but have a full view of each other. In the Apocriphal book there is a
plain description of this view, Wisd. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the face of such
as have afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors; and when they see it
they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the
strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for; and they
repenting and groaning for anguish of Spirit, shall say within themselves, this
is he whom we had sometimes in a derision, and a proverb of reproach; we fools
accounted his life madness, and his end to be without honor; how is he numbered
among the children of God, and his lot is amongst the Saints? Here is a sight
that will trouble and amaze the wicked, that those who sometimes were their
footstools should now be on Thrones; that poor Lazarus who lay at the gates of
that certain rich man, should now shine like a Star near the Sun of
Righteousness; that they who were reproached, reviled, massacred, murdered by
them, should now be their Judges, joining with Jesus Christ to sentence them to
Hell. Oh who can conceive the terrible thoughts of these men's hearts! now the
world cannot help them, their old companions cannot help them, the Saints
neither can, nor will; only the Lord Jesus can; but Oh! there is the
soul-killing misery, he will not; Ye Men, and Devils (says Christ) joint-heirs
of Hell, fit fuel for eternal fire, look on us in our Thrones, time was we
could not have a look from you; Christ and Christians were an abhorrency of
spirit unto you, you troad us under foot, but now we are got above you; oh see
the vast difference betwixt us and you; look on us, look on me and my Saints!
see us on our Thrones, see us glittering in glory; and be confounded and amazed
for ever.

4. A particular strict account shall be then required, and given. Of what you
will say? I Answer --

1. Of sins: Come (will Christ say) Now confess all your sins before all the
world; time was that you consealed your sins, but now every sin shall be laid
open before God, Angels, and Men; and now is the black Book of their
consciences opened, wherein appears all their sins original and actual; of
Omission and Commission. For omissions of duties all those shall be discovered.
Christ hungry, and I gave him no meat; Christ thirsty, and I gave him no drink;
Christ a stranger, and I lodged him not; Christ naked, and I clothed him not;
Christ sick, and in prison, and I visited him not. And for commissions of
evils, all those shall be discovered. These and these sins I committed in my
childhood, youth, ripe age, old age: these were my gross sins, Blasphemy,
perjury, Idolatry, robbery, drunkenness, uncleaness, profaneness, etc. and
these were my less sins, anger, hatred, envy, distrust, impatience, pride,
presumption, contention, derision, inconstancy, hypocrisy, etc. Oh the
numberless number of evil thoughts, words and deeds that now are laid open. In
the black book is not only written all sins done, but all such sins as were
intended and purposed to be done; All the projects of the heart, though never
acted, must now be discovered. Men little think of this; if I should tell you
of such designs that died in your hearts, and never came out to light; you
would be now ready to say, Tush, I never did such a thing, I only intended it,
or had some thoughts about it, and what then? why then those very thoughts,
secrets, purposes, projects shall come to light; or if there be any thing more
hidden or secret, as the very bent, and frame of your hearts, the very
inclinations of your souls to this or that evil, shall then be manifest to all
the World. Nay, yet more, such sins, as by the sinners themselves were never
took notice of, either before, or at, or after the commission of them, shall
this day come out. Conscience is such a kind of private Notary or Secretary,
that it keeps notes or records of all acts and deeds, whether you observe them
or no; conscience has the Pen of a ready Writer, and takes in shorthand, and
in an illegible character, from your mouths as fast as you speak, and from your
hearts as fast as you contrive. Consciences writing (says one) is not now
legible; as that which is written with the juice of a Lemmon is not to be read
by daylight, but against the sire by night you may read it; so consciences
writing cannot now be read, but in that day when Heaven and Earth are set on
fire, this book shall be opened, and the cipher be discovered. Oh what a day
will this be, when not a sin committed by any reprobate from the beginning of
the world, but now it shall be rehearsed.

2. As an account of all sins, so an account of all temporal gifts which God
has imparted to reprobates, must now be given. Some have the gifts of the
world; as riches, honors, places of authority; others have the gifts of the
body, as health, strength, beauty, life; others have the gifts of the mind, as
understanding, wisdom, policy, learning; now of all these gifts they must give
an account. Come you that are rich (says Christ) render you an account of your
stewardship; how have you spent your riches? The like will he say to the
honorable, and to those in places of authority; Oh remember you were in
authority, and office, and place, but what service did you to me, or my
members? you had wisdom, and learning, and knowledge, and understanding
conferred upon you, but what good had the Church or Commonwealth by it? the
like will he say to others according to the talents bestowed on them, You
excelled in strength, beauty, health of body, length of days; and now tell me,
and publish it to all the world, how were these improved? I believe many a sad
answer will be given to Christ of these things, riches misspent, and health
misspent, and wisdom, policy, learning, gifts, and parts misspent; O consider
it! if the Factor after many years spent in foreign Countries, at last returns
home without his reckonings, who will not blame him for his negligence? but
when his Master calls him to account, and he finds nothing but a bill of
expenses, this in courting, that in seasting: who laughs not at so fond a
reckoning? Thus many pass the time of their life as a time of mirth, then when
they return to their Lord again, behold all their accounts are sins, their
profits vanities.

3. I shall add one thing more; not only of gifts Temporal, but of all
blessings spiritual, though but tendered, and offered, must all give an account.
Oh the sad accounts that many a soul will make of these things! methinks I hear
some wicked wretch confessing thus to Christ; True Lord, I lived at such a time
when the Sun of the Gospel shone bright in my face; and in such a place where
all was Goshen; I lived under such a ministry, who set before me life, and
death; many and many a powerful, and searching Sermon have I heard; any one
passage whereof (if I had not wickedly and wilfully forsaken my own mercy)
might have been unto me the beginning of the new Birth, and everlasting bliss.
Sometimes in the use of the means I felt stirrings or strong workings in my
heart, and then I was fully purposed to have been another man, to have cleaved
to Christ, and to have forsook the World; I was almost resolved to have been
wholly for God, I was almost persuaded to be a real Christian; Oh what thoughts
were in my heart when such a faithful Minister pressed the truth home? methinks
every Sermon I heard then, is now a preaching again; methinks I hear still the
voice of the Minister, methinks I see still his tears dropping down his cheeks;
Oh how fresh is the reproof, admonition, exhortation of such, and such a
Preacher now in my mind? oh how earnestly did he entreat me! with what love and
tender compassion did he beseech me: how did his bowels yearn over me! how
strongly did he convince me, that all was not well with my sin-sick soul! how
plainly did he rip up all my sores! and open to me all my secrets, and my whole
heart! but alas within a while I made a jest of all, I hardened my heart
against all, I stifled all his convictions, I shut my eyes against his
discoveries; I cared neither for the Minister, nor any thing he said, or did.
And yet here is not all, not only the Ministers of Christ, but the Spirit of
Christ sometimes speak to my heart; I remember at such a time Christ himself
(as it were) condescended, and bowed the Heavens, and came down to entreat me
for my souls health; oh the strivings of the Spirit of Christ, as if he had
been loath to have took a denial! Rev. 3.20.
O Christ, I remember thy words, when thou cryedst to me, open sinner, open thy
heart to thy Savior, and I will come in, and sup with thee, and thou with me.
Why sinner, are thy lust's better than I? thy carnal pleasures better than I?
thy worldly commodities better than I? why sinner, what do thou mean? how
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? O take pity on thy Jesus! for
here I stand, and wait at the door of thy heart, and my head is filled with the
dew, and my looks with the drops of the night. But Alas! I resisted Christ and
his Spirit; O thou Judge and Savior of all thine Elect, I dealt churlishly
with thee, I tired out thy patience, I gave thee a repulse, I told thee I had
entertained other lovers, and I would have none of thee; I troad on council, I
trampled thy precious blood under my feet; and now I am expecting no other but
to eat the fruit of my own way. Now may thou accomplish thy Word, because I
set at naught all thy counsels, and would none of thy reproof, therefore thou
may laugh at my calamity, and mock now my fear comes. Lo, here the
confessions of sins. Every thing now comes out, for Christ will have it so, as
a preparative to his doom upon them.

5. Christ and his Saints proceed to sentence. First, Mat. 25.41.
Christ the chief Judge shall pronounce it, depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, every word breathes
out nothing but fire and brimstone, vengeance and woe; to depart from that
glorious presence of Christ were Hell enough, but they must go with a curse;
nor only so, but into fire; and that must be everlasting; and therein they
shall have no other company or comforters but wicked devils, and they insulting
over them with hellish spite and stinging exprobations.

Give me leave a little to enlarge upon these words. No sooner Christ begins
the sentence, Depart from me] but methinks I imagine the reprobates to reply;
how? depart from thee? why O Christ, thou art all things, and therefore the
loss of thee is the loss of all things; thou art the greatest good; and
therefore to be deprived of thee is the greatest evil; thou art the very
Center, and perfect rest of the Soul, and therefore to be pulled from thee is
the most cruel separation: we were made by thee, and for thee, O let us never
be divided from thee; we were made according to thy Image, O never drive us
from our glorious pattern; Away, away (says Christ) ye have no part in me, or
in my merits, never speak, or entreat me any more, but depart from me. But
secondly, they may reply again, if we must depart, and depart from thee, at
least give us thy blessing before we go, thou have great store of blessings to
give, and we hope thou have one yet in store for us, we crave but a small
thing, but a blessing. O it is a little one; thou art our Father (witness our
Creation) and it is a chief property of a Father to bless his children. No,
depart from me ye Cursed, in place of a blessing take the full curse of your
Father, you have been most prodigal and disobedient children: you have followed
him who had my first curse; and now share ye curses with him, cursed be you in
your souls, and in your bodies; and in your thoughts, and in your words, and in
the hainousness of your sins, and in the grievousness of your punishment. But
thirdly, if we must depart from thee, and depart accursed, yet appoint us some
meet and convenient place to go into; Create a fruitful piece of ground, and
let a goodly Sun daily shine upon it; let it have sweet and wholesome air, and
be stored with fruits, and flowers, of all forms and colors; give us the
variety of Creatures for our uses; O if we must go from thee, the source and
fountain of heavenly sweetness, and afford us some plenty of earthly pleasures,
which may in some sort recompense our pain of loss, speak but the word, and
such a place will presently start up, and show it self. No, depart from me ye
cursed into fire; though fire naturally burns not Spirits, yet I will lift and
elevate this fire above its nature; you have sinned against nature, and I will
punish you above nature; Fire? alas that ever we were born! who is able to rest
in fire? the very thought of it already burns us. Of all the creatures
appointed by God to be the Instruments of revenge, fire and water have the
least mercy. But Fourthly, if we must into fire, let the sentence stand but for
a very short time; quench the fire quickly, half an hour will seem a great
while there; No, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire; it was kindle
by my breath, and it has this property among other strange qualities, that it
is an unquenchable Fire; as long as I am God it shall endure, and ye broyl in
it; and when I cease to be happy, then shall ye cease to be miserable. O woe is
us! what? to live in a fire perpetually without all end, or hope of end? -- Yea
Fifthly, allot us then some comforters, whose smooth and gentle words may
sweeten our torments, or somewhat dull the most keen edge of our extremity: O
let the Angels recreate us with Songs and hymns of thee, and of thy
blessedness, that we may hear that sweetly delivered which others fully enjoy:
No, no; depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels: they shall be your comforters, they that will triumph in your
miseries, they that are your deadly, desperate enemies; they that will tell you
by what deceits and by-ways they led you from me, and that will give you every
hour new names of scorn and horrible reproach. O sentence not to be endured,
and yet never, never must it be reversed. O my brethren, I tremble at the very
mentioning of this sentence, and O what will they do on whom it must pass? I
beseech you before we pass from it, will you ask but your souls this one
question! what, can you dwell with everlasting fire? if you can, you may go on
in sin; but if you cannot, why then stop here, and repent of sin: O now say, if
this be the effect of sin, Lord pardon what is past, and O give me grace that I
may sin no more, as sometimes I have done. Methinks if a temptation should come
again for ordinary entertainment, you should fright it away with the
remembrance of these powerful words, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

1 Cor. 6.2.
2. The Saints shall judge the very self same judgment, do ye not know that the
Saints shall judge the World? that they as well as Christ shall judge the
World, is without controversy; Dan. 7.22.
And judgment was given to the Saints of the most high. Ye also shall sit upon
twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Behold, the Lord comes
with twelve thousand of his Saints, Mat. 19.28. Jude 14.15. 1 Cor. 6.5.
to execute judgment upon all. Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? not
only shall we judge the World, but the God of the World; the Principalities and
Powers that captive wicked men at their pleasure; even they must be judged by
those whom they formerly soyled; so then there is no question but they shall
judge.

Only how the Saints shall judge together with Christ, is a very deep question.
For my part I am apt to think, that it shall not be directly known, ere it be
seen or done. I shall only relate what others say to this point, and so leave
you to your liberty of judging what is right.

1. Some say that the Saints shall judge the World by presenting their persons
and actions, by comparing their good examples with the evil examples of all the
Reprobates; Jude 15.
and so, they shall convince and condemn the World. Behold the Lord comes with
Ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them; This I conceive to be a truth, yet surely this is
not all truth.

2. Others say, that the Saints shall judge the World by way of indicting,
impleading, accusing witnessing, etc. And I conceive it may be thus too; the
Saints of the Law more especially accusing the breakers of the Law, by the Law.
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, John 5.45.
there is one that accuses you to the Father, there is one that accuses you,
even Moses, in whom ye trust. And the Saints of the Gospel more especially
judging the prophaners of the Gospel, Romans 2.16.
by the Gospel: in that day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel. This likewise is truth, but I believe as yet we
have not the whole truth.

Psalm. 58.10.
3. Others say, that the Saints shall judge the World after the manner of
exaltation, glorying, and rejoicing to see the vengeance. The Righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the
wicked. But this their exulting being a constant and perpetual act, not for a
time, but for eternity, methinks this present act should be yet somewhat more.

Rev. 16.17. Rev. 19.1, 2.
4. Others say, that the Saints shall judge the World by way of assession,
assent, vote, suffrage, comprobation, and the like subordinate, and conformable
acts. And I heard another out of the Altar say, even so Lord God Almighty, true
and righteous are thy judgments. -- And after these things, I heard a great
voice of much people in heaven, saying, Allelujah, salvation, and glory, and
honor, and power unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his
judgments; this certainly is truth, and commonly so received, yet neither is
this all truth.

5. Others say, that the Saints shall judge the World (i.e.) Christ in the
Saints, and the Saints in Christ. He in them by those Infallible principles of
Divine Justice which are impressed in them; and they in him, by those inseparable
bounds of union, whereby they wholly relate to him: or he and they together as
head and members, the act of the head imputed to the members, and the act of
the members acknowledged by the head; his Judiciary Act (especially as from his
Mediatorship and Manhood) having a peculiar influence upon them; and their
Judiciary act (in a perfect conformity, though not any absolute proportion)
having a peculiar reference to him. And methinks those Texts of Mat. 19.28.
Jude 14.15. speak there of Christ's, and of the Saints judgment, as of one joint
act.

Oh what terror will be to all wicked men? when not only Christ, but all the
Saints shall say of them, away with them, away with them, let them be damned.
You that are Fathers, it may be that your Children will thus sentance you, I
remember when the Jews told Christ, that he cast out Devils through Beelzebub
the Prince of Devils, Mat. 12.7.
he answered, If I through Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your Children
cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges. They liked well enough of
the Miracles of their Children who were the Disciples of Christ, but they could
not endure them in Christ; and therefore he tells them, that their Children,
whom God has converted, and to whom he had given power to do the same works as
he did, even they should be their judges to Condemn them. And so it may be with
you, if any of your Children be converted to the Lord, and you remain still in
a natural estate, your very Children shall be your judges, and condemn you to
Hell. But of that anon.

6. In this doom which Christ and his Saints shall pass on Reprobates, our
Savior tells us of some reasonings betwixt him and them; I was an hungered
(says Christ) and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink,
etc. Mat. 25.42.44.45.
-- Then shall they answer, Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or a thirst, or a
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? and
then shall he answer them, verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to
one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. As if Christ should have said,
time was that I was under reproach, misery, calamity, necessity; I lay at your
doors like Lazarus full of sores, and as I thought nothing too, much for you,
so I expected also something from you; but oh cruelty to see thy Christ an
hungered and not to feed him? to see thy Christ a thirst, and not to cool, or
quench his thirst? to see thy Christ a stranger, and not to give him a nights
lodging? to see thy Christ naked, and not to cover him with a garment, who
would gladly have covered thee with the robe of righteousness, the garment of
Salvation? O monstrous inhumane heart? O prodigious wretch! who among the
Heathens ever dealt thus with their Idols? have any of the Nations starved
their Gods, turned them out of doors? and must I only be slighted? away
Reprobates! you had no mercy on me, and now I laugh at your calamity: surely he
shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy; They stand
wondering at this, and cannot remember that ever they saw Christ in such a
condition; Why Lord, (say they) when saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty, or
naked? art thou not he that rose again from the dead, and ascended on high, and
ever since have been exalted above the highest Cherubims, a name being given
thee above every name, at which name to this day, but especially now on this
day, every knee does bow of things in heaven, and things in earth, Phil. 2.9,
10.
and things under the earth; how then could we see thee in such a condition? is
not this thy second coming in glory? and were we alive at thy first coming in
humility? how can this be? oh how should thou charge us with unkindness to
thy self? surely if we had known thee in need, we would have given thee of thy
own, thou should never have wanted what things we enjoyed, but thou should
have commanded both us and them. To which our Savior replies, O deceitful,
ignorant, and stupid souls! have you no better learned Christ than so? am not I
Head of the Church, and can the Head be without Members? Verily, if you had
loved, relieved, or done good to them, you had done so to me; but in being
uncharitable to them, you were no less unto me. Never say you would have been
thus, and thus kind to Christ, whiles you were unkind to Christians: herein
lies the deceitfulness of your hearts; O they are deceitful above all things
and desperately wicked, who can know them? but I the Lord search the heart, I
try the reins, Jer. 17.9, 10.
even to give to every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit
of his doings; In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of my members,
ye did it not to me, and therefore get you down into Hell, and get you out of
my presence; take them Devils, away with them Angels to the Devil and his
Angels for ever.

These are the reasonings betwixt Christ and Reprobates; and if so, may we not
imagine the like between Saints and Reprobates? is there not the same reason of
reasoning betwixt them and the inferior Judges, as betwixt them and the supreme
Judge? for my part I cannot conceive, but if we admit of such disputes betwixt
Christ and them, well may there be the like disputes, arguings, and reasonings
betwixt Saints and them: for they had on earth more familiarity, converse, and
communion together; some of them it may be, were in near and dear relations to
each other; and now that one shall judge the other to eternal flames, oh what
passages will be betwixt them? I shall instance in our nearest relations upon
earth, as of Masters and Servants, Parents, and Children, Husbands, and Wives,
Ministers and People; no question but in these very relations some shall judge,
and others be judged; our Savior tells us, There shall be two men in one bed,
the one shall be taken, the other shall be left; Luke 17.34, 35, 36.
two women shall be grinding at one Mill, the one shall be taken, and the other
left; two men shall be together in the Field, the one shall be taken, aad the
other left; wherein the Lord seems to show that God's Election does extend it
self to all sorts of persons, and separates the most. They shall not be saved
by Families, as in Noah's time, but one frie^^ shall be taken by Christ into
Heaven, and another left for the Devil to carry into Hell. Give me leave but to
enlarge on those reasonings, or discourses that we may imagine will be now
betwixt these several relations. As --

1. Betwixt Master and Servant; if the Master be the Saint, and his Servant the
Reprobate, then shall the Master say, O thou wicked Servant, how many a time
did I call on thee to duty? how often have I told thee that I would have thee
to be God's Servant as well as mine? Colos. 3.22, 23, 24, 25.
how often came that word to thy ears; Servants obey your Masters in all things
according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God? how often was that precious Word laid close
to thy conscience, He that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he
does; but in doing service to me as to the Lord, thou should of the Lord
receive the reward of the Inheritance, for in such service thou did serve the
Lord Christ? but thou would not be warned, and now thou art justly condemned;
I say Amen to Christ's Sentence; get thee down to Hell, and there serve Satan,
and receive his wages in fire and Brimstone for ever. -- Or if the Servant be
the Saint, and his Master the Reprobate, then shall the Servant say, O my
quondam Master, how many a time have thou tyrannized it over me? how did thou
use me, or abuse me to serve thy own lusts and corruptions? many a time I had
strong desires to wait upon God in the use of public and private Ordinances;
this morning, and that evening, I would have served my Master the Lord Jesus
Christ, but thou would not spare me one hours time for prayer, reading,
meditation, etc. I was ever faithful in thy service, going to bed late and
rising early; Genesis 31.40, 42.
The drought consumed me by day, and the frost by night, and my sleep many a
time departed from mine eyes; surely God has seen my affliction, and the
labor of my hands, and now he has rebuked thee: do thou not observe the
admirable justice and righteousness of Christ in the sentences past on us both?
remember that thou in thy lifetime received thy good things, and I received
evil things; but now I am comforted, and thou must be tormented. I now serve a
better Master; after my weeks work with thee, I shall keep a perpetual Sabbath
with God; but go thou with thy old companions from thy glorious Mansion to a
loathsome dungeon; from thy table of surfeit, to a table of vengeance; from thy
faithful Servants, to afflicting Spirits; from thy bed of down, to a bed of
fire; from soft linen and silken coverings, to wish a rock for thy pillow, and
a mountain for thy coverlet.

2. Betwixt Parent and Child; if the Parent be the Saint, and the Child the
Reprobate; then shall the Parent say, O thou wicked, rebellious Son! or O thou
wicked, rebellious, and disobedient daughter! it is I that begot thee, or that
brought thee forth; that during thy Infancy, laid thee in my bosom, and dandled
thee on my knee, and carried thee in my arms, and set thee as a seal upon my
heart; that during thy minority fed thee, and apparelled thee and trained thee
up in manners, learning a particular calling, and especially in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; and then when I saw thy untowardness of spirit, and thy
breakings out into things forbidden by God and man, O the admonitions,
reprehensions, corrections! O the many thousands of warnings that I gave thee
of this day, and of the wrath to come! and yet thou wentest on in thy
stubbornness, till thou becamest many and many a time a grief of mind, a
bitterness of spirit unto me: and then how often did I mind thee of thy duty.
Children obey your Parents in all things. Honor thy Father and Mother, Colos.
3.20. Ephesians. 2.6. Prove. 30.27.
which is the first Commandment with promise. The eye that mockketh his Father,
and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out,
and the young Eagles shall eat it. But alas, all these expressions made no
saving impression on thy hardened heart, thy brow was Brass, and thy sinew of
Iron, thou wast ever stiff-necked, and now thou art justly damned; I cannot but
approve of Christ's judgment upon thee; though thou came out of my bowels,
yet now I have no pity, no bowels of compassion toward thee; the glory of God
has so swallowed up all my natural affections, that I cannot but laugh at thy
calamity, and joy in thy damnation; I gave thee a body, and God himself gave
thee a Soul; but now let the Devils have both, and torment them in Hell; be
gone! I shall never see thee again -- Or if the Child be the Saint, and the
Parent the Reprobate, then shall the Child say, O unworthy Parent; unworthy of
everlasting life! I had my natural being from thee, but my Spiritual being was
from the Lord; if I had followed thy steps, I had been everlastingly damned;
did I not know thy ignorance, thy unbelief, thy worldliness, thy covetousness,
thy pride, thy malice, thy lust, thy lukewarmness, thy impatiency, thy
coffeehouse, thy vainglory, thy self-love; did not thou often check me
for my forwardness, and zeal, and holiness in Religion? did not thou ask me,
what, art thou wiser than the rest of the neighborhood? are there not many
gray hairs amongst us, whose wisdom and experience thou have not yet attained?
and can not thou walk on soberly toward heaven, and either do as the most,
or keep pace with the wisest? what, have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees
believed on Christ? oh I shall ever remember to the praise and glory of Christ,
what discouragements I had, and yet how the Lord plucked me as a firebrand out
of the fire; and now has the Lord set me on the Throne to judge thee according
to thy demerits; and therefore I join with him, who is the Father of Spirits,
against the Father of my flesh; depart, go to the Gods whom thou have served,
and see if they will help thee in the day of thy calamity.

3. Betwixt Husband and Wife; now if the Husband be the Saint, and the Wife the
Reprobate, then shall the Husband say; Thou art she whom I knew in the flesh,
whom I dearly affected with my heart and soul; whom I nourished and cherished
as my own body; thou art she that was the Wife of my bosom, as near and dear to
me as my heart in my bosom; thou wast my companion, my yoke fellow, and my very
delight: but oh! I could never rule thee, lead thee, guide thee in the way of
life, in the path that is called holy: many a time have I wooed, sued, and
sought to gain thy soul to that blessed Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus Christ, many
a time have I prayed with thee, and for thee; many a time have I stirred thee
up to hear the Word, to wait upon God in the use of all means public and
private; and instead of embraces, or yieldings to these blessed motions, Prove.
19.13.27.15.
I have met with contentions and jars, as a continual dropping in a very rainy
day; but death has dissolved that knot, so that now I am no more thy Husband;
this is the day of separation, and I shall no more consort with thee; at the
Resurrection there is no use of Marriage, but now I am to live as an Angel in
Heaven; and because thou would not draw with me in Christ's yoke, now
therefore adue for ever and ever; we shall never more lie in one bed, Mark.
12.29.
or sit at one board, or walk in one Field, or grind at one mill; thou have
lost me, and thou have lost Jesus Christ, two husbands in one day; go now and
take thy choice in Hell! thou art free from us, but thou shall be bound there
with indissoluble bonds to the Devil and his Angels -- Or if the Wife be the
Saint, and the Husband the Reprobate, then shall the Wife say; Thou art he who
I looked upon as my second-self, my head, my governor, my helper, my husband;
for whom I was willing to forsake my native home, Fathers house, dear
Relations, of Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, and many comforts in that kind;
and I expected to have found new matter, and a continued influence of comfort,
and delight in a marriage-state; but oh the vexations of Spirit! had thou not
almost drawn me away from Jesus Christ? was I not forced through many
provocations sometimes to break out and say, Surely a bloody husband art thou
to me? many a time I cried out, Exodus 4.25.
O my Husband when will thou set up the rich and royal trade of grace in thy
Family? when will thou exercise prayer, reading, catechizing, conference, days
of humiliation, and other household holy duties? oh for doing something to
assure our souls of meeting together hereafter in heaven! But alas! it would
not be; and now see the effect: here I stand like a Queen, decked and adorned
with cloth of Gold, with raiment of needle work, with the white robe of
Christ's righteousness; so that the King of Heaven greatly desires my beauty,
and my soul is this day married to Christ; I acknowledge him, and no other
Husband in the world; and for thee who refused to join with me in the worship
of God, now God has refused thee: fare well, or fare ill for ever.

4. Betwixt Minister and some of his people at least: if the people be as so
many Saints, and the Minister the Reprobate, then shall the people say: O thou
art the man that undertookest that high and mighty calling of feeding souls
with the Word of life; but now are thy sins written in thy forehead, for
either thou run'st before thou wast sent, or being sent, thou have been
exceeding negligent in the gift that was in thee: Did not thou prophecy in
Baal, and cause God's people to err? did thou not studiously and mainly seek
for the Fleece, not regarding respectively the Flock? did not thou strengthen
the hands of evildoers in Preaching peace, peace to wicked men? wast thou not
profane, and wicked, and loose in thy life, and by that means ledst many
thousands to hell! O thou bloody Butcher of Souls; had thou been faithful in
thy Ministry, well might those damned Companions about thee have escaped the
flames! but they are doomed to death, and now thou may hear their cries, and
grievous groans, and complaints against thee, this was the man set over us to
give us the bread of Life, but oh Christ, did he not fail us? did he not feed
us with unprofitable matter, fables, conceits, airy sentences, rather than any
thing tending to godly edifying, which is in faith? did not our tongues, and
the tongues of our Children stick to the roof of our mouths in calling and
crying for bread, for the bread of life, and he would not pity us? we gave him
the tenths which thou appointed, but he gave not us thy truth, which thou did
command him; why Lord Christ, thou Judge of all the world, did not thou bid
him feed, feed, feed? did thou not bid him feed the flock committed to his
charge? did not bid him preach the word, be instant in season, and out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering? and notwithstanding
all thy commands, did he not miserably starve us? instead of feeding us unto
salvation, has he not starved many thousands of us to our destruction. O
Christ, thou that art the judge of Nations, and the revenger of blood! reward
thou this man, as he has rewarded us; he led us in the ways of wickedness, and
(if it must be so) let him be our ringleader to Hell; and upon his soul once
buried in Hell, let this be the Epitaph, the price of blood, the price of
blood; if thou did hear the blood of Abel, being but one man, forget not the
blood of many, now thou art judging the earth. Why thus do the damned cry about
thine ears; and as for us, (say the Saints) who were once thy people, but now
thy Judges, we consent to their cry, and to our Saviors doom, go ye cursed
into everlasting fire.

Men, Brethren, and Fathers, I begin thus with the Ministers doom, that you may
see I would deal impartially; and verily I believe it, if our case come to
this, we of the Ministry shall be in a thousand times worse condition than any
of you; for besides the horror due to the guilt of our own souls, all the
blood of those souls who have perished under our Ministry, through our default,
will be laid to our charge; little do you know, or consider the burden that
lies upon us, a burden able to make the shoulders of the most mighty Angel in
heaven to shrink under it. Chrysostom was a glorious Saint, Heb. 13.17. Hujus
comminationis terror animum mihi concutit. Chrysostom. d
yet casting his eye upon one only Text in the Bible, Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they
that must give account, He professes that the terror of this Text made his
heart tremble. Surely it is enough to make our hearts tremble, if we seriously
weigh our terrible doom, in case that we should miscarry.

But now on the other side, if the Minister be the Elect, and sentenced to
salvation; and many of his people prove no better than Reprobates, then shall
the Minister say, O miserable souls, now you feel the truth of those
comminations, and curses which we opened and unfolded, and discovered to you
out of God's Word! We dealt plainly with you, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
that the unrighteous should not inherit the Kingdom of God: we advised you
again and again, be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor
Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetuous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God: and such were you, and notwithstanding all our
threats, warnings, intreatings, beseechings, thus ye lived, and thus ye dyed;
and there is the issue, Christ now has doomed you to hell, and here am I set
on a throne to judge your souls; for the Saints shall judge the World as well
as Christ himself; Oh what shall I do? Oh my bowels, my bowels! here is a case
beyond all the former, each of them according to their relations judge another;
but here is a multitude, not one, or two, or ten, or an hundred, but many
hundreds, or thousands, according to the number of such and such Congregations,
where I have preached.

In Christ's reasonings with the wicked we have heard of his sayings, and their
answers, and of his replications to their answers, much said on both sides to
and again; I may suppose the like here. O what shall I do (says the Minister)
what doom shall I pass on this Assembly of Reprobates? can I absolve them whom
the righteous God has condemned? can I say, come along with me to heaven, now
Christ has said, go ye cursed into hell? and oh now shall I turn my speech
from my wonted wooing, beseeching, entreating, exhorting, to a direct dooming,
damning, condemning these souls to the pit of hell? sometimes indeed I opened
to these souls the armoury of God's wrath. I thundered and lightened in their
Congregations; but my design was to fright them out of hellfire, and knowing
the terrors of the Lord to have persuaded them toward heaven, and heavenly
things; but now if I speak condemnation, no sooner shall I speak, but their
souls will sink down to hell; O miserable souls, what shall I say? or what can
you say for your selves? Then shall they answer; Oh Sir, do not you aggravate
the torment by your condemnation; the weight of Christ's doom is already
unsupportable, but will you add more weight? Why remember, we are some of us
(it may be) of your flesh and blood; many a time you told us that you
unfeignedly loved us; and that we were dearer to you then all worldly
enjoyments; many a time you told us that you were willing to spend your self
for us, as the candle that burns it self to give others light; you were pleased
to bestow your prayers, tears, sighs, groans for our souls; your very Books and
Writings were high expressions, and abiding monuments of your dear love to us;
you weighed not your strength and spirits in comparison of our souls; and shall
this fair comical scean end in a dismal, doleful, bloody Tragedy? would you do
or suffer any thing to save us, and will you now condemn us? Oh forbear!

Ah no, (says the Minister) I cannot forbear; all is true that you say, I
loved you dearly, and I was willing to spend, or to be spent for you; but this
aggravates the more; ah my travail, pains, books, writings, words, fears,
sighs, groans are in one volume together, and this volume has been opened this
day, and now is the question put; what have you profited by all my words,
prayers, tears, sighs, and groans? is not all lost? and are not your souls
lost? and now do you tell me of love? what, did I ever love you more then
Christ loved you? were the drops of my tears to be compared with the showers of
his blood? were my pains for you equal with the pains of his Cross? and has he
not condemned you to hell? and shall not I be like-minded to Jesus Christ?
Surely the Lord's will must be my will; he has already judged you, and he will
make me to judge you; so far am I from pitying you, that if he that formed you
will show you no mercy, if he that saves me, and all the Elect people of God,
will not save you, can I pity you, or save you, or descent from Jesus in his
sentence upon you? speak no more of flesh, and blood, of labors, of love,
Christ's Sentence must stand, and as I am a member of Christ, and a Minister of
Christ, I cannot but approve of it, and so judge you to hell.

Why then (say Reprobates) we will curse thee, and blaspheme Jesus Christ in
hell for ever; cursed be the time that ever we heard of Jesus Christ, or that
ever we knew thee, or thy Ministry; do not thy Sermons send us deeper into
hell? had it not been easier for us at this day of judgment if we had lived in
Tire and Sydon, where the Gospel never was Preached? did not thou harden our
hearts in such and such Sermons, when the Word came home? did not thou deny
us the seals which might have been for confirmation of our souls salvation?
did thou not estrange thy self from us in respect of any inward, intimate,
and familiar society, which thou affordest to others? does not the event
plainly show, that all thy tears, prayers, words, and works, as in reference to
us, were hypocrisy, flattery, deceit, dissimulation? Oh cursed be the day that
ever we lived under such a Ministry, or that ever we heard of Jesus Christ.

Nay then (says the Minister) it is time for us to part; such were your
invectives on earth, and now they are, and will be your language in Hell; but
have I not answered these cavils many a time? have I not told you that the Word
would harden some, and soften others, the fault being in your selves? have I
not cleared it that the seals are not to be set upon blanks, and that
confirmation could not be without a work of conversion to lead it? and were we
not commanded in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to withdraw our selves from
every brother that walks disorderly? did not the wise man tell us? he that
touches pitch shall be defiled therewith, 2 These. 3.16.
and he that has fellowship with a proud man shall be like unto him? can a man
take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? can a man go upon hot
coals, and his feet be not burnt? Prove. 26.27, 28.
as for other cavils, the Lord be judge betwixt you and us; nay the Lord has
been Judge betwixt you and us; lo here we stand on the right hand of Christ,
so, here we sit on our Throne to judge you, and that world of wicked men and
Angels; let Christ be glorious, Psalm. 109.17.18.
and let his sentence stand, and let that word of Judgment never be reversed;
he that loves cursing, let it come upon him; and he that cloatheth himself
with cursing as with a garment, let it come into his bowels like water, and
like oil into his bones? no more, but adieu souls, adieu Reprobates, adieu for
ever; you must descend, but we must ascend. Go you to Hell, whiles we mount
upwards to Heaven and Glory.

At this last word, down they go, the evil Angels falling like lightning, and
evil men haled, and pulled down with them from the presence of God, and Christ,
and Angels, and all the blessed ones; even from their fathers, mothers, wives,
husbands, children, ministers, servants, lovers, friends, acquaintance; who
shall then justly and deservedly abandon them with all detestation and
derision; and forgetting all nearness, and dearest obligations of nature,
neighborhood, alliance, any thing, will rejoice in the execution of divine
justice. Oh the shrikes, and horrid cries that now they make, filling the air as
they go! Oh the wailings and wringing of hands! Oh the desperate roarings! Oh
the hideous yellings, filling heaven, and earth, and hell! But I shall follow
them no further, no sooner do they fall into the bottomless pit, but presently
it shuts her mouth upon them, and there I must leave them.

SECT. VII. Of Christ and his Saints going up into heaven, and of the end of
this World.
7. FOR Christ and his Saints going up into heaven, and so for the end of this
world: no sooner are the Reprobates gone to their place, but the Saints ascend;
now Christ arises from his judgment seat, and with all the glorious company of
heaven, he marches toward the heaven of heavens. Oh what a comely march is
this? what songs of triumph are here sung and warbled? Christ leads the way,
the Cherubims attend, the Seraphims wait on, Angels, Archangels,
Principalities, Powers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Professors, and Confessors of God's Law and Gospel following, attend the Judge,
and King of Glory; singing with melody, as never ear has heard, shining with
Majesty as never eye has seen, rejoicing without measure as never heart
conceived. O blessed train of Soldiers! O goodly Troop of Captains! each one
does bear a palm of Victory in his hand, each one does wear a Crown of Glory
upon his head; the Church Militant is now Triumphant; with a final overthrow
have they conquered Devils, Death, and Hell; and now must they enjoy God, Life,
and Heaven; sometimes I have with much wonder and admiration beheld some
Regiments passing our streets; but had I seen those Roman Armies when they
returned Victors, and made their solemn Triumphs in the streets of Rome, oh
then how should I have then admired? never was the like sight to this of Christ
and his Army in this World. O the comely march they make, through the sky, and
through the Orbs, and through all the Heavens, till they come to the Heaven of
Heavens! were ever so many glistering Suns together in one day? was ever so
many glories together on this side the Kingdom of glory? Cant. 6.10.
not to speak of Christ, or his Angels, O who is she that looks forth as the
morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with
Banners? are not in the head of these Regiments Adam, and Abel, and Noah, and
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; and all the Patriarchs and all the Prophets, and
all the Apostles? And (if thou art a Saint that read this) art not thou one
Son appointed by God amongst the rest to follow Christ? here is enough to fill
thy heart with joy beforehand; as sure as yond Sun now shines in the Firmament
shall thou that believe pass by that Sun in its very orb, and by reason of
thy glory it shall lose it shine? oh then what spreading of beauty and
brightness will be in the heavens as all the Saints go along! what lumps of
darkness shall those glittering Stars appear to be, when all the Saints of God
shall enter into their several orbs and spheres? and thus as they march along
higher, and higher, till they come to the highest, at last heaven opens unto
them, and the Saints enter their Masters joy; what is there done at their first
entrance, I shall discover another time; only for a while let us look behind
us, and see what becomes of this nether World.

No sooner Christ and his company in the Empyreal heaven, but presently this
whole world is set on fire; To this profane Authors seem to assent, As,

1. Philosophers, especially the Stoics were of this mind. Humor primordium,
exitus ignis, said Seneca: Moisture was the beginning, and fire shall be the
end of this World. And speaking of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; mark (says he)
whatsoever now shines in comely and decent order, shall at last burn together
in one fire.

2. The Poets grant this; Lucan speaking of those whom Caesar left unburned at
the Battle of Pharsalia; Hos Caesar populos si nunc non urserit ignis, uret cum
terris. If fire shall not now burn these, when Heaven and Earth, and all shall
burn, then must they burn. -- Ovid in like manner, Esse quoque in fatis -- quo
mare, quo tellus -- ardeat. A time shall come, when Sea, and earth, and all the
frame of this great World shall be consumed in flame.

3. The Sybills grant this, to which the Roman missal seems to allude, joining
them with the Prophet David, though I know not by what warrant. Dies ira, dies
illa, solvet saeculum in favilla, test David cum Sybilla.

A day of Wrath, a day of fire,
So David with the Sybills does conspire.
But to wave all these, one Text of Scripture is to me more than all these. 2
Pet. 3.10. The Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, 2 Pet. 3.10.
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up. Hence all our Divines agree, that a fire
shall seize on the Universe; only some difference is amongst Divines, whether
the World shall be wholly annihilated, or renewed by fire? Jerome and Augustine,
and many after them say, the end of this fire is for purifying and refining of
the Heaven, and Earth; for all corruptible qualities shall be burnt out of
them, but they in their substance shall remain still: if we ask them, to what
end shall this nether world be renewed? some say for an habitacle of the
restored Beasts; others for a fitter accommodation of men, Mundus in melius
immutatus aperte accommodabitur, hominibus in melius immutatis. August. de
civit. Dei. l. 20. c. 16.
and the glorified Saints; others for a perpetual Monument of God's Power and
Glory. Polanus and some of our Moderns are of Opinion, that Polan. Syntag. l.
6. c. 70.
These Heavens and this Earth when purified with those fires, and
super-invested with new endowments, they shall be the everlasting habitations
of the blessed Saints. But on the contrary, others are of the other opinion,
that all the World with all the parts and works (except Men, Angles and Devils,
Heaven, and Hell, the two mansions for the saved and damned) shall be totally
and finally dissolved and annihilated. And of this opinion were Hilary,
Clement, and all the ancients before Jerome; and of our Moderns not a few. For
my part I rather incline this way, because of the many Scriptures that are so
express, I shall only mention these. Job 14.12. Psalm. 102.25, 26. Isa. 34.4.
-- Man lies down, and rises not till the heavens be no more. -- Of old thou
have laid the foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy
hands, they shall perish, but thou shall endure. All the hosts of heaven shall
be dissolved, and the heaven shall be rolled together as a scroll, and all the
host shall fall down as the leaf falls from the Vine, Rev. 6.14.
and as a falling fig from the fig tree. To which prophecy John seems to
allude, And the heavens departed as a scrowl when it is rolled together, and
every Mountain and Island were moved out of their places. Again, Mat. 24.36. 2
Pet. 3.10.
heaven and earth shall pass away (says Christ) but my Word shall not pass
away -- The day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in the which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein, 1 John 2.17.
shall be burnt up. -- And the world passes away, and the lusts thereof; but
he that does the will of God abides for ever. -- and I saw a great white
Throne, Rev. 20.11.
and him that sat on it from whose face the earth and heaven fled away, and
they was found no place for them. Now I would demand, whether being no more, as
Job; and perishing, as David; and rolling together, and falling down like a
withered leaf, as Isay; and passing away, as our Savior, and Peter; and flying
away, as John; do not include to utter abolition? If to these Scriptures I
should add one reason, I would argue from the end of the Worlds Creation; was
it not partly for the glory of God? and partly for the use of man? now for the
glory of God, the manifestation of it is occasioned by the manifestation of the
world unto man; if man therefore should be removed out of the world, and no
creature in it be capable of such a manifestation, what would become of his
glory? And for the use of man, that is either to supply his necessity in matter
of diet, physic, building, apparel; or for his instruction, direction,
recreation, comfort, delight; now when he shall attain that blessed estate of
enjoying God, and seeing God face to face, these ends or the like must needs be
frustrate. This argument is weighty, and we need no more. Only we shall hear an
Antagonist's objections and give them their answers, and so conclude.

The Texts more especially objected against this opinion, are two; the first is
that in Romans 8.21. Romans 8.21.
The creature it self shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: here (say the^) is an earnest
expectation, attributed to brute Creatures, that they shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Children of God. But
I answer, that no immortal being of the brute creatures is here promised, but
only a simple deliverance and dismission from the servitude they were in, to
ungrateful men. The Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, do now suffer for our diet;
Horses, Mules, and beasts of that nature do now groan under the burdens of our
pleasures, or necessities; their annihilation therefore to them must needs be a
kind of deliverance; and at last they shall be delivered at the time of the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God; the Text will bear it thus. (...) pro
(...) 1 Cor. 10.2. as, sometimes (...) pro (...). Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 2.15. So
Chrysostom expounds it (...).
(...) pro (...), The Creature shall be delivered by the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God. (i.e.) When such a deliverance comes to men, these shall be
freed from their servitude by being not at all, having done all the business
for which they were ordained, or created.

The second Text is that in 2 Pet. 3.13. 2 Pet 3.13.
We look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.
These words (say some) imply a purging, rather than abolishing; a taking off
the corrupt qualities only, not the substance. But I am of another mind, and if
I must give my sense of the place, I say --

1. Negatively that by new heavens and new earth, is not meant renewed heavens
and earth; 2 Pet. 3.7, 10
is it not punctually in the seventh verse, that the heavens and the earth
which are now, are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment? and does he
not descend unto particulars in the tenth verse, that the heavens which are
now, shall pass away with a great noise? 11, 12.
that the Elements shall melt with fervent heat? and that the earth also, and
the works therein shall be burnt up? and does he not infer thereupon in the
eleventh and twelfth verses, that all these things shall be dissolved? and in
the thirteenth verse, that we are therefore to look for new heavens, and a new
earth? dissolution mends not a fabric, but destroys it; how then should that
which is dissolved be said to be reserved, and let stand? surely if Peter had
thought of this refining only, some words of his would have intimated so much.
The end of these creatures was for man's use, and man using them no more, to
what end should they be reserved? to say for a monument of what has been; or
for the habitation of the Saints; or for an outlet for the Saints, descending
sometimes from the highest heavens to solace themselves here below; are but
groundless surmises, and deserve no answer at all.

2. Positively, by new heavens, and a new earth, is meant the heaven of
heavens, and place of glory. Now these heavens are termed new, not in regard of
their new making, but of our new taking possession of them for our new
habitation; and they are called heavens and earth, because they come in stead
of that heavenly covering, and that earthly habitation which we now enjoy; so
that the Text may well bear this paraphrase, we look for new heavens (i.e.) the
supreme court of God's presence, and a new earth, (i.e.) a new habitation for
us; which shall infinitely exceed the commodities and happiness of these heavens
and earth which we now enjoy, thus John in his Revelations. Rev. 21.1.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven, and the first
earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. This new heaven, and new
earth is the place or habitation prepared for the blessed Saints and people of
God. A new heaven, where the Moon is more glorious then our Son, and the Sun as
glorious as he that made it, for it is he himself, the Son of God, the Son of
righteousness, the Son of Glory; a new earth, where all their waters are milk,
and all their milk honey; where all their grass is corn, and all their corn is
Manna; where all their glebe and clods of earth are Gold, and all their Gold of
innumerable Carats; where all their minutes are ages, and all their ages
Eternity; where every thing is every minute in the higest exaltation as good as
can be. Of these new heavens, and this new earth, I can never say enough, not
know enough, till I come there to inhabit it. Something only we shall discover
of it in our next Sections; for now are the Saints entered in with Jesus Christ.

Use.
Only one word of use; Christians! what is the matter that we are so busy about
this world? why look about you, not one of these visible objects shall that day
remain or have a being; those houses wherein we dwell, these Temples wherein we
meet, this Town, this Country, this Isle, and the Seas and waters that surround
it, shall be all on fire, and consume to nothing; the Sea shall be no more, and
time shall be no more, or if we look higher, yond Sun, and Moon, and Star,
shall be no more; that glorious Heaven which rolls over our heads, shall be
rolled together as a scrol, Isa. 34.4. Isa. 51.6.
and all the host shall fall down as a leaf falls from the Vine, and as a
falling Fig from the Fig Tree: -- the heavens shall vanish away like smoke
(says Isaiah) comminuentur in nihilum (as Hierome reads it) they shall be
battered into nothing. Alas! alas! what do we toyling all the day (it may be
all our life) for a little of this little, almost nothing -- earth? you that
have an hundred, or two hundred, or a thousand Acres, if every acre were a
Kingdom, all will be at last burnt up; so that none shall say here was Preston,
or here was London, or here was England, or here was Europe, or here was the
Globe of Earth on which men troad: let others b^ast as they will of their
inheritances, but Lord give me an inheritance above all these visibles; heaven
shall remain, when earth shall vanish; that Empyreal Heaven, those seats of
Saints, those mansions above, prepared by Jesus Christ shall never end, but for
my riches, lands, possessions movables, goods, real or personal, they will end
in smoke, in nothing; what? will thou set thine eyes upon a thing that is not?
Prove. 23.5.
upon this the primitive Christians took joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
it was but a loss a little before the time, and they knew in themselves that
they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. O let this be our care!
here we have no abiding City, but O let us seek one to come, even that one that
will abide for ever and ever, Amen.

SECT. VIII. Of Christ's surrendering and delivering up the Kingdom to God, even
the Father.
8. FOR Christ's surrendering and delivering up the Kingdom to God, even the
Father, no sooner is he in heaven but these things follow. --

1. He presents the Elect unto his Father, of this the Apostle speaks, you has
he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and
unblameable, Col. 1.12, 22.
and unproveable in his sight; to this end Christ dyed that he might wash us
and cleanse us by his blood, and then that he might present us without spot
unto his Father. We may imagine Christ as going to his Father with his bride in
his hand, and saying thus, O my Father, here is my Church, my Spouse, my Queen;
here are the Saints concerning whom I covenanted with thee from Eternity,
concerning whom I went down from heaven, and dyed on earth, and ascending up I
have interceded these many hundred years; concerning whom I went down to Judge
the World, and having sentenced them to life eternal, I now bring them in my
hand to give them the possession of thy self. These are they whom thou gave
me in the beginning of the World, and now I restore them to thy self at the end
of the World, for they are thine. Thus he presents them to his Father. Indeed
we read that Christ presents the Saints to himself, as well as to his Father,
Ephesians. 5.25.27.
Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, -- that he might present it
to himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle; but this I take it
was done before; when first a Soul believes, it is contracted to Christ, when
the soul is sentenced to glory, then is the solemnity, and consummation of the
Marriage, then does Christ present the Soul to himself; and I know not but that
the Ministers of Christ may have a part in this matter, for I have espoused you
to one husband (said Paul to his Corinthians) that I may present you as a chaste
Virgin to Christ. 2 Cor. 11 2.


And after this when Christ takes the bride home, brings her into Heaven, and
leads her by the hand into his Fathers presence; then is his last presentation,
then he presents her faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy. The word signifies leaping, springing, exalting joy: O what springing,
leaping, exalting is in heaven, when Christ takes the hand of his Bride and
gives her into the hand of his Father; q. d. O my Father, see what a number I
have brought home to thee; thou know what I have done, and what I have
suffered, and what offices I have gone through, to bring these hither; and now
my Mediatourship is done, I resign all my charge to thee again; see what a
goodly Troop, what a noble Army I have brought thee home, why all these are
mine, and all mine are thine, and all thine are mine, Joh. 17.10, 12.
and I am glorified in them; all those that thou gave me, I have kept, and
none of them is lost; see here is Adam, and Abel, and Noah, and Sem, and every
Saint from the beginning to the end of the World, the Nuptial between them and
me is solemnized? and whither should I lead them but to my Father's house, and
into my Father's presence? I have already pronounced them blessed, and the
glory which thou gave me, I have given them, Joh. 17.22.23.
that they may be one, even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be made perfect in one. Here take them from mine hands, now give them a
welcome into glory, and let them know that thou have loved them, as thou have
loved me.

2. He presents all his Commissions to his Father, as he is a Mediator (at
least by Destination) from all Eternity; Ephesians. 1.4.
were not the Saints chosen in Christ before the foundation of the World? then
was he a Mediator in the business of Election, and then was he Predestined
to be a Mediator of Reconciliation. Prove. 8.23.
I was set up from Everlasting, (i.e.) I was appointed and designed to be a
Mediator from all Eternity. Howsoever he was a Mediator virtually and
inchoatively from the Fall of Adam; then did he undertake that great
Negotiation of reconciling God to man, and man to God; and actually he was a
Mediator after his Incarnation; for then was he manifested in the flesh, then
was he manifested to be what before he was, then did he act that part visibly
upon earth, which before he had acted secretly and invisibly in heaven; then he
entered upon the work of his active and passive obedience; then he discharged
his Prophetical and Priestly office here on Earth, which having done, then he
entered upon his Kingly Administration in Heaven. Now as to this work he was
called by God ( him has God the Father sealed; John 6.27.
it pleased the Father by him to reconcile all things to himself. Colos. 1.19.
And as to these offices severally he had Commission from God, ( the Lord has
anointed me to Preach good tidings unto the meek; and the Lord has sworn,
Isa. 61.1. Psalm. 110.4. Psalm. 110.1.
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever; and the Lord said unto my
Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.) So
now he comes with all his Commissions in his hand, and he delivers them all up
unto his Father again. In this case it is with Christ as with some General,
whom the King sends forth with Regal Authority to the War, who having subdued
the Enemy, he returns in Triumph, and all being finished he makes a surrender
of his place; thus Christ having discharged all his offices imposed on him, now
the work is finished, he leaves his function by delivering up his Commissions
to his Father. Rev. 21.23.
In Heaven there is no need of Sun or Moon, that is, as some interpret, there
is no need of Preaching, or Prophesying; of the Word or Sacraments, for the
Lamb is the light thereof, Christ is the only means of all the communication
that the Elect there shall have; and as for his Regal Office, 1 Cor. 15.24.
the Apostle is express, then shall he deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the
Father. Only here is the question, how is Christ said to resign his Kingdom to
God the Father? Luke 1.33. Heb. 1.8.
for says not the Scripture, that Christ's Kingdom shall have no end? and that
Christ's Throne is for ever and ever? for answer, I see no contradiction but
that Christ may both resign his Kingdom, and yet reserve it. See a like case,
Mat. 28.18.
All Power, says Christ, in heaven and earth is given to me of my Father:
shall we say now that the Father himself was quite stripped of it? no; but as the
Kingdom which the Father gave the Son is nevertheless called the Father's
Kingdom, or the Kingdom of God; so Christ shall return it, yet retain it also.
Two things (we say) are contained in the Term of Reign, sci. Dominion, and
Execution; to wear the Crown, and to bear the Scepter: now Christ in the former
sense shall reign for ever, the honor of dominion and of wearing the Crown he
shall never resign up to his Father, for his Fathers Throne disturbs not his,
there are both their Thrones at once, Rev. 7.11. but the functions of a King,
to sit in Judgment, to reward deservers, to punish evildoers, to rescue the
oppressed, to fight with the enemy, Christ in this sense shall cease to reign,
and shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father.

More particularly, Christ is said to deliver up the Kingdom in three respects.

1. Because he cease to execute that Authority, which nevertheless he has;
as a Judge that goes from the Bench is a Judge still, although he gives no
judgment, but imployeth his time about other occasions; so Christ is said to
resign his place, not that his Authority is subject to Diminution, but in that
he makes no show; for when his enemies are all put under, there is no need that
any more blows should proceed from his Kingly power.

1. Because the manner of his Kingdom after the judgment day shall be wholly
changed; he shall not Reign in the same fashion that he did before; there is no
need in heaven of good Laws to keep men from starting into wickedness; the
orders of this life are changed into a new kind of Government, and in that
respect he is said to give over the Kingdom.

3. Because he cease to increase his Dominion. In this World Christ was still
gaining more souls to his Kingdom by the Preaching of his Word, and so he
spread his dominion further, and further; but when the Lord shall have made up
the number of his Servants to his mind, then he will end the World, and give up
the Kingdom, (i.e.) he will cease to enlarge his confines any more, he will be
content with the number of his Subjects that he has already. Here is the
Second thing, Christ presents all his Commissions to his Father, he gives up
his Priestly, Prophetical, and regal offices at his first entrance into heaven.

4. He presents himself unto his Father; not only his offices but Christ
himself is presented, and subjected unto God. This I take it, is the meaning of
the Apostle, when he says, then shall the Son also be Subject unto him, 1 Cor.
15.28.
that put all things under him. The words are mystical, and therefore we had
need to understand them soberly, and according to the Analogy of Faith. The
Arrians hence inferred, that the Son was not equal with the Father, because he
that is subject must needs be inferior to him whose Subject he is. But the
Answer is easy, Christ is considered either as God, or as man, and Mediator
betwixt God and Man; Christ as God has us Subject to him, and is Subject to
none; but Christ as man and Mediator is Subject to his Father together with
us. Some would have it, that Christ is Subject to his Father in respect of his
mystical body, the Church; and that this only should be the meaning of the
Apostle, then shall the Church be Subject to the Father; but I cannot assent to
this Exposition. 1. Because the Apostle speaks expressly of Christ and of his
Kingdom. 2. Because though Christ be sometimes in Scripture read for the
Church, or for the body of Christ, yet the Son as opposed to the Father, is
never so read or understood. 3. Because we read, that he that is to be Subject,
must first, have all things Subject to himself. Now the Father does not
properly Subject or subdue all things to the Church of Christ, but only unto
Christ, and therefore the Apostle speaks of Christ's subjection to the Father;
In the same way as Christ delivers up the Kingdom to the Father, is Christ also
to be subject to his Father; but Christ delivers up his Kingdom as man, and as
mediator betwixt God and man; in these respects Christ (as we have heard) must
Reign no more, at that day his Mediatourship shall cease, and by consequence in
respect of his Mediatourship, or in respect of his humanity, he shall that day
be subject to his Father.

You will say, is not, and was not Christ always subject to his Father as man,
or as mediator betwixt God and man? how then do we limit this subjection to
that day? then (says the Apostle) shall the Son be subject.

I answer, this subjection will be then, or at that day more clearly manifested
then ever it was before; then he must surrender his Kingdom to his Father in
the sight of men and Angels; then he shall lay aside all his Offices in the
view of all; so that henceforth God shall not Reign by the humanity of Christ,
but by himself; nor shall we henceforth be subject to God through a mediator
Christ, but immediately to God himself; nor shall Christ himself reign over us
as mediator any more, for the very glory of his Majesty shall become so
illustrious, that all eyes shall see how transcendently eminent the Deity of
Christ is above all creatures, even above the humanity of Christ himself. That
a fuller view of Christ's subjection shall be at that day then ever before: we
may illustrate thus; by night the Sun Reigns or rules over us, but by the Moon;
for the light of the Moon is borrowed from the Sun, though in the night we see
not any subjection of the Moon to the Sun at all: but so soon as the Sun
rises, presently the Moon surceaseth its office of lightning others, and
becomes subject to the Sun it self; not by a new subjection, but by a
declaration of its former subjection, so that now all may see what eminency of
glory and light the Sun has both above the Stars, and above the Moon, thus it
is with God and Christ, now it is God reigns over us, but only by Christ as
Mediator; God's immediate Reign we discern not so clearly for the present; but
when the end shall come, and Christ shall surcease his Office of Mediatourship,
then shall the glory of Christ's Divinity appear more eminently, not only above
all creatures, but above the brightness of Christ's humanity it self; and in
this respect Christ then shall be Subject, if not by a new subjection, yet
certainly by a new declaration and manifestation of his subjection, so as never
was before.

Use.
O the wonders of this day! O the admirable shows in heaven, at Christ and his
Saints first entrance into heaven! O my soul, where will thou stand? or what
will thou say, when Christ shall take thee by the hand, and bring thee into the
presence of his glorious Father? when he shall present thee, and present all
his Commissions which he received for thee, and present himself unto his Father
with thee, saying, O my Father, here we are all before thy glorious Godhead;
thus far I have carried on the great work of man's Salvation, and now all is
done according to the Covenant betwixt thee and me; lo here all the Saints
which by decree thou gave me before the world was made; lo here all the
Commissions which I received from thee in order to their Salvation; lo here the
humanity which thou gave me when I came into the World; such were the sins of
my redeemed ones, and grown to such an height, that Sacrifice and offering thou
would not have, but a body thou preparedst for me, Heb. 10.5.
and lo here I present all these before thee; come, take thy Commissions, and
be thou all in all; we praise thee O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.
Come welcome me, and welcome mine, we all stand here before thy glorious
Throne, and expect every way as high an entertainment as Heaven, or the God of
heaven can afford us. O my soul, what joy will possess thee at this passage? be
sure now thy danger is over, and thy arrival is safe, neither shall it ever be
heard, friend how came thou hither? for the Lord himself will run unto thee,
he will hug thee and embrace thee, mouth on thy mouth, eyes on thy eyes, and
hands on thy hands; and each hand shall clap for joy, each harp shall warble,
each knee shall bend and bow, and each heart be merry and glad. O for the day!
Oh when will the day come on, when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to the
Father!

SECT. IX. Of Christ's Subjection to the Father, that God may be all in all.
1 Cor. 15.28.
9. FOR the end of Christ's Subjection to his Father that God may be all in all.
Surely this is the meaning: Christ therefore Subjects himself unto his Father,
that God himself might be all in all; that God may no more Reign by a Deputy,
or by a Christ, but that immediately and perfectly he may reign by himself, so
that every one may see him face to face. Here we enjoy God (as it were) by
means as in the use of the Word, and Sacraments, and the like, but when that
Kingdom (where these Administrations are made use of) shall be delivered up,
then shall God himself be all in all, without means, without defect, without
end.

It is observable that Christ in his mediatory Kingdom has some such things as
bear an Analogy to the means and instruments of governing in the Kingdoms of
men; As, 1. He has his Militia and his Laws, with threatenings and promises, in
the ordinances of his Word. 2. He has his grants, and seals, with many
privileges to confirm his people in the Ordinances of his Sacraments. 3. He
has his Officers and Ambassadors for the management of spiritual affairs in
the Ordinances of his Ministry; but the ceasing of Christ's Kingdom is the
ceasing of all these; and he therefore cease his Kingdom that God may
immediately succeed all these; without any means, or without any Mediator at
all, he himself may be instead of all; or all in all.

In prosecution of this, I shall discuss. 1. The meaning, what it is for God to
be all in all. 2. The particulars, wherein more especially is God all in all.

1. For the meaning; it is a periphrasis of our complete enjoyment of God: that
God may be all in all, is as much as to say, that we may enjoy God alone to all
purposes, neither wanting nor willing any thing besides himself; for a person
to be all in all to me, it is to have an enjoyment of that person to all
purposes, so that I neither do; nor need I to enjoy any thing besides himself;
thus God is to the Saints in glory, he is their exceeding great reward; they
need nothing else besides himself, their very droughts of happiness is taken in
immediately from the fountain, and they have as much of the fountain as their
souls in their widest capacity, can possibly hold.

2. For the particulars, wherein more especially is God our all in all? I
answer.

1. In our enjoying God immediately; here we enjoy God by means; either he
communicates himself unto us through his Creatures, or through his Ordinances,
and hence it is, that we know him but in part, we see him but in a glass
darkly; 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2.
but when he shall be our all in all, we shall see him face to face; we shall
then see God as he is clearly and immediately. Oh how excellent is this
enjoyment above all present enjoyments here below? as the enjoyment of a friend
in his picture, letters, tokens, is short of what we enjoy when we have his
personal presence; or as the heat and light of the Sun through a cloud is
beneath that heat and light when the glorious body of it is open to us without
any interposition; even so all the enjoyments of God in the use of means,
graces, blessings, ordinances are infinitely inferior to that enjoyment of God
which shall be without all means; all the ravishments of our spirit in prayer,
hearing, reading, meditating, is but a sip of those Rivers which we shall have
in heaven. I know the remembrance of God in a private meditation is sweet,
Psalm, 104.34. and communion with God in any Ordinance is a feast of sweetness
and marrow, and fatness. Psalm. 63.5, 6. But when the soul shall immediately
possess God, when this Kingdom of grace shall expire, and all the
Administrations of it shall vanish away, will not the fountain be much more
sweet then all the streams? surely feasts, and sweetness, and marrow, and
fatness, are terms exceedingly too diminitive to give us any more than a small
hint of that incomprehensible satisfaction by immediate communion. O the
wonders of Heaven! there shall be Light without a candle, and a perpetual day
without a Sun, there shall be health without physic, and strength of Body
without use of food; there shall be knowledge without Scriptures, and settled
government without a written Law; there shall be Comunion without Sacraments,
and Joy without promises to be its fuel; the soul in glory shall go straight
unto God, and immediately perticipate his glory and happiness. It Is the
comparison of a Learned Divine, suppose you saw a company of Crystal Globes
placed in a parallel line, because their posture will not admit the Suns
immediate beams; we'll suppose another single Globe set by the middle of them,
to transmit the Sunbeams unto all those Globes, by this means they all shine,
though it be only by reflection; but when the Sun shall so come about, as that
they may immediately receive its beams, there is no further use of the single
Globe then; so here, while we through our distance from God are incapable of
immediate enjoyment, there is a necessity of Christ's Mediation, but when all
things that cause the distance are removed, and we brought into the
presence chamber of God himself, there is no such need of a Mediator then. Now
here is one thing, wherein he is our all in all, shall enjoy him immediately.

2. It consists in our enjoying of God fully. Now I know in part (says the
Apostle) but then I shall know, even as I am known; 1 Cor. 13.12.
our enjoyment of God is but here in its infancy, there it will be in its full
age; here it is in drops, there it will be in the Ocean, here we see God's back
parts, and we can see no more, but there we shall see his face, not his second
face (as some distinguish) which is his grace and favor enjoyed by Faith, but
his first face, which is his Divine essence enjoyed by sight. Yet I mean not
so, as if the soul which is a creature could take in the whole Essence of God
which is incomprehencible; but the soul shall, and must be so full of God, as
that it shall not be able to receive, or desire one jot more. And oh how
excellent is this enjoyment above all present enjoyments? it is now our highest
happiness to have some glimpses of his glory shining on us, and some drops of
his favor distilled into us, oh but when God shall be our all in all, we shall
have as much of God as our souls can hold, we shall have the glory of God so
poured in, till we shall be able to receive no more. And here is that which
gives the soul a full satisfaction; never would it be satisfied till it came to
this; suppose that God would draw out all the beauty, sweetness, goodness that
he has communicated to all Creatures in the world, and bring the quintessence
of all, and communicate that unto the soul of one poor Saint, certainly it
would not serve the turn, there must be a greater comunication before the soul
be fully satisfied and rest content; only once admit it into the glorious
presence of him who is all in all, and presently it expires its infinite desire
into the bosom of that God; for there is enough to fill his spirit, he cannot
desire so much, but there is more and yet infinitely more; if there be enough
in God for the sprrits of all just men made perfect with God, if there be
enough in God for Angels whose capacities are greater than the Saints, if there
be enough in God for Jesus Christ, whose capacity is yet far wider than the
Angels, if there be enough in God for God himself, whose capacity is infinitely
greater than them all; then there must needs be satisfaction enough in God to
any one poor soul. Here is another thing wherein God is our all in all, we
shall enjoy him fully.

3. It consists in our enjoying God solely. Not as if there were nothing else
in Heaven but only God; but that God in Heaven shall be all in all, and
instead of all; it is God in Heaven that makes Heaven to be Heaven; the Saints
blessedness, and Gods own blessedness does consist in the enjoyment of God
himself; the Schoolmen tells us, that we shall not properly enjoy any thing
else but only God; we may have some use of the Creatures, but no fruition; and
therefore is God said to be all, or as good as all. And indeed what can we
imagine to be in Heaven, which is not eminently in God himself: if it be
greatness, power, and glory, and victory, and majesty, all these are his; if it
be joy, or love, or peace, or beauty, or any thing amiable or desirable, all
these are in him. Hence some take it to be David's meaning, when he said, he
had none in Heaven but God; Psalm. 73.25.
that the sole enjoyment of God, (of God, and of nothing else but God) is the
souls true happiness, when it is at highest; whom have I in heaven but thee?
whom? why there are Angels, there are Saints, there are the spirits of just and
perfect men; are these nothing with David? O yes! all these are good, but they
are not able to satisfy a soul without God himself. Whether God will make use
of any Creatures for our service then? or if any, of what Creatures? and what
use? is more than I yet know; but to make up a full enjoyment there is required
a gracious-glorious presence, a sweet effusion or communication of that
presence, a just comprehension of the excellency of that communication, a
perfect love, and a perfect rest in the love of whatsoever it is we comprehend;
now this is proper only to God; it is he only that fills the whole capacity of
the Soul, it is he that so fills it that it can hold no more, it is he only
that is the object of love intended to the utmost, and therefore he only is
properly enjoyed, he only is possessed with a full contentment as portion
enough, and as reward enough for the soul for ever.

But shall not the Saints have to do with something else in Heaven, but only
with God? O yes! I believe there shall be in Heaven a communion of the blessed
Spirits in God, an association of the Saints and Angels of God: yet this shall
not take away the sole enjoyment of God, that he should not be their all in
all. For they shall not mind themselves or their own good as created things,
but altogether God; they shall not love them or one another as for themselves,
but only for God; here we love God for himself, and it is a gracious love; but
there we shall love our selves for God, and it is a glorious love; why this is
to enjoy God solely, in this respect he is all, and in all; whom have I in
Heaven but thee?

Here Is a point enough to wean us to the World. Alas! the time is coming on a
pace, Use.
that all this World shall be dissolved, and then God shall be all in all; here
lies the Saints happiness to have God immediately, God fully, and God solely;
and will not Saints prepare themselves for such a condition as this? you that
have the World, use it as if not, 1 Cor. 7.31.
for the fashion of this World passes away; and you that have but a little to
do with the World, improve that condition; surely it is your own fault if you
have not more to do with God, for you have little else to take up your hearts;
God may dwell and walk in your hearts without disturbance, give me neither
poverty nor riches (says the wise man upon that account) a mean condition is
more capable of happyness than that which over-loads us with outward things;
whilst others are casting up their accounts, you may say with David, how
precious are thy thoughts unto me O God? Psalm. 139.17.
how great is the sum of them? whilst others are following their suits at
courts of Justice, you may follow all you have at a Throne of grace; whilst
others are numbering their Flocks and Herds, all your Arithmetic may be
employed to number your days; whilst others cannot get out of the clutches of
the world, you may get into the embraces of your God; why, this is to prepare
your selves for fuller and fuller enjoyments of God; it is God will be all in
all, and this is the very top of Heavens happyness; surely the less you have of
the World now, if you can but improve it, the more you may have of Heavens
happiness even upon earth: for what is the happiness of Heaven, but the sole
enjoyment of God? Christians! if you feel any inclinations, pantings,
breathings after this world, give me leave to tell you, that you will never be
happy till you have lost all, till you have no friends, nor estates, no
enjoyment but God alone; when all his done, when this world is nothing, when
means shall cease, both for bodies and souls, and when Christ shall cease his
Mediators office, and the Son of man be Subject to his Father, then God shall
be all in all.

SECT. X. Of Christ's (notwithstanding this) being all in all to his blessed,
saved, redeemed Saints, to all Eternity.
10. FOR Christ's being all in all to his blessed, saved, redeemed Saints to
all Eternity; we shall dilate in this Section. Some may object, if God be all
in all, what then becomes of Christ? is not this derogatory to Jesus Christ? I
answer no, in no wise; for --

1. It is not the Father personally and only, but the Deity essentially and
wholly that is our all in all, when we say God is all in all, we do not exclude
the Son, and holy Ghost, for the whole Godhead is all in all to all the
Saints, as well as the first person in the Trinity; the Father is all, and the
Son is all, and the holy Ghost is all; and in that Christ is God, and the Son
of God, we may say of Christ, that he is all in all only the truth of this
position is not from the humane nature but from the divine nature of Jesus
Christ.

2. It is not derogatory to Christ, but rather it does exceedingly advance
Christ in the thoughts of all his Saints; while it was necessary Christ veyled
his Deity, and when his work of Mediation is fully finished, Christ then shall
reveal his Deity to his Saints more then ever before. In this respect might I
say if any person in the Trinity receives more honor than other, Christ should
have most; Rev. 5.13.
every Creature which is in heaven heard, I say, blessing, honor, glory, and
power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever; not only unto God, but particularly to the Lamb for ever and ever. It is
true, that God only, and God fully, and God immediately is all in all, but does
that hinder that Jesus Christ is not also only, fully, and immediately all in
all? see how the Scripture joins them together, Rev. 21.22, 23.
which plainly argues that they may consist, I saw no Temple in the City, for
the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it, and the City had no
need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God does
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

Now then as I have spoken of God, so that I may speak of Christ, and conclude
all with Christ, I assert this Doctrine, that the glory of Christ which the
Saints shall behold in Christ to all eternity is their all in all. In the
discussion of which I shall open these particulars. 1. What is the glory of
Christ? 2. How the Saints shall behold his glory. 3. Wherein is the
comprehensiveness of this expression, that the beholding of Christ is our all
in all.

1. What is the glory of Christ? I answer, that the glory of Christ is either
humane, or divine.

1. There is an humane glory, which in time was more especially conferred upon
his manhood.

2. There is an essential or divine glory, which before time and after time,
even from everlasting to everlasting issues from the Godhead; I shall speak
to both these, that we may rather take a view of Christ in those glories (as we
are able) wherein he will appear to his Saints as their all in all to all
Eternity.

1. For his humane glory, that is either in regard of his Soul, or body; for
his Soul, Christ was from the first instant of his conception full of glory,
because even then he received grace, not by measure, as we do, but as
comprehension, he had the clear vision of God, even as the Angels of heaven,
which arose from that hypostatical union of two natures at his first
conception. It is true, that by the special dispensation of God, the fullness
of thy accompanying that glory was withheld from Christ in the time of his
passion, and the redundancy of glory from his soul unto his body was totally
deferred until the exaltation of Christ; but Christ no sooner exalted, and set
on the right hand of God, but immediately the interruption of joy in his soul,
and the interception of glory from his soul to his body, was altogether
removed. Then it was that his soul was filled with all joy, solace, pleasure,
which could possibly flow from the sight of an object so infinitely pleasing,
as is the essence, Majesty, and glory of God And then it was that his body was
replenished with as much glory as was proportionable unto the most vast
capacity of any creature; not only his soul, but his body is a glorious
Creature; it is (...), a body of glory, that is a most glorious body in it
self. And the spring of glory unto others, ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, Luke 24.26.
and so to enter into his glory? it is called his glory, as if it were
appropriated unto him as the most eminent subject, and principal efficient of
glory; as if he had the monopoly of glory: all the glory in heaven is in some
sort his glory. Surely Christ's manhood is exalted unto an higher degree of
glory than the most glorious Saint or Angel ever was, or shall be;
principalities, powers, mights, and dominions fall short of his glory.

But some object, that the mediatory office of Christ shall wholly cease, and
that the body and soul of Christ shall then be annihilated.

Indeed this was the opinion of Eutiches, that the human nature of Christ
should be changed or converted into the divine; and thus he interprets that
Scripture, then shall the Son also himself be subject, that God may be all in
all, what is this subjection, (says he) but a conversion of the Creature into
the very substance, 1 Cor. 15.28.
or essence of the Creator himself? Vt ipsam subjectionem communicationem and
conversionem credat futuram creaturae in ipsam substantiam vel essentiam
creatoris. Aug. de Trinit. lib. 1 c. 8. and Aret. in loco. Job. 19.27. 2 These.
1.10.
But we deny the interpretation; the Son as man shall be subject, and yet the
manhood of Christ shall still remain: it is true that his Mediatory office
shall wholly cease, but it follows not that therefore the manhood of Christ
shall be converted or changed into the Deity; there may be other reasons for
the continuation of his human nature besides the execution of his Mediatory
office; As, 1. That the luster of his Deity might shine through his humanity,
and that thereby our very bodily eyes may come to see God, as much as is
possible for any creature to see him, I shall see him (says Job) not with
other, but with these same eyes; 2. That the Saints may see how the power of an
infinite God can conveigh the luster of his Deity into a Creature; upon this
account I verily believe, that Angels and Men will be continually viewing of
Jesus Christ, he shall come to be admired of the Saints; he shall be admired
(as we have heard) at the Judgment-day; nor is that all, but the Saints in
heaven shall see with their eyes such excellencies in Christ, as that they
shall admire for ever; I say for ever, as much as they did at the first moment
when they saw him; here if we see any thing excellent, we admire at first, but
after a while we do not so, but in heaven there will be so much excellency in
Christ, that we shall admire as much to all Eternity, as we did at the very
first moment; there will be no abatement in glory of our being taken with the
sight of the glory in Jesus Christ. 3. That Christ by his humanity may converse
more freely, and familiarly with his brethren in his Fathers house; oh the
intimacy that will be there betwixt Jesus Christ and his Christian Saints! oh
the mutual rejoicing and delight that will be there betwixt Jesus Christ and
his dearest darlings! as Christ from Eternity rejoiced in the habitable part of
his Earth, so will the Saints (his habitable Earth) to all eternity rejoice in
Christ; the eye of the Saints in glory can never be off Christ as Mediator and
God; now the eye of the Saints in glory shall never be off Christ as God and
Mediator then. Thus far of his human glory.

2. For his Essential divine glory, it is that glory which Christ has as God:
this he never laid aside, but as the Sun in a dark gloomy day may not send
forth its beams, so Christ the Son of righteousness in the time of his abode
upon earth (except a little glimps only in his transfiguration) did not send
forth his glorious beams; but hereafter the body or humanity of Christ shall
not hinder the breaking forth of all his divine glory. No sooner the Son
subject, and his Mediatory office discharged, but Christ, as God will
manifestly put forth his more immediate glory to all his Saints. Behold, now we
are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear, what we shall be, but we know
when he shall appear we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2.
for we shall see him as he is. Mark it, when he shall appear, at, and after
the Resurrection day, we shall see him as he is, (i.e.) we shall see the very
essential glory of Jesus Christ. Quest.
But what is the essential glory of Christ? I cannot answer, it is a question
not to be resolved by all the men in the World; we know little of the glory of
Saints, how should we know any thing of the essential glory of Christ as God?
Answ.
The Scriptures say, that God spoke to Moses face to face, yet God tells him
thou can not see my face, and he favors him so far as to tell him the
reason, for there shall no man see my face and live, Exodus 33.11, 20.
q. d. No man in this life, he must first dye, and be changed, and then he
shall have a peculiar revelation of the divine Majesty; then he shall see him
as he is; but how that is, I cannot tell; come, let us question this no
further; surely it is a mercy that this infinite glory is not discovered to us;
for as a weak eye is not able to behold the Sun, or to see in it rota, (as the
Schoolmen speak) in that wheel or circle wherein the Sun does run, but only in
the beams of it; no more can we see Christ as God in his glorious essence, or
in his essential glory, but only in the beams thereof in his Word and Effects;
if now we know so little of spirits and spirituals, oh then how little do we
know of him who is the Father of Spirits? I shall say no more therefore, let us
be content to be ignorant of these things, till we enter into the confines of
Eternity.

But whether shall this glorious Essence, or Essential glory of Christ be more
seen, or manifested, at, or after the day of judgment, then ever it was before?
Quest:
I answer. --

I believe it will. Answ. Dr. Annesly Communion with God.
Some tell us of several periods wherein the glory of Christ is still more and
more seen; as, 1. In this life we may see it in part, thus David speaks of
himself, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, to see thy
power, and thy glory, as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary; but this sight is
very dim, we see only now as through a glass darkly. The second period is
betwixt our dissolution and resurrection; 1 Cor. 13.12.
and then shall we see the essential glory of Christ more immediately and
fully, our creeping apprehension of God shall then be elevated, and our
distance from God shall then be shortened, and all the riddles of grace and of
Jesus Christ shall then be opened. This sight is so great, that if a soul
should come from heaven to declare it, neither could that soul express it, nor
we understand it; we read of Lazarus, whose soul Christ returned into his body,
whom much people of the Jews came purposely to see, that they might hear
stories of the other World, but not a word from him of any such matter; Paul's
rapture may satisfy with the reason of it, he heard there (...), wordless
words, 2 Cor. 12.4.
such words as could not possibly be repeated on earth, and yet all this is but
a second step to the full vision of Christ's essential glory. The third period
is at the Resurrection, and during the time of the last Judgment, and then we
shall see more of his glory; Camero affirms that it is no curiosity to say, that
the Saints and Angels in heaven had a new glory by the exhibition of Christ,
the great mystery of the Incarnation being thereby better known; and we may as
safely affirm, that the Saints shall have a new glory, by new visions of the
glory of Christ at the day of Resurrection; they shall then see the solemnity
of heavens glory carried on by Christ in his glorious actings; and all that
ever the soul saw before in being with Christ in Heaven till the Resurrection,
shall be swallowed up with the sight of this glory of Christ at the
Resurrection-day. The last period is after the Resurrection, and that shall
continue even to all Eternity; now all the manifestations of Christ's glory
before this, are but as a few green ears rubbed in our hands, so that the full
crop or the full harvest is yet behind. But this is that (which as we told you
before) we cannot tell, though we had the tongues of men and Angels. Thus far
of the first point, what is the glory of Christ.

2. How shall the Saints behold this glory? I answer, As Christ has a twofold
glory, so there is a twofold manner of beholding it, (i.e.) ocular and mental.

1. There is an ocular vision, a sight of Christ with our very eyes, Job. 19.27.
whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold him; with these eyes
in our heads we shall one day behold the human glory of Christ; I doubt not we
shall behold the beauty of Heaven, the shining bodies of the Saints, but above
all, our very eyes shall delightfully contemplate Christ's glorious body; and
indeed this shall drown all the other sights, if any think that Christ's
glorious body shall be too intensive, and too extraordinary a brightness for
our weak eyes; let such consider that --

1. The eye in heaven shall be glorified; now glorification adds a singular
excellency to the faculties, it advances the faculties, and raises them to an
higher pitch of excellency; glorification adds a greater capacity to the eye
then ever it had before. In this world there is a difference in our eyes and
sight; a man of a clear sight sees more things, and more of every thing then a
dark sight does; so a glorified eye sees more of things then our eyes now can
see; it shall be enlarged exceedingly to take in objects which now it cannot
receive; glorification adds strength to the faculties both internal, and
external, so that the eye shall be able to look on the glory of Christ, not
with difficulty, but with contentment; in this World every sense we have is apt
to be destroyed by excellent Objects, and the more excellent, and transcendent
the object is, the more it hurts and destroys the sense; as the Sun by its
brightness darkens the eye, and other things by mighty sounds bring deafness to
the ear; Paul indeed had a vision of glory, but because his faculties were not
glorified, he was he knew not how, whether in the body or out of the body,
whether alive or dead, he did not know; certainly the sight of the glory of the
other world would amaze, distract, and destroy us, if we had a sight of it as
now we are; but in heaven the eye shall have great pleasure in beholding the
brightest light, because it shall be advanced to the highest pitch of strength
that may be.

2. As the eye shall be glorified, so it shall act in a glorified body, and
this will make the sight of the glory of Christ in stead of hurting us, to
leave upon us, a more sweet, enlivening, and powerful impression. By this means
all the impediments that hinder the conveyance of divine influences from that
heavenly object will be removed. To illustrate this, let the most excellent
sight be set before a man that is defective in his bodily state, and it does
not take him; what should a sick man do with such things? he makes nothing of
the most pleasant gardens, orchards, buildings, nor of the most glorious sights
that are; when he is sick, they are but sick things to him, and of none effect;
but in heaven the body shall be glorified, and stripped of all corruptions and
imperfections, so that there shall be no bar unto the influences of the glory
of Christ which shall there be seen.

3. As there shall be a glorified eye acting in a glorified body, so it shall
be acted by a glorified Spirit; the eye is but the organ or instrument of
sight, and without the spirit would conveigh no more then a glass does; it is
the Spirit of a man that gives life to vision, it is the Spirit of a man that
discovers things, and sets them forth in their worth, virtues, ends; now in
heaven the spirit of men shall be glorified, and enabled to perform all those
offices in perfection; so that when a man shall look on the man Christ Jesus by
virtue of a glorified spirit, he shall see more, know more, taste more than any
other can; As a man of understanding when he looks on a diamond, or a wedge of
gold he has other apprehensions of it, and a further touch upon his spirit,
then a beast or a child in a cradle has; so where the sight of the eye is
acted by a glorified mind, it takes in more from the sight of every thing which
is to be seen (unexpressibly more) then what can be done here by the most
sanctified Spirit in the World. Now in these respects Christ's glorified body
(though it be the brightest visible thing in the Heaven of Heavens) yet may it
be the object of the eye of Saints, for they shall have glorified eyes, in
glorified bodies, and acted by their glorified spirits.

2. There is a mental vision, a sight of Christ by the eyes of our
understandings; and surely this exceeds the former, the eye of the body is only
on the body of Christ, but the eye of the soul is on the body and soul, on the
Humanity and Deity of Jesus Christ. This is the very top of heaven, when Saints
shall be illightned with a clear and glorious sight of Christ as God; Divines
usually call it, Beatifical vision.

Quest.
But how shall Saints behold the glorious Essence, or Godhead of Christ?

Answ.
1. Some say, Christ as God, or the Godhead of Christ shall be known by the
Humanity of Christ; such a luster of his Deity shall shine through his
humanity, as that thereby, and by no other means shall the Essential glory of
Christ appear.

2. Others say, That besides the Humanity of Christ there shall be a species
representing the Divine Essence of Christ, and a light of glory elevating the
understanding by a Supernatural strength; and that thereby the glorious Essence
of Christ shall be discovered.

3. Others say, That the Divine Essence shall be represented to the glorified
understanding, not by Christ's humanity, nor by any species, but immediately by
it self, yet they also require a light of glory to elevate and fortify the
understanding by reason of its weakness, and infinite disproportion and
distance from the incomprehensible Deity.

4. Others hold, that to the clear vision of Christ as God, there is not
required a sight of Christ's humanity as the first suppose; nor a species
representing the Divine Essence, as the second suppose; nor any created light
elevating the understanding, as the third suppose; but only a change of the
natural order of knowing; It is sufficient (say they) that the Divine Essence
be immediately represented to a created understanding; which though it cannot
be done according to the order of nature, as experience tells us, (for so we
conceive things as first having passed the sense and imagination) yet it may be
done according to the order of Divine grace. I shall not enter into these
Scholastical disputes, 1 Cor. 13.12. Rev. 22.4.
it is enough for a sober man to know that in heaven we shall see him face to
face, his Servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face.

Quest.
His face, what is that? I answer --

Answ.
1. They shall see Christ as God, of the same Essence with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, and yet a distinct Person from them both; they shall see the Unity
in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; they shall see how the Son is begotten of the
Father, and how the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son; they
shall see the difference between the generation of the Son, and procession of
the Spirit. These are mysteries in which we are blind and know very little or
nothing, but in seeing his face we shall see all these.

2. They shall see Christ at their first being, or principle of all the good
that is in the World; they shall see how all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made; they shall see all the good
in the creature as flowing from Christ, John 1.3.
and as contained in the absolute perfection of Christ's Divine Nature; they
shall see in one Christ all the excellencies of all the creatures united, which
is indeed to see him in his eminency if there be any beauty, riches, honor,
goodness in any creature, that is eminently, transcendently, and originally in
Christ, and that shall be seen.

3. They shall see Christ in all his ways, counsels, decrees, executions,
transactions, from everlasting to everlasting; that great business of Election
and Reprobation will then be discovered; it is an expression of Augustine, They
shall then see the reason why one is Elected, and another Reprobated; why one
is rich, and another poor; they shall then see all the works that ever God did,
or that ever God will do; it is not yet Six thousand years since the creation
of the World, and what is Six thousand years to Eternity? certainly the truth
of Origen's opinion touching the existency of other worlds before this, Orig.
l. de Prin cipiis 3. c. 5.
and the future succession of other Worlds after this, will then be known. If
no worlds, before this, yet if God in Christ has done such great things in
only Six thousand years what he may do in the next Six thousand years, and so
in the next Six thousand years, who now can tell? we see not these things, but
the Saints in seeing the face of Christ shall see all things.

4. They shall see Christ in all his glory, ways, counsels, decrees,
executions, transactions, as working for their happiness. Now this (...) more
then the former; there is a great deal of difference in seeing an object as
excellent in it self, and in seeing an object as conducing to my happiness; As
one that is a stranger, and another is an heir rides over such a demesgne; the
stranger rides over it, and takes delight to see the situation, rivers, trees,
and fruits, but the heir looks upon it after another manner, this (says he) is
the land for which my Father laid out so much, and all to enrich me, and all to
bestow it on me, as my Inheritance. So the Saints admitted into the glorious
sight of Christ, they take not only a view of Christ, of the Essential glory of
Christ, of the transactions of Christ, things excellent in themselves, but they
see all these as to make them happy; they say of Christ, and of all his
actings, these are mine, and for my happiness; A stranger may look upon a King,
and see beauty and Majesty, and glory, and honor in him, but the Queen looks
upon the King and his beauty as her own; so the Saints look upon the King of
Heaven, they see Christ, and all in Christ as their own, to make them happy for
ever and ever.

5. They shall see Christ as he is; but what? do we not see him now as he is?
oh no: 1 John 3.2.
we now see him not as he is indeed and truth, but only as he is in hearsay,
and report; we now see him only as he is shadowed out to us in the Gospel of
peace; and what is the Gospel, but the pourtraiture of the King, which he sent
to another Land to be seen by his Bride? so Kings and Queens on earth woo one
another; whilst the Bride is on earth, she never sees him as he is in his best
Sabbath-Royal Robe of immediate glory, she sees him rather by the second hand,
(i.e.) by messengers, words, mediation; he rather sends his pourtraiture, then
comes himself; but in heaven the Saints see him as he is, they see Christ
himself in his own very person; they see the red and white in his own face;
they see all the inside of Christ; and thousands of excellencies shall then be
revealed, that we see not now; the mysteries of that glorious Ark shall then be
opened; his Incarnation, his two Natures in one person, his Suffering as Man,
and his sitting in the seat of God as God, all these shall be seen.

6. They shall see Christ without interruption, and without intermission to all
Eternity. If once the eye be set on the face of Jesus Christ, it will never be
taken off again. Some conceive this to be the reason why the Saints in heaven
can never fall away, because they shall have a continual view of Christ as God;
Surely to have but one glimpse of Christ in this respect, though it were gone
presently, it were a great happiness beyond all that the World affords; it was
sometimes the desire of a Philosopher to see the nature of the Sun, though he
were to be burnt by it; so if Christ should but grant us this happiness, you
shall come to see me, but the sight of me will destroy you, this were a
desirable thing; but to have such an excellent glorious sight as shall never
end; that Christ should not only pass by, but stand still, so as the soul shall
never lose his sight; O how glorious is this? if a man do but look upon a
delightful Object, he is loath to have his eye drawn from it; surely the eye of
Saints shall be eternally opened to see the divine nature of Christ; turn them
which way they will, they shall never turn aside the busied eyes of their
understanding from off the Deity of Christ; he fills heaven; he is that fair
Tree of life, the branches whereof in all that huge and capacious borders of
heaven have not room to grow in; for the heaven of heavens cannot contain him.
O the wonders of heaven. There is Abraham, Moses, Elias, the Prophets, the
Apostles, and the glorified Martyrs, but the Saints have neither leisure, nor
hearts to feed themselves with beholding of creatures; no, no; all the eyes of
heaven (which are a fair and numerous company) are upon (only, only upon) the
Lord Jesus Christ; the Father has no leisure to look over his shoulder to his
Son; the Husband has no leisure to look over his shoulder to his Wife; Christ
takes all eyes off from such created things; surely it is enough for the Saints
and Angels in heaven to study Christ for all Eternity; it shall be their only
labor to read Christ, to smell Christ, to hear, see, and taste Christ; to love,
joy, and enjoy Jesus Christ for ever and ever. Thus far of the second point,
how the Saints shall behold the glory of Christ.

3. Wherein is the comprehensiveness of this expression, that the beholding of
Christ is our all in all? I answer, --

1. It comprehends the immediate seeing and looking upon all, that Majesty and
Glory which Jesus Christ has. 2 Cor. 5.7.
In this sense Paul took it when he complained, we walk by faith, not by sight.
q. d. on earth we have faith, and in heaven we have sight; it is some comfort
that now I see Jesus Christ by faith, but comparatively to that sight which the
Saints have in heaven it is as no comfort at all; alas! I am not, I cannot be
satisfied so long as I am absent from the Lord, I look upon my self as one from
home; And as a Prince in a strange Land sits down sadly, because he has not
the sight of his Father, so I am forced to complain; O I cannot see my Lord, I
would fain behold him, I am a stranger on earth, a Pilgrim in this world, I am
not where I would be, I am absent from him whom I most desire; O I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; I walk with him here on earth by faith, but
to walk with him in the streets of heaven by sight is far better; O I long, I
pant, I breath, I desire, I think every day a year, and every year an age till
I be in heaven, at home, in my Father's arms, that I may behold and see him,
and that immediately, I say immediately in his glory. This is one way of
beholding Christ, it is an immediate sight.

2. It comprehends the fruition and enjoyment of Christ in his glory. Surely
the Saints shall not be mere idle spectators of the glory of Christ, but they
shall enjoy him, and be taken into fellowship with him: it was said of Moses,
that he did see the Land of Canaan; but he was not admitted into it; it is
otherwise with the Saints, they shall see heaven, and they shall enter into
heaven, come thou faithful servant, and enter into thy Master's joy; not only
behold it, but enter into it; they must behold Christ, and take possession of
Christ, and enjoy them as their own. And thus the word to see, or behold, is
often used in Scripture; except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom
of God, (i.e.) he cannot enjoy it: John 3.3. John 17.24.
and Father I will that those whom thou have given me be with me where I am
that they may behold my glory, (i.e.) that they may enjoy my glory; for Christ
is not only glorious in himself, but he is the spring of glory unto others: now
in this respect more especially is Christ our all in all; he is all in himself,
and if we enjoy him, he is all in all unto us: To see a little into the state
and condition of the Saints in glory in this enjoyment of Christ. --

1. They possess Christ as their own; they go to Christ, and they lay hold on
him, saying, thou art mine. It was indeed the language of the spouse whilst yet
on earth, I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine; there is a right, and a
propriety made over to her in her betrothing unto Christ, but after the
solemnity of the marriage is over, the possession is then more full; when once
the spouse comes to behold Christ in his Kindgom, she may then go boldly to her
beloved, and say, all I see is my own; I had thee in hope, but now hope is
vanished, and actual enjoyment comes in place: lo, now I have thee in my eye,
and in my heart, and in my hands, and in my arms; and as nothing shall separate
us now, for all our enemies are trod underfoot, so never will I part with thee,
so far as to be out of my eye, I will still behold thee, and in beholding I
will still possess thee, for thou art mine own.

2. They have the use of what they possess; and this is an infinite good to the
Saints; they shall not only possess Christ, but they shall have what use they
will of Christ, and of all in Christ; they shall as they please make use of his
humanity, and of his Deity, of his glorious Essence, and of his glorious
attributes; O wonder! that a Saint should come to Christ and say, O my Lord,
thou art mine, and my pleasure is to make use of thy wisdom, power, and mercy;
and that Christ should reply, and say, welcome sweet soul, use me and all my
glory as thou please, why thus it is; even as a friend will say to his
friend, make use of all I have as your own; so will Christ come to his Saints,
and bid them make use of all his riches, glory excellency, even as they will,
even to the utmost that they are capable of.

3. They have the sweet and comfort of all they use; and this makes up a
complete enjoyment. In things below we may have the possession of them, and the
use thereof, but if we have not the sweet and comfort of that we use, we cannot
be said truly or fully to enjoy those things; what is the possession and use of
meat and drink, if we taste not the sweet of them? Hence God is said to give us
all things richly to enjoy; no creature can give us richly to enjoy another,
one may give us such and such things wherein there may be comfort, but he
cannot give us comfort in such things, it is only God that can give us that; it
is so with the Saints in glory, God gives them all things, yea, Christ gives
himself to them as all in all, to enjoy him richly, fully, sweetly, to the very
uttermost. This another way of beholding Christ, it is a fruition or enjoyment
of Christ, wherein and whereby he is our all in all.

4. It comprehends all the effects and consequents of such a beholding of his
glory, which are infinite delight and complacency in the will, and all praise
and thanksgiving in the mouths of his Saints. For the first, It is disputed
whether Eternal happiness be more in the acts of the understanding, or if the
Will? and some conclude that it is principally in the will, because that is an
active appetite, arid predominant in a man, indeed the whole of a man, oh the
joy, delight, and complacency that will arise in the will upon the seeing and
beholding of Jesus Christ! they shall delight infinitely in the Essential glory
of Christ, and in the declared glory of Christ; they shall delight in all that
glory that is reflected upon Christ by all his creatures in heaven; they shall
delight in his presence, and in his love, Christ is all delights, and how then
should they but delight in Christ? for the second, as they delight in their
wills, so will their mouths be filled with praises; we read of Saints and
Angels continually praising God in heaven; there shall be none of our duties of
mourning, fasting, praising, humbling; the acts of patience and justifying
faith shall cease in heaven; but the duty of praising, and glorifying God will
contiuue to all Eternity. Methinks I see the Saints following the Lamb;
methinks I hear the familiar converses betwixt Christ and them; as Christ opens
himself to them, so they to him; first, he begins; Oh my dearest Saints, you
are they, for whom before all time I decreed this heaven, and now you see the
execution of my decrees; whiles the world stood, I was still carrying on the
work of your salvation, either in doing or suffering, or in successive works,
applying my doings and sufferings, my active and passive obedience to your
persons, and now the World is at an end, you see the end of my work, and the
end of your faith, which is the Eternal Salvation of your souls; Oh how I have
my wish, and you have your happiness; here you and I will live together, that I
may for ever behold you, and that you may for ever behold me, and my glory;
which no sooner said, but methinks I hear all those innumerable Saints in
heaven to answer, worthy is the Lamb that was slain, Rev. 5.12.
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing, and therefore unto him that loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings unto God and his Father, to
him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Rev. 1.6.
Amen. Yea, methinks I hear every creature in heaven say, blessing, honor,
glory, and power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever. Amen. Ver. 13.
Why this is their continual work in heaven; they have nothing else to do, but
with joy and gladness to sing forth the praises of God, and of Christ, and that
his mercy endures for ever. And this likewise is comprehended under that
notion of the Saints beholding of Christ, which completely makes up the
proposition asserted, that Christ, or the glory of Christ, which the Saints
shall behold to all eternity, is their all in all.

Thus far we have propounded the object which is Jesus carrying on the
Salvation of his Saints in his coming again to earth, and taking them up with
himself and his Angels into heaven; our next work is to direct you how to look
unto Jesus in this respect, and then we have done. CHAP. II.
SECT. I. Of knowing Jesus as carrying on the great work of our Salvation in
his second coming.
WHAT looking is, and what it contains, we have often heard; and that in these
respects we may look on Jesus.

1. Let us know Jesus, carrying on the Saints Salvation in his second coming,
and taking them to Heaven. Many glorious excellent things, many precious
passages, many high and heavenly carriages are in this transaction; Is it not
of high concernment that he that now sits at God's right hand interceding for
us, should thence come again to judge the World, and after judgment take up his
Saints with him into glory? can we read of the several actings of this general
Assize, and not desire to read on still? nay, is not all our reading mixed with
admiration of every passage? come! wonder, and sit, and pause, and stop, at
every word; stay and wonder, and adore that light, which appears in any beam of
truth, and in the admiration of that truth which does appear, cast thy self
down at the feet of Christ, and cry out; O the depth of Glory, and Majesty, and
goodness, and grace in thee! O the riches of love that thou should let out
thy self in these several admirable dispensations! come be exact in this study;
gather up all the crumbs and fillings of this gold; the least beams of the
glory of Christ (especially as it shines and glitters at his second coming)
have so much light, and love, and splendor in them, as that they will be very
sweet to look upon them: every piece or part of this knowledge will be of
special use and worth, yea the low and imperfect knowledge of this mystery is
of infinite more value then the high and perfect knowledge of Ten thousand
things besides. And one thing (O my soul) let me tell thee it is possible for
thee to attain a very sweet, and satisfactory degree of this very knowledge.
And therefore study close, run over again all that has been spoken, and dig
yet deeper into that glorious mine; content not thy self with a bare discovery
of that gold-oare which is only upon the superficies or top of the mine, but go
so far as to find out the inward spiritual, and experimental knowledge, which
the Saints by the light of the Spirit may come to attain. O study Christ in his
second coming to judgment.

SECT. II. Of considering Jesus in that respect.
2. LET us consider Jesus, carrying on this work of Salvation at his second
coming. It is not enough to know, but we must meditate and seriously consider
of it A mere student may know Christ, and study Christ, as he knows and studies
other things: he may keep together many notions concerning Christ, and his
coming to Judgment, but he has no impression of the holiness of Christ upon
his heart: and in this respect he is a stranger to Christ and all his actings;
alas, he studies Christ, but he does not rightly, seriously, inwardly consider
of Christ, but he does not look unto Jesus, as one that looks to his pattern,
or as one that looks to his refuge, hope, and help; true and spiritual
consideration, is a serious matter; its not some few and freeting thoughts that
are the discharge of this work, but thoughts resting, dwelling, fixing, and
staying upon Christ, until they come to some profitable issue; O it is another
manner of business then many are aware of; it is a thinking with thought upon
thought; it is a reiteration and multiplication of the thoughts of the mind upon
the Subject propounded; so the Scripture expresses it, I looked on all the
works that my hands had wrought, Eccles. 2.11, 12.
and in that next verse, I turned to see; he looked, upon and considered his
works, and he returned to behold them; he thought on them before, but now he
returned to think; he renewed his thoughts upon the matter, and took a new view
of them. Indeed when the understanding works seriously and spiritually, it will
fetch things into sight, and not only so, but it will hold them there, and
fasten upon them, Lam. 4.20.
and when they are gone, it will fetch them again, my soul has them still in
remembrance, my soul in remembering does remember them, and will not off till
the end he obtained; so a man eyes Christ, till he have more of Christ, more of
his presence, and more of his light, and more of his favor, and more of his
image. O let this be our work; let us thus consider Jesus in reference to his
second coming to judgment. And that we may do it in Order --

1. Consider Christ's preparing for judgment; realize it as if thou saw or
heardst the same; no sooner the time determined which God has appointed, but
Christ commands, make ready ye Angels to wait upon me, and make ready ye
glorious souls that now are with me; it is the Fathers pleasure, and it is my
pleasure to go down into the nether World, and to call before me all the men
and women that ever lived in it; there will I pass my doom upon all flesh, and
reward every one, good and bad, according to his works. O what a shout may I
imagine in heaven at this news! what joy is in the souls of Saints that now
they must go to their bodies, and enter into them, that both their souls and
bodies, which sometimes lived together, may now dwell together with Christ, in
glory, and never part more? if those that live on earth are commanded by
Christ, To lift up their heads, because their redemption draws nigh; how much
more shall they joy in Heaven, who also have waited for the adoption, to wit,
Romans 8.23.
the redemption of their bodies, that now the long-looked-for day is come, it
is come, O the exaltation of the Angels at this tidings! This is worthy a
pause, a Selah to be set upon it.

2. Consider Christ's coming to judgment; all now in readiness, the Son of God
comes forth with all his glorious attendants; Matt. 16.27.
For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels, and
with the souls of Saints, that for a time have been in Paradise. Oh what a
goodly sight is here! In this meditation I may see with John, Rev. 21.2.
The new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride
adorned for her husband. Down comes Christ, and down come the Angels, and down
come the spirits of the just made perfect: and as they come along, see how they
shake the Heavens, and dim, and dark the very lights of Heaven; see what a
flood of fire goes before them; see how they pass into the cloud, where Christ
makes a stand, and erects a Throne for himself to sit on. Sure 'twill be a
gilded glorious cloud, when Christ with all his celestial servants shall sit
upon it: a mornings cloud gilded with the beams of the Sun is admirably fair
and shining; but what a shining cloud is that where the Sun of righteousness
with all his morning stars do sit and shine? here is enough to dazzle my eyes,
and to take up my thoughts; O my soul think on it!

3. Consider Christ's summons of the Elect to come under judgment; no sooner in
the cloud, but He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, Mat.
24.31.
and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from the one end
of heaven to another. Will not this be a strange sight to see Christ a coming,
with Trumpets sounding before him, causing all the dead to awaken out of their
sleeps of death; the very sound of this Trumpet was ever in Jerome's ears, Arise
ye dead and come to Judgment, and no question but thy ears shall be filled with
the blast thereof; the Trumpet shall found that shall bp heard over all the
World; and then shall the dead arise out of their graves; and every Saints soul
shall re-enter into his own body, by virtue of the resurrection of Christ their
Head. Can I pass this meditation without some reflection on my self? O my soul
how joyfully will thou greet thy body, when thou shall enliven it again? how
will thou say, O my dear Sister, whom I left behind me in the dust when I went
to Heaven? how sweet is thy carcass, how comely is thy countenance? how do I
enter into thee, and animate thee, and I will never more leave thee; thou wast
my yoke fellow in the Lords Labors, and my companion in persecution and wrong;
now shall we enter together into our Masters joy? see, lift up thy head, behold
Jesus Christ yonder sitting in the cloud; and lo here the Angels waiting on us,
and coming to take us with the rest of the Saints into the Air, to meet our
Redeemer there. Could I but realize this summons, this resurrection, this
meeting of the soul and body, and going with the Angels into the judgment seat,
oh how would it work! and what work would it make within!

4. Consider Christ and the Saints meeting at the judgment day; oh how shall
the Saints look, and stare, and gaze at the beauty of Jesus Christ? oh how will
they break out into admiration at the first view of those glories which never
before appeared on this side Heaven? is not this he (will they say) of whom we
read so often, that he was fairer than the sons of men? that he was white, and
ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousands; that his countenance was as Lebanon,
excellent as the Cedars, glorious as when the Sun shines in his strength: but
was ever the half told us of what now we see, and behold? O the
super-excellent, transcendent beauty of this Son of righteousness! O the
treasures of loveliness in this Jesus Christ never seen before! And thus as
they admire, so they adore; now they begin those Hallelujahs, that never, never
shall have end; they fall at the feet of Christ, and the Lord Christ takes them
up with his hands, and folds them in his arms; oh what mutual reciprocal
salutations are these betwixt Christ and his members? oh my head! and oh my
body! oh my husband! and oh my spouse! oh my dear! and oh my darling! never two
lovers met with such heat of love, as Christ and his Saints; come, says
Christ, and sit you down here at my right hand, and let the world be on my left
hand; it was otherwise with you in your lifetime, my gold and my jewels were
then cast in the dust; you were then clothed with infamy, and the vilest of
men were then gilded with honor; but now I will set all right, now the dust
shall be swept away, and the jewels of my Kingdom shall be gathered up; now the
Goats shall be driven into the desert, and you who are the Sheep shall be
brought into my fold. Oh my soul, what a meeting is this? what a sight will
this be, to behold the Saints in this condition, and thy self amongst them?
could thou but realize this one very passage, it were enough to quench thy
lust, and to kindle a flame of pure love in thy heart to Jesus Christ; it is a
quickening, rouzing, rising, rejoicing, consideration.

5. Consider Christ sentencing the Saints for eternal glory; then shall the
books be opened, and all the good works of the Saints shall be revealed and
made known; and then shall the Judge from his Throne of Majesty (in the sight
and hearing of all the world) pronounce that sentence, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
Mat. 25.34.
q. d. Come my Saints, come with me into glory; come now from labor to rest,
from disgrace to glory, from the jaws of death to the joys of eternal life; for
my sake ye have been railed on, reviled and cursed; but now it shall appear to
all those cursed Esaus, that you are the true Jacobs that shall receive the
blessing, and blessed shall you be; come now and possess with me the
inheritance of Heaven, where you shall be for love, Sons; for birthright,
heirs; for dignity, Kings; for holiness, Priests: come, you may boldly enter
in, for my Father has prepared, and kept it for you, ever since the first
foundation of the World was laid.

O my soul, do thou not remember when sometimes thou have been at the feet of
Christ in the beauty of holiness, and there tookest in those droppings of his
spirit; which were better to thee than the feasts of Kings? do thou not
remember when sometimes thou have had the very beams of light darted from the
face of Jesus Christ, when he whispered to thy soul the forgiveness of thy
sins, saying, Fear not, thy sins shall not hurt thee, I am thy salvation? oh
what joy was then? what meltings, movings, stirrings, leapings of heart were
then in thy bosom? but was that joy any thing to this, or to be compared with
this? that was a drop, but here is an Ocean, here is fullness of joy; oh what
leapings of heart, what ravishments will be within when thou shall see thy self
in the arms of Christ, and shall receive words of life from the mouth of
Christ, in the face of all the World? what a thing will this be, when Christ
shall pass a sentence of death on others, and speak words of life unto thee?
when thou shall see him frowning upon the world (and oh those frowns will break
the heart) and shall behold him smiling in the fullness of his love upon thy
self? that Christ at such a time should be delighting-thee with all the
embraces of love, and with this sweet invitation to Heaven, Come thou blessed
inherit the Kingdom, it were enough to a spirit a soul half dead; the very
meditation of this must needs be sweet.

6. Consider Christ and the Saints Judging the rest of the world; no sooner are
the Saints sentenced, but Christ turns to the wicked, and bids them go into
everlasting fire; in which sentence the Saints shall join with Christ himself,
Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World? 1 Cor. 6.2.
when the Saints appear, it is not only by a Summons, but with commission; not
only to be judged, but to judge; not only shall they stand at Christ's right
hand, but they shall sit down on the Throne of the Son of God, to judge the
wicked Angels and the World. O the torment! O the vexation of wicked men and
Devils, when they shall see those very men whom they scorned, oppressed,
persecuted, to be now advanced, not only to glory, but to be their judges! it
is as if some Noble man had wronged some Poor man, and that the King should
therefore deliver the Noble man into the power of the poor man, Psalm. 112.10.
to take his own revenge: Surely, The ungodly shall see this, and be grieved,
he shall gnash with his teeth for indignation, and melt away: but on the
contrary, Psalm. 58.10.
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
footsteps in the blood of the ungodly.

O my soul, do thou believe this truth? and art thou confident that thou
shall sit with Christ on his very Throne to judge the World? why then be
joyful in afflictions, exercise thou patience in the censures and judgments of
the World, know thou for thy comfort that there is a turn and time of judging,
and therefore say, 1 Cor. 4.^.
With me it is a small matter that I should be judged of you, or of man's
Judgment, as the original has it, of man's day. Is it not enough to command
patience, if God's day be at hand, when I shall judge my unjust judges; hark
what the Apostle says, Jam. 5.7, 8, 9.
Be patient Brethren unto the coming of the Lord, behold the Husbandman waits
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he
receive the early and latter rain; be ye also patient, stablish your hearts,
for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, -- behold the judge stands before
the door. Come exercise patience, let the World be judging; if they will needs
slander, reproach, and persecute thy soul, they had better abuse any judge on
earth than thee: though thou art the poorest, weakest, meanest of God's Saints
upon the earth, they will know one day that they have abused their own judge in
abusing thee. And therefore be thou quiet, silent, patient; Say as David, let
him alone, and let him curse, yea, let him judge, for the Lord has bidden him;
it may be the Lord will look, on mine affliction, and will requite good for his
Judging this day; this is his day; but the day of the Lord is my day, and then
shall I sit with Christ on his Throne to judge the World. Oh the sweet that I
may suck from this honeycomb, of Christ and his Saints judging the World!

7. Consider Christ and his Saints going up into Heaven. No sooner has he done
his work with the World, and sent them away, but then he shall conduct all his
flock like a faithful shepherd to their fold; then shall he go with all his
troops following him into Heaven. Has not Christ said so? If I go away, I will
come again, John 14.3.
and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also. O those
songs of joy, and shouts of praise that will fill the World at that day! And
thus as they go along, Heaven opens unto them, and they enter in; what welcomes
they have there is past my telling; if we may imagine and guess, O the welcome
that Christ will give! Come my spouse, and come my dear, come all my Saints;
here be those Mansions that I went before to prepare and make ready for you,
here be those everlasting habitations wherein you and I will dwell together;
here is your Fathers house, the building of the wall is all of Jasper, Rev. 21
18.
and the worst piece of it is all of pure Gold, like unto clear Glass; why this
is your home, your house made without hands, here you and I will spend our
time, eternity it self, in joying, enjoying, and beholding of each other. And
as thus Christ salutes them, so will the Angels, those Created Citizens of
Heaven salute them too; for if joy be in Heaven at the conversion of one
sinner, what joy will there be at the glorification of all these Saints? what
welcome, entertainment, will the Angels give to these new guests at their first
entrance into Heaven?

O my soul, if thou art one of them that shall have this welcome, what will thou say when thou art admitted in thither! if weeping were in Heaven, would
thou not weep for joy? sure these things are no fictions of man's brain, but
truths, and realities; and as they are true and real, so they are exceeding
full of joy; all the excellencies of this World are but a dream in comparison
of them; even the Sun in its brightness is but darkness to this glory that
shall then be seen. Come, think over these things, and be so enlarged in thy
thoughts, that before they go, thou may feel the sweet, and taste of this
goodness of the Lord.

8. Consider all the several transactions that will follow in Heaven: then will
Christ present all his elect to God his Father; then will he give in all his
commissions which he has received from his Father; Then will the Son himself
be subject to the Father, that God may be all in all. I cannot stay to enlarge
on these; Only remember, though God may be all in all, that excludes not
Christ, for he also is All in all to all his Saints, even to all eternity;
Immediate visions and fruitions of Christ, as God is the very top of Heavens
joy: Christ is all, and in all; Christ is the center of Heavens happiness;
Christ is the wellspring that fills the capacities of Saints and Angels;
Christ is the object of happiness it self, there is as much happiness in Christ
as happiness is; what ever belongs to glory, is in Christ, In him dwells all the
fullness: whatever excellency is in Heaven, it is in Christ, not only in
perfection, but connection, for all those excellencies meet together, rest in
Christ; and Christ is all good things to all his Saints in Heaven; he is Beauty
to their Eyes, Music to their Ears, Honey to their mouths, Perfume to their
Nostrils, Health to their Bodies, Joy to their Souls, Light to their
Understandings, Content to their Wills; he is Time without sliding, Society
without loathing, Desire without fainting, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
ending; wanting both, needing neither, yet the Author of them both, he is All
in all, from one, not all. Even all the Strength, Wit, Pleasure, Virtues,
Colors, Beauties, Harmony, and goodness that are in Men, Beasts, Fishes,
Fouls, Trees, Herbs, and all Creatures, are nothing but sparkles of those
things which are in Christ. Christ himself will then supply their use, so that
the best Creatures which now serve the Saints, shall not have the honor to
serve them then; Rev. 21.23.
There will be no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon, to shine in that City, for
the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

And hence the beholding of Christ is the All in all to his glorified Saints:
this was Christ's Prayer, Father I will that those whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am, to what end? John 17.24.
that they may behold my glory. Christ's heavenly presence is conspicuous, he
is not present as some things that are not seen, and yet are present; but his
presence is, or certainly shall be conspicuous to all his Saints: when he was
in the world his glory was covered under a mean outside, he was like a bright
light in a dark-Lanthern, and there were very few that knew him then; but in
Heaven he shall be as a Cabinet opened, or as the Sun in his full glory; We
shall know him as we are known, and behold him face to face, 1 John 3.2.
and we shall see him as he is. Nor only will he be conspicuous, but his
presence shall be vital; a stone may be with us, and seen clearly, but there is
little in the sight of that; in the beholding of Christ there will be an acting
of kindness upon the Saints, there will be visions with life and dear
refreshing: O the influences that the sight of Christ will have on his Saints
in Heaven! nor only will he be conspicuous and vital, but his presence shall
be fixed; he shall abide with the Saints, that they may for ever behold him. Oh
if there was such running after Christ in this world, some getting on hills,
and others on trees, that they might behold him, when he passed by, what will
the sight of Christ in Heaven be, when he shall be always in the eye of his
Saints, and never out of sight, when they shall be always viewing of him, and
be always satisfied with that view? nor only will he be conspicuous, vital,
fixed, but his very presence shall transform; They shall see his face, -- and
they shall reign for ever and ever. O the influence of this sight! Revel. 22.4,
5.
it is of such a transforming Nature, that to see the King will make Kings;
this vision of glory amounts unto a fruition of glory, if ever thou art a
spectator of Christ, thou art sure to be a partaker of Christ in all his glory.
I shall be satisfied, Psalm. 17.15. 1 John 3.2.
when I awake with thy likeness. It does not yet appear what we shall be, but
we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; why so? for we shall
see him as he is. And no wonder, for if the imperfect beholding of his glory in
the glass of his Gospel, change the soul into the same image from glory to
glory; how much more shall the full view of his glory in Heaven transform both
the souls and bodies of his Saints into a fullness of glory? 1 Cor. 13.12.
Here then is the top of Heaven; here is the All in all; here is the
satisfaction of souls to the very uttermost; if Christ's glory in his
transfiguration was so satisfactory to Peter, as that he desired his sight of
it might never have end, or interruption; O it is good to be here, let us here
build Tabernacles; and yet Peter was only a spectator of this glory, for he
had himself no share in it; O then what infinite satisfaction may thou expect
in the beholding of Christ's Glory in Heaven, which will be accompanied with an
everlasting enjoyment? the lusture of his glory will be diffused unto all, so
that some shall enjoy the glory of the Sun, others of the Moon, and others of
the Stars. O my soul, if thou art but a Star there, yet if thou art filled with
that light that comes from the Sun of righteousness, it is enough. O remember!
oh consider! oh never forget this Looking unto Jesus! as it is thy duty on
Earth, so it is thy privilege and highest happiness in Heaven for ever and
ever.

SECT. III. Of desiring after Jesus in that respect.
3. LET us desire after Jesus, carrying on this work of man's Salvation at his
second coming. It is true, many shrink at the thoughts of death and judgment;
and it is an high pitch to desire the dissolution of our selves, and of this
world; the best Christians are compounded of flesh and spirit, and if the
spirit long to be in Heaven, yet the Flesh is loath to leave this Earth. Speak
out of my soul, thou prayest daily, Come Lord Jesus, let thy Kingdom come; but
is not the Flesh afraid, lest God should hear thy Prayers? Oh that we could
loath our loathness in that respect! oh that we could long for this second
coming of Christ to Judgment! And Christians, this is attainable, or otherwise
I should not persuade you to it. Phil. 1.2^.
I am in a strait (said Paul) between two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ which is far better: And this is the voice of the desolate Bride,
Come; for the spirit of Christ within her says come, The Spirit and the Bride
say come. Yea, the whole Creation says come, Rev. 12.17. Romans 8 21, 23.
Waiting to be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God; and not only they, but our selves also which have
the first fruits, of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit the redemption of our body. Oh that we could
groan! oh that we could come up to this high pitch, even to sigh out, not our
breath, but our spirits! even to groan out, not some vapors, but our hearts.

I know it is suitable to flesh and blood to tremble at the thoughts of
judgment; When Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and of Judgment to
come, Felix trembled. Acts 24.25.
Weak Christians as well as Heathens may have many terrible fancies and notions
of that day: Oh to think of a time, When there shall be a great earthquake,
Rev. 6.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
when the Sun shall become black as jet, and the Moon red as blood, when the
Stars of heaven shall fall, and when the heavens themselves shall depart as a
scroll; when the Trumpet shall sound, that will shake the Earth, and every
Mountain and Island shall be moved out of their places; when the Kings of the
earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and every
bonds-man, and every freeman shall hide themselves in the dens, and in the
rocks of the Mountains, and shall say to the rocks and to the mountains, fall
on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand? Will it not be terrible? if the people were so afraid when the
Lord came without such attendants to give the Law upon Mount Sinai; certainly
much more terrible must such a coming in this manner be, when he shall come
like a revenging judge to take an account of the world for the keeping, or for
the breaking of that Law.

In this respect, I wonder not at some weak Christians, that cry out, O Lord
thou know, that I have not desired this woeful day; A wise Jew was wont to
say, from a deep foresight of terror of this day, The Messiah will come, but
Lord let me not live to see his coming. Now to conquer this fear, and to abate
such slavish terror in such souls; oh that they would consider it in the whole
notion of it, not only as it shall be a day of blackness, and of terror, but
as it shall also be a day of rest and of release. Some are apt to take it up in
the half notion of it, they look on it only as a day of judgment, and a day of
condemnation, and so they fly from it as from a Serpent; but if they would take
it up again, and look on the other side, the Serpent would be turned into a
Rod. The day which will be so dreadful to the ungodly, and the beginning of
their misery, it will be as joyful to the Saints, and the beginning of their
glory.

But in what respect is this day of Christ so desirable a day? I answer, in
these particulars --

1. It is a day of refreshing. Here the Saints work in a furnace; his fire is
in Zion, Acts 3.19. Isa. 31.9.
and his furnace in Jerusalem; but Christ in his second coming (when all the
world shall be on fire) shall fan wind (as I may say) on his Saints to cool
them; to the wicked it is an hot day, a day of everlasting burnings; but to the
Saints it is a day of cooling, quickening, reviving, and refreshing.

2. It is a day of restoring of all things. Acts. 3.21.
Every creature is now in it is work-day dressed, all defiled with sin, but at
that day there shall be a restitution of all things; all the disorders and
ruins which sin has brought into the world shall then be repaired, and man
himself whose sin is the cause of all, shall then be restored to his original
glory.

3. It is a day of the manifestation of the Sons of God. Romans 8.19.
Then shall it be known who are true Saints, and who are Reprobates; here we
live inconfusion, and in our most refined Churches (if we have none scandalous)
yet we may have many hypocrites, and we cannot discern them; but in that day it
shall be known who are the Lords, and who are not; the hypocrite shall then be
unmantled, and the Sons of God shall shine and glitter as the Sun, that all may
run and read, These are God's Elect, these are the Sons and Daughters of the
Almighty.

Romans 8.23.
4. It is the day of adoption, and of the redemption of our bodies. It is the
day of our Sonship and deliverance; I deny not but that the Saints are adopted
and redeemed before this day; but this adoption and redemption is not
consummate, nor declared before Christ come again to judgment, then it is that
he takes his Saints home to his house, and all the Angels and Men of the World
shall understand the love wherewith he loves them; then shall Christ say, These
are my sons whom I have redeemed, and as I have set them free, so now shall
they live and reign with me for ever and ever.

5. It is The day of Christ's coming. He was here not long since travailing
about the Earth, and about our business; which done, he went away to Heaven
upon a special errand for his Saints; and there now he is to intercede for
them, to attend the court, to be their Advocate, and to agitate the business of
their souls; and withal th^re now he is to take up lodgings for them, and to
prepare them mansions for eternity: And no sooner shall he have dispatched his
business there, but he will come for earth again; he will bow the Heavens and
come down to give a report of his transactions there; has he not left us a
letter to that effect, John 14.3.
I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am, there you may
be also. O why are his Chariots so long a coming? why tarry the wheels of his
Chariots?

2 These. 1.7.
6. It is the day of Christ's revealing. Christ to many of his Saints here is
hidden and withdrawn; it is true, he may be in them, yea, certainly he is in
them by his spirit, but no man knows it, no nor themselves neither, which makes
them cry, O where is he whom my soul loves; but at this day of Christ's
revealing, all curtains shall be drawn aside, Christ shall be unhid, and the
Saints shall see him face to face, they shall never lose him more; for without
any intermission they shall stare, and gaze, and be ever looking unto Jesus.

Colos. 3.4.
7. It is the day of Christ's bright and glorious appearing. When he was upon
the Earth he appeared in our dress, many then saw him, who then said of him,
There is no beauty in him that we should desire him: Oh it was a sad sight to
see him crowned with thorns and scourged with whips, and nailed to the cross?
but in his next appearing we shall see him in his best attire, arrayed in
white, attended with the retinue of glory, riding in his Chariot of light, and
smiling upon all his Saints. Now is not this desirable? The Apostle tells us of
the Saints, Tit. 2.13.
Looking for the glorious appearing of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ; therefore surely they desire it.

Isa. 53.11.
8. It is the day of Christ's joy. Then he shall see of the travail of his soul,
and he shall be satisfied. Now what is the travail of his soul? is it not the
perfection of his redeemed ones? oh when Christ sees this, when he sees his
spouse as without spot, or wrinkle; then shall be fulfilled that prophecy,
Isa. 62.5.
As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over
thee: look how the joy of a Bridgroom is over his Bride upon the wedding day,
(surely then if ever) all is love and joy; so is Christ's joy over his Saints
at the last day; then begins that joy that never, never shall have end, there
shall be no moment of time wherein Christ will not rejoice over his Saints for
ever after.

9. It is the day of Christ's perfection. Christ as Mediator is not fully
perfect till all his members be in glory united to him: As an head that wants
an arm, or hand, or leg, we say is lame; so it is a kind of mistical lameness
that Christ our head has not with him all his members; the Saints are little
pieces of mystical Christ, and it shall not be well till Christ gather in his
arms, and thighs, and pull them nearer to himself in glory: and is not this
desirable to see the Lord Jesus Christ as Head of the Church in his perfection?
to see the Son of righteousness with every beam united to him? O desirable day!

Hos. 2.18.
10. It is Christ's Wedding Day, or the Marriage day of the Lamb. The Saints are
betrothed to Christ when first they believe in Christ, that is Christ's word, I
will betroth thee unto me, Cant. 4.10.
and thou art my sister, my spouse, not my Wife; thou art not yet married,
only contracted here: but at that day the marriage of the Lamb will be
complete, and then will the voice be heard; Rev. 19.7.
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. O the joy that Christ, and
Saints, and Angels, and all that belong to Heaven will make at this marriage!
Blessed are they that are called to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb. One of the
seven Angels that came to John in visions, Rev. 21 9.
talked with him, saying, Come hither, and I will show thee the Bride, the
Lambs Wife. If the espoused Virgin be willing to be married, how is it that we
cry not, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly?

1 Cor. 5.24.
11. It is Christ's day of presenting his Saints unto his Father; he delivers up
the Kingdom to God, even the Father. Then shall he take his Bride by the hand
and bring her to his house, and present her in all state and solemnity to the
Father. Is not this a desirable day? surely Christ rejoices, and his very
heart even springs again to present his Church unto his Father, Father here
behold my Bride that I have married unto my self. It is true, a Child may
sometimes marry such a one, as he may be ashamed to think of bringing to his
Fathers house; but how mean and sinful soever we are of our selves, when once
we are married unto Christ, he will not think it any dishonor, no not before
his Father, that he has such a bride, Father (will he say) lo here all my
Saints of all that thou have given me, I have lost none, but the children of
perdition, these are mine, dearly bought, thou know the price, O welcome
them to glory.

12. It is the day of Christ's glory. What glorious descriptions have we in
scripture of Christ's coming to Judgment? The Son of man shall come from heaven
with power and great glory; and the work no sooner done, Math. 24.30.
but he shall return again into Heaven with power and great glory. Not to
mention the essential glory of Christ, O the glory of Christ as Mediator; all
the glory that Ahashuerus could put upon his favorites was nothing to this
spiritual and heavenly glory, which the Father will put upon the Son; it is a
glory above all the glories that ever were, or ever shall be; it is an eternal
glory; not but that Christ shall at last give up his Kingdom to his Father; he
shall no more discharge the acts of an Advocate, or intercessor for us in
heaven, only the glory of this shall always continue; it shall to all
eternity be recorded that he was the Mediator, and that he is the Savior that
has brought us to life and immortality, and upon this ground the tongues of
all the Saints shall be employed to all eternity to celebrate this glory. This
will be their everlasting Song, Unto him that loved us, Rev. 1.5, 6.
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen. Now is not this a desirable thing? do we believe there is such a
thing as Christ's mediatory glory, and Christ's essential glory? as Christ's
humane glory, and Christ's divine glory? and have we no desires to behold this
glory? surely Christ himself desired it of God, he would have his Saints with
him where he is, that they might behold his glory; and shall not we desire it,
whom it most concerns? O the sweet temper of the spouse when she cried out,
Cant. 8.14.
Make haste my beloved and be thou like a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
mountains of spices!

Come now, and run over these particulars; surely every one is motive enough to
desire this day; it is a day of refreshing, a day of restoring, a day of
manifestation of the sons of God, a day of adoption, and of the redemption of
our bodies; a day of Christ's coming, of Christ's revealing, of Christ's
appearing, of Christ's joy, of Christ's perfection, of Christ's Wedding, of
Christ's presenting of his Saints, of Christ's glory; what are we not yet in a
longing frame? the wife of youth that wants her husband for some years, and
expects that he should return from over Sea-lands, she is often on the shore,
her very heart loves the wind that should bring him home; every Ship in view,
that is but a drawing near the shore, is her new joy, and new reviving hopes,
she asks of every passenger, O saw you my husband? what is he a doing? when
will he come? is he not yet Shipped, and ready for a return? souls truly
related to the Lord Jesus Christ should methinks long no less; O what desire
should the Spirit and the Bride have to hear when Christ shall say to his
Angels, Make you ready for the journey, let us go down and divide the skies,
and bow the Heavens; I Will gather my prisoners of hope unto me, I cannot want my
Rachel, and her weeping Children any longer, behold I come quickly to judge the
Nations? Methinks every spouse of Christ should love the quarter of the sky,
that being rent asunder should yield unto her husband; methinks she should love
that part of the heavens, where Christ puts through his glorious hand, and
comes riding on the Rainbow and Clouds to receive her to himself. I conclude
this with the conclusion of the Bible, He that testifies these things, says
surely I come quickly, Amen. Even so, Rev. 22.20.
come Lord Jesus.

SECT. IV. Of hoping in Jesus in that respect.
4. LET us hope in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us
in his second coming. Hope is of good things to come; hope is an act of the
will extending it self toward that which it loves as future; only the future
good as it is the object of hope is difficult to obtain, and therein it differs
from desire; for desire looks at future good without any apprehension of
difficulty, but hope respects the future good as it is gotten with difficulty.
Lazy hopes that will not be in use of means, though difficult, are not true
hopes; we see many desirable things set before us, of which we may say, Oh that
we had our part and portion of them! but shall we go on, and search and find
out the truth, whether we have any part or portion in them? or whether we have
any hopes of any such thing? oh this is worthy our pains! come then, let us yet
make a further progress, let us not only desire that it may be thus and so; but
let us say, on some sure and certain grounds, we hope it is thus and so; we
hope Christ will come again, John 14.3.
and receive us to himself, that where he is, there we may be also.

Heb. 9.12.
Indeed there is the Christians stay and comfort; such an hope is a sure Anchor,
that will hold the ship in a storm; only because our souls lie upon it, we had
need to look to it that our hopes be true; the worst can say, They hope to be
saved as well as the best; but I fear the hopes of many will be lamentably
frustrated. Our Savior brings in many pleading with confidence at the last day
for life, who shall be rejected with miserable disappointment; Many shall say
to me at that day, Lord, Lord, etc. and I will confess unto them, I never knew
them; depart from me. Now to clear this point, that our hopes, are of the right
stamp, and not counterfeit hopes, I shall lay down some signs, whereby we may
know that Christ's coming is for us, and for our good, and for the grace that
is to be given us at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
1. If we are born again, then will his glorious coming be to glorify us,
Blessed be the God and Father of Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, to an inheritance
incorruptible. Whoever has the true hope of Heaven, John 3.3.
he is one that is begotten again; so our Savior, Except a man be born again,
he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Many things may be done, as Herod heard John
the Baptist, and did many things: but except a man be born again, those many
things are in God's account as nothing. When Peter had told Christ, that he and
his fellow-disciples had forsaken all, Math. 19.28.
and followed him; Then Jesus said, verily I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of
his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve Thrones, Judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. q. d. Peter, you have forsaken all, and followed me; but know, that
bare forsaking is not enough: but you who have felt the Work of God
regenerating your souls, upon which ye have followed me, ye shall sit upon
twelve Thrones. In those who are alive at the last day there will be a change,
and this change will be to them instead of death; 1 Cor. 15.51.
Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed. Certainly in those who at the last day shall sit on Thrones with
Christ, there must be a change likewise in this life; (i.e.) a new spirit, and
a new life must be put into them: Oh what a change is this! suppose a rational
soul were put into a beast, what a change would be in that Creature! suppose an
angelical nature were put upon us, what a change would there be in us? oh but
what a change is this, when a man is born again of water and of the spirit; I
must tell you, that the highest degree of glory in Heaven, is not so different
from the lowest degree of grace here, as the lowest degree of grace here is
different from the highest excellency of nature here; because the difference
betwixt the highest degree of the glory of Heaven, and the lowest degree of
grace is only gradual; but the difference that is betwixt the lowest degree of
grace, and the highest excellency of nature is a specifical difference. Oh
there is a mighty work of God in preparing souls for glory by grace, and this
change must they have that must sit on Thrones. Come then, you that hope for
glory, try your selves by this; is there a change in your hearts, words, and
lives? is there a mighty work of grace upon your spirits? are you experienced
in the great mystery of regeneration? why here is your evidence, that your hopes
are sound, and that you shall sit upon Thrones to judge the world.

Heb. 9.28.
2. If we long for his coming, then will he come to satisfy our longings.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst, for they shall be satisfied; how
satisfied, but in being saved? Christ was offered to bear the sins of many; and
unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin to
salvation; unto them that look for him, or long for him, shall he appear the
second time unto salvation; it is very observable, how this looking for Christ,
is in Scripture a frequent description of a true believer in Christ. Who are
true, sincere, and sound Christians, but such as live in a perpetual desire and
hope of Christ's blessed coming? 2 Pet. 3.12.
they are ever looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God. Here
are two signs in one verse, looking for, and hasting unto; true believers are
not only in a posture looking for the coming of Jesus Christ, but also, as it
were, going forth to meet Jesus Christ with burning Lamps. Luther could say,
Mat. 6.10.
That he was no true Christian, neither could he truly recite the Lord's
prayer, that with all his heart desired not this day of the coming of Christ.
It is true, that whether we will or no, that day will come, but in the Lord's
prayer Christ has taught us to pray that God would accelerate and hasten the
day of his glorious coming, thy Kingdom come, (i.e.) the Kingdom of glory at
the Judgment, as well as the Kingdom of grace in the Church. It is true, that
the day of the Lord is a terrible day, the Heavens, and Earth, and Sea, and Air
shall be all on a bone-fire, and burn to nothing; nevertheless we according to
his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth; we that have laid hold upon
God, and laid hold on him by the right handle, according to his promises, we
look for this day of the Lord, we look for it, and hasten unto it, we are glad
it is so near, and we do what we can to have it nearer, with an holy kind of
impatience we beg of the Lord, Rom 8.22, 23
Come Lord Jesu, come, quickly. This was Paul's character, We know that the
whole creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain together until now; and not
only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the spirit,
even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit
the redemption of our bodies: God's children, such as have the first fruits of
the spirit, the beginnings of true saving grace in them, they constantly look
and long for the day of full deliverance, or of the coming of Christ. This the
Apostle instanceth in his Corinthians, ye come behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.7.
waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; and in like manner he writes
to his Philippians, Phil. 3.20.
Our Conversation is in Heaven from whence also we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ: Tit. 2.13.
And to Titus himself he writes the same things, We look for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Now
Christians lay this character to heart, do you long, pant, and look for this
glorious and second coming of Christ? have you any such wishes, and sayings of
heart and mind as these are; Oh that Christ would appear! Oh that Christ would
now break the Heavens, and come to Judgment! oh that I could see him in the
Cloud, and on his Throne! oh that his enemies were ruined, my sins subdued, my
soul saved, that I might serve him without weariness, for ever and ever! Surely
if these elongations of soul be in you, it is a comfortable evidence that your
hopes are sound, and that Christ will come to receive you to himself, and to
bring you to glory.

3. If we love Christ's appearing, then will he appear on our side, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto
them also that love his appearing. A true Christian loves Christ's appearing in
ordinances, and in all the means of grace, how much more in his own person? but
how should we love that we see not? O yes! there is a kind of an Idea of Christ,
and of his glorious appearing in every sanctified soul, and in that respect we
love him though we cannot see him, Who having not seen ye love, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Verse. 7.
says the Apostle: and so your love and faith at the appearing of Jesus Christ
shall be found unto praise, and honor, and glory. Those that have not seen
Christ, and yet love the Idea of his sight, even they shall appear at the
appearing of Christ in praise, and honor, and glory. Is not the Crown laid up
for them that love the appearing of Christ? is it not a sign of a good cause to
love a day of hearing? surely the love of Christ's coming cannot consist
without some assurance that a soul shall stand upright in the Judgdment. He
that has not a confidence in his cause, loves not the coming of the Judge; no
guilty prisoner loves the Sessions, or loves the judges presence; it is the cry
of Reprobates, Rev. 6.16.
O ye mountains, and O ye Rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sits on the Throne. But as for Christ and his Saints; O the mutual
loves, and mutual longings in their breasts! The last words that Christ speaks
in the Bible (and amongst us last words make deepest impressions) are, Surely I
come quickly; and the last answer that is made in our behalf, is, Amen, even so
come Lord Jesus. I know this Character is near the former, and therefore I
shall pass it over.

4. If our works be good, then will he reward us according to our works. At
that great day this will be the trial, works? are no works? Mat. 25.33, 34, 35,
36.
Then will he say to them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in,
naked and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me, I was in prison, and
ye came unto me. Here were works, Verse 46.
upon which followed the rewards of Heaven for these went into eternal life. I
know Works are not meritorious, and yet they are evidences; I know works
without Faith are but glisterrings sins, and yet works done in faith are signs,
and forerunners of eternal glory; I know that if all the excellencies of all
the moralities of all the men in the world were put together, these could never
reach glory, and yet a cup of cold water given to one of Christ's little ones
in the name of a Disciple of Christ shall not lose its reward. Mat. 10.24.
If a Christian doubt, how should I know that my works are of a right stamp. I
answer, 1. Look at the principle, is there not something above nature? do I not
find some new light let out by God, that shows a glory, and excellency, and
beauty in good works? is there not something in me that makes the same to be
sweet, or pleasant, or agreeable to me? 2. Look at the end; natural works have
no better end than self and creature-respects; but in my works is there no aim
at something higher than self? whatever I do, is not this in mine eye, that all
I do may tend to the honor and glory of God? I had need take heed of
vainglory, and self applause; the Godly at the day of Judgment do not know the
good works they did; if my aim be at God I shall forget my self, as if all I
did were swallowed up in God. 3. Look at the manner of my doing works: Vzzah
had a good intention, but his work was not good, because the manner was not
good; are my works according to the rule? do they carry a conformity to the Law
of God? Let every man try his own work in this: O my soul bring thy works to
the touchstone, the Scripture, the Rule of goodness, is not all thy gold then
discovered to be dross? the Scripture does not only tell of works, but tells
us the manner of performing them; as for instance, if rightly done, they must
be done in zeal, in fervency, in activity; thus Gods people are called a
peculiar people, zealous of good works; a formal, customary, superficial
performance of holy works fails in the manner of performing them: what, are my
works performed in zeal? is there not too much of coldness, emptiness formality
in all I do? why, thus may I know whether my works are of a right stamp;
certainly all works, duties, actings, which are not done by a gracious heart,
through a gracious power, to a gracious end, in a gracious manner, are sins,
and not such works as shall have the rewards of Heaven. Some may object, this
is an hard saying, who then shall be saved? I answer, 1. By concession, very
few; What is the whole company of Christians, besides a very few (said Salvian)
but a sink of vices? are they only good works which are thus and thus
qualified? it were enough to make us all fear all the works that ever we have
done. But secondly, here is all our hope, that in a Gospel-way Christ looks at
our good works in the truth of them, and not in the perfection of them; Romans
7.18, 19
no man goes beyond Paul, who when he would do good, found evil present with
him: Alas, there is a perpetual opposition and conflict betwixt the flesh and
the spirit, so that the most spiritual man cannot do the good things he would
do; and yet we must not conclude, that nothing is good in us, because not
perfectly good. Sincerity and truth in the inward parts, may in this case hold
up our hearts from sinking; as he in the Gospel cried, I believe Lord, help my
unbelief; So if we can but say, I I do good works, Lord help me in the
concurrence of all needful circumstances, here will be our evidence that our
hopes are sound, and that Christ will sentence us to eternal life. Come ye
Blessed, etc. and why so? For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.

5. If we believe in Christ, then shall we live with Christ; if we come to him
and receive him by Faith, then will he come again, and receive us to himself,
that where he is, there we may be also. Good works are good evidences, but of
all works those of the Gospel are clearest evidences, and have clearest
promises; come then, let us try our obedience to the Commandments of Faith, as
well as Life; let us try our submission to the Lord by believing, as well as
doing. Surely the greatest work of God that ever any creature did, it is this
Gospel-work, when it apprehends its own unworthyness, and ventures it self and
its estate upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ: if we were able to perform a
full, exact, and accurate obedience to every particular of the moral Law, it
were not so great a work, nor so acceptable to God, nor should be so gloriously
rewarded in heaven, as this one work of believing in his Son Jesus Christ. This
is the work to which in express terms salvation, John 3.36.
Heaven, and glory is promised; He that believes on the Son has everlasting
life; and he that hears my word^, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but he has passed from
death to life -- And this is the will of him that sent me, John 5.24.
that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him may have everlasting
life -- And these things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ
the Son of God, John 6.40. John 20.31. Acts. 16.31.
and that believing ye might have life through his name -- Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved -- And if thou shall confess with thy
mouth, the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised
him from the dead, Romans 10.9. Heb. 10.39.
thou shall be saved -- And we are not of them who draw back unto perdition,
but of them that believe unto the saving of the soul -- And these things have I
written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, 1 John 5.13.
that ye may know that ye have everlasting life. Why this above all is the
Gospel work, to which are annexed those gracious promises of eternal life. So
that if we believe in Christ, how may we be assured that we shall live with
Christ.

O my soul, gather up all these characters, and try by them. Every one can say,
that they hope well, they hope to be saved, they hope to meet Christ with
comfort, though they have no ground for it but their own vain conceits; but
hope on good ground, is that hope that makes not ashamed; say then, art thou
born again? Romans 5.5.
do thou look and long for the coming of Christ in the clouds? do thou love
his appearing? art thou rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate? do thou obey the commandments of faith as well as life? sure
these are firm, and sound, and comfortable grounds of an assured hope. Content
not thy self with an hope of possibility, or probability; but reach out to that
plerophory, or full assurance of hope; Heb. 6.11.
the hope of possibility is but a weak hope, the hope of probability is but a
fluctuating hope, but the hope of certainty is a settled hope; such an hope
sweetens all the thoughts of God and Christ, of death and judgment, of Heaven,
yea, and of Hell too, whiles we hope that we are saved from it; and are not the
Scriptures written to this very purpose, That we might have this hope? are we
not justified by his grace, Romans 15.4. Tit. 3.7. Psalm. 119.166. psalm. 24.11.
that we might be heirs in hope, heirs according to the hope of eternal life?
and was not this David's confidence, Lord I have hoped for thy salvation? why
then art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance
and my God.

If I may here enter into a Dialogue with my own poor, trembling, wavering
soul. -- Person -- why art thou hopeless O my soul? would thou not hope, if
an honest man had made thee a promise of any thing within his power? and will thou not hope when thou have the promise, the oath, and the covenant of God in
Christ? -- Soul -- Yes; methinks I feel some little hope, but alas it is but a
little, a very little. -- Person -- Ay but go on my soul, true hope is called a
lively hope, and a lively hope is an efficacious hope; no sooner faith commends
the promise unto hope, but hope takes it, and hugs it, and reckons it as its
Treasure, and feeds on it as Manna, which God has given to refresh the weary
soul in the desert of sin; go on then, till thou come up to the highest
pitch, even to that triumphant joyful expectation, and waiting for of Christ
in glory -- Soul -- Why, methinks I would hope, I would ascend the highest step
of hope; but alas I cannot; Oh I am exposed to many controversies, I am prone
to many unquiet agitations; though I have a present promise, yet I extend my
cares and fears even to eternity: Alas, I cannot comprehend, and therefore I am
hardly satisfied; my sinful reason sees not its own way and end, and because
it must take all on trust and credit, therefore it falls to wrangling; nay,
Satan himself so snarles the question, and and I am so apt to listen to his
doubts, that in the conclusion I know not how to extricate my self. -- Person
-- Say thou so? surely in this case there is no cure, no remedy, but only the
testimony of God's Spirit; but says not the Apostle, Romans 8.16.
That the spirit of it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God? if a Man or Angel, or Archangel should promise Heaven,
peradventure thou might doubt; but if the Supreme Essence of the Spirit of
God bear witness within, what room for doubting? why, this voice of the spirit
is the very voice of God; hark then, enquire O my soul, if thou have but this
testimony of the spirit, thou art sure enough -- Soul -- Oh that it were thus
with me! oh that the spirit would even now give me to drink of the wells of
salvation! oh that the spirit would testify it home! oh that he would shine
upon, and enlighten all those graces which he has planted in me! fain would I
come to the highest pitch of hope, oh that I could look upon the things hoped
for as certainly future. -- Person -- Thou say well O my soul, and if these
wishes be real, then pour out thy self unto God in prayer; this was the
Apostles method, Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, Romans 15.13.
that ye may abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost; let this be
thy practice, pray as he prayed, pray thou for thy self as he prayed for
others; if an earthly Father will hearken to his child, Luke 11.13.
how much more will God the Father give the spirit to them that ask the spirit
of him. -- Soul -- Why if this be it; to thee Lord do I come, O give me the
Spirit, the witness of the Spirit, the first fruits of the spirit, the sealing
of the spirit, the earnest of the spirit. O give me the spirit, and let the
spirit give me this hope. O the hope of Israel, and Savior thereof in the time
of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in my soul, and as a wayfaring
man that turns aside to tarry for a night? Come, O come, and dwell in my
soul, Come and blow on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: come
and fill me with a livelv hope; yea Lord excite, and quicken, and stir up my
soul to act this hope, yea, so illighten, or shine upon my hope, that I may
know that I hope, and know that I joyfully expect, and wait for the coming of
Christ: O Let me hear thy voice, Say unto my soul I am, and will be thy
salvation. -- Person -- Well now, thou have prayed, Psalm. 35.3.
O my soul, Come, tell me, do thou feel nothing stir? is there nothing at all
in thee that assures thee of this assurance of hope? is there no life in thy
affections? no spark that takes hold on thy heart to set it on flame? no
comfort of the spirit, no joy in the holy Ghost? -- Soul -- Yes! methinks I
feel it now begin to work, the Spirit that has breathed this prayer into me
comes in as Comforter; O now that I realize Christ's coming and my
resurrection, Psalm. 16.9.
I cannot but conclude with David, Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory
rejoices, and my flesh also shall rest in hope. Oh what an earnest is this?
what a piece has the spirit put into my hand of the great sum promised? not
only that he in great mercy promised me Heaven, but because he does not put me
into a present possession, he now gives me an earnest of my future inheritance.
Why, surely all is sure, unless the earnest deceive me; and what? shall I
dispute the truth of the earnest? oh God forbid! the stamp is too well known to
be mistrusted; this seal cannot be counterfeit, because it is agreeable with
the Word; I find in my self an hope, a true sincere hope, though very weak: I
find upon trial that I am regenerate, that I look and long for the second
coming of Jesus, that I love his appearance even before hand: that my works,
though imperfect, are sincere and true, that I believe on the Name of the Son
of God, and flesh and blood could never work these duties or these graces in
me; it is only that good spirit of my God, which has thus sealed me up to the
day of redemption. Away, away despair, trouble me no longer with a musing
thoughts; I will henceforth (if the Lord enable) walk confidently, and
cheerfully in the strength of this assurance, and joyfully expect the full
accomplishment of my happy contract from the hands of Christ. The Lord is my
portion, therefore will I hope in him; Lam. 3.24, 25, 26.
the Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him; it
is good that I both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord -- It
is good that I hope to the end, 1 Pet. 1.13.
for the grace that is to be brought unto me at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

SECT. V. Of believing in Jesus in that respect.
5. LET us believe in Jesus as carrying on the great work of our salvation in
his second coming. Now this believing in Christ is more than hoping in Christ;
Faith eyes things as present, but hope eyes things as future; and hence the
Apostle describes faith to the substance of things hoped for; Heb. 11.1.
it is the substance, foundation, or prop which upholds the building; or it is
the substance, essence, existence of things hoped for, and consequently absent
and a far off, to be by a firm apprehension of the believer as already present
and real. And this is as necessary as the former; oh if we could but see things
now, as they shall appear at that last general day of Judgment, how mightily
would they work upon our souls? I verily think the want of this work of faith
is the cause almost of all the evil in the world; and the acting of Faith on
this subject would produce fruits even to admiration. If we could but see that
glory of God in Christ, and those glorious treasures of mercies that shall then
be communicated; if we could but see those dreadful evils that are now
threatened, and shall then be fulfilled, would not this draw the hardest heart
under Heaven? come, let us act faith this day, as if this day were the last
day; a thousand years are but as one day to faith? it takes hold upon eternal
life, whenever it acts; it takes present possession of the glorious things of
the Kingdom of God even now.

O then let us believe in Jesus in reference to his second coming to judgment.
But how should we believe? what directions to act our says on Jesus in this
respect? I answer --

1. Faith must directly go to Christ.

2. Faith must go to Christ as God in the flesh.

3. Faith must go to Christ as God in the flesh made under the Law.

4. Faith must go to Christ made under the directive part of the Law by his
life, and under the penal part of the Law by his death.

5. Faith must go to Christ as put to death in the Flesh, and as quickened by
the spirit.

6. Faith must go to Christ, as going up into glory, as sitting down at God's
right hand, and as sending down the holy Ghost.

7. Faith must go to Christ as interceding for his Saints, in which work he
continues till his coming again. Of all these before.

8. Faith must go to Christ as coming again into this nether world to judge
the quick and the dead; This is the last act of Faith in reference to Christ,
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. The coming of
Christ, the resurrection of the dead, the change of the living, the last
judgment, and the glory of Christ with his Saints to all eternity, is that
transaction which must be dispatched at the end of the world; now this is the
object of faith as well as the former; Christ's work is not fully perfected
till all these be finished, nor is our work of Faith fully completed till it
reach to the very last act of Christ in saving souls. -- Oh what an excellent
worker is Jesus Christ? he does all his works thoroughly and perfectly; the
greatest work that ever Christ under took was the work of redemption, that work
would have broken Men and Angels, and yet Jesus Christ will carry it on to the
end, and then will he say not only prophetically, but expressly, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do. John 17.46.
Now Faith should eye Christ as far as he goes, if Christ will not have done
till he comes again, and receive us to himself, and settle us in glory; no more
should Faith, it should still follow after him, and take a veiw of all his
transactions from first to last; what, will Christ come again? will he summon
all the elect to come under judgment? will he sentence or judge them to eternal
life? will he conduct them into glory, present them to his Father, and be their
all in all to all eternity? why then let our faith act it self upon all these
promises; or if I may instance in one for all, Christ's coming is the most
comprehensive of all; and is not the coming of Christ very frequently mentioned
in the p^omises, as the great support and stay of his peoples spirits till
then? do not the Apostles usually quicken us to duty, and encourage us to
waiting by the mentioning of this glorious coming of Jesus Christ? why then let
us act our faith on this glorious Object; Christians, what do we believe, and
hope, and wait for, but to see this coming? this was Paul's encouragement to
rejoicing and moderation, Phil. 4.4, 5.
Rejoice in the Lord always -- and let your moderation be known to all, the
Lord is at hand; To think and speak of that day with horror, does well beseem
the impenitent sinner, but does ill beseem the beli^ving Saint; such may be the
voice of an unbeliever, and it may be of a believer in desertion or temptation,
but it is not the voice of faith. O believe on Christ, as carrying on our
salvation at his coming again, For yet a little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and he will not tarry. Heb. 10.37.


9. Faith must principally and mainly look to the purpose, design, intent, and
end of Christ in his second coming to Judgment. Now the ends are -- 1. In
respect of the wicked that they may be destroyed, for he must reign till he
has put all his enemies under his feet. He shall come with flaming fire, 2
These. 1.8.
and then he will take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. O
miserable men! now it is God's design to be revenged on you. This is the day
when the wicked shall suddenly start out of sleep, and meet with ghastly
amazedness at the mouth of their sepulchers; above them stands the Judge
condemning, beneath Hell gaping, on the right had justice threatening, on all
sides the world burning; to go forward is intolerable, to go backward is
impossible, to turn aside is unavailable; which way then? Heaven gates are
shut, Hell mouth is open, where they must end their endless misery; the last
torment lasts ever. O the shrikes of the wicked at every passage of this day!
when the Prophet Joel was describing the formidable accidents of his day, he
was not able to express it, but stammered like a Child, or an amazed imperfect
person, A. A. A. for the day of the Lord is at hand. We translate it, Alas,
Joel. 1.17.
for the day of the Lord is at hand. But Lyra, Ribera, the Vulgar Latin, and
others translate it, A.A.A. in Hebrew it is indeed but one word, and sounds as
Aha, which howsoever so written, yet is it pronounced without any aspiration,
as Aharon, is pronounced Aaron. The best Critic^s would but have it one word,
and so they write it, A-a-a- for the day of the Lord is at hand: thus they that
stammer, and cannot suddenly speak, say A-a-a. it is not sense at first; the
Prophet was so amazed, that he knew not what to say; the stammering tongue that
is full of fear, can best speak that terror, which will make all the wicked of
the world to cry, and shrike, and speak fearful accents; oh the shrikes! oh
the fearful sounds that will then be heard! sure that noise must needs be
terrible, when millions of men and women at the same instant shall fearfully
cry out, and when their cries shall mingle with the thunders of the dying and
groaning Heavens, and with the crack of the dissolving World, when the whole
fabric of nature shall shake into dissolution, Psalm. 51.21.
and eternal ashes. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest he tare you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Shall not the consideration of these
things awake your spirits, and raise you from the death of sin? what? do you
believe these things? or do you not? if you do not believe these things, where
is your says? if you do believe them, and sin on, where is your prudence? and
where is your hope? but enough of this; it belongs to the wicked.

2. In respect of the Godly that they may be saved. Now this contains several
steps. As --

1. They must be regenerated. It is true they partake of this grace before, but
now is the full perfection and manifestation of it, Mat. 19.28.
and therefore the last day is called the day of regeneration.

Col. 1.13, 14.
2. They must be redeemed. So they are in this life; Paul could tell his
Colossians, that Christ had delivered them from the power of darkness; and that
in him they had redemption through his blood. Yet the Scripture calls the day
of judgment in a peculiar and eminent manner the day of redemption. And grieve
not the holy spirit of God whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.
Ephesians. 4.30.


1 John 3.2.
3. They must be adopted. It is true, they are adopted in this life, We are now
the Sons of God (says the Apostle) yet it does not appear what we shall be;
the glory which Christ will put upon us at the last day, is so far transcendent
and superlative to what now we are, that we know not what we shall be; sons,
and more than sons; and therefore the Apostle calls the last day, Romans 8.23.
the day of adoption.

4. They must be justified. I know they were justified by Faith before, and
this justification was evidenced to some of their consciences; but now shall
they be justified fully by the lively voice of the Judge himself; now shall
their justification be solemnly and publicly declared to all the world; The
Syriack word to justify, is also to conquer, because when a man is justified,
he overcomes all those bills and indictments which were brought in against him;
now this is manifestly done in the day of judgment when Christ shall before Men
and Angels acquit, and absolve his people: oh what a glorious conquest will
that be over Sin, Death, and Hell, when the judge of the whole World shall
pronounce them free from all Sin, and from all those miserable effects of Sin,
Death, Hell, and Dominion.

5. They must inherit the Kingdom prepared for them, so is the sentence at that
day, Come ye Blessed, Mat. 25.34.
inherit the Kingdom. Not only are they freed from Hell, but they must inherit
Heaven. Now herein is an high step of salvation, and a great part of the design
of Christ's coming, to bring his Saints into Heaven; he went thither before to
prepare it for them, and now he comes again to give them the possession of it,
come enter into heaven. Heaven? what is Heaven? surely it is not one single
Palace; but a City, a Metropolis, a Mother-City, the first City of God's
creation: When the Angel carried John in the spirit to a great and high
Mountain, Rev. 21.10, 11.
he showed him the great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven
from God, having the glory of God. But a City is too little, Luke 12.32.
therefore its more, its a Kingdom; Fear not little Flock, its your Fathers
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom; and at this last day he bids his Saints
to inherit the Kingdom. Luke. 20.34, 35, 36.
Or if a Kingdom be too little, it is called a World; the Children of this
world marry, and are given in marriage; but they which shall be accounted
worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry,
nor are given in marriage, neither can they dye any more. There Is another world
besides this, and for eminency it is called the world to come. O the breadth and
largeness of that world! as the greater circle must contain the less, Heb. 6.5.
so does that world contain this; alas, all our dwellings here are but as caves
under the earth, and holes of poor clay in comparison. In the bosom of that
Heaven is many a dwelling place; John 14.2.
In my Fathers house are many mansions; there lodges many thousand of glorious
Kings; O what fair fields, and mountains of roses and spices, are there? surely
gardens of length and breadth above millions of miles are nothing in comparison.
O the Vines, the Lillies, the Roses, the precious Trees that grow in Immanuel's
land! an hundred harvests in one year are nothing there, The lowest stones in
every mansion there, are precious stones; Rev. 21.18.
the very building of the wall about it is Jasper, and the City is pure gold,
like unto clear glass. O glorious inheritance! Tell me Christians, in what City
on Earth do men walk upon gold? or dwell within the walls of Gold? though none
such here, yet under the feet of the inhabitants of Heaven there is Gold; All
the streets, and fields of that City, Kingdom, World, Rev. 21.21.
are pure gold, as it were transparent glass. But alas, what speak I of Gold,
or Glass; all these are but shadows; indeed and in truth there is nothing so
low as Gold, or precious Stones; there is nothing so base in this high and
glorious Kingdom, as Gardens, Trees, or Roses, comparisons are but created
shadows, that come not up to express the glory of the thing. I shall therefore
leave to speak this, because unspeakable.

6. They must live with Christ in heaven; they must see, and enjoy Christ there
to all eternity. This is a main end of Christ's coming, I will come again, John
14.3. John 17.24.
and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also -- And
Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold the glory which thou have given me. O let faith eye this above
all the former! what? will my Savior come again? and shall I see his face? Oh
what a pleasant sight will this same be? if Heaven, if the inheritance be such
a wonder to the beholders, what a beauty is that which is in the samplar? oh
what an happiness to stand besides that dainty precious Prince in Heaven? to
see the King on his Throne? to see the Lamb, the fair Tree of life, the flower
of Angels, the spotless Rose, that Crown, the Garland, the joy of Heaven, the
wonder of wonders for eternity? oh what a life to see the precious Tree of
life! to see a multitude without quantity of the Apples of glory! to see love
it self, and to be warmed with the heat of immediate love that comes out from
the precious heart and bowels of Jesus Christ! Oh what a dearness to see all
relations meet in one! to see the Savior, the good Shepherd, the Redeemer,
the great Bishop of our souls, the Angel of the Covenant, the Head of the body
of the Church, the King of ages, the Prince of peace, the Creator of the ends
of the Earth, the Song of Angels, and glorified Saints. Not only must they see
Christ, but they shall enjoy him whom they see; they fly with doves-wings of
beauty after the Lamb, and in flying after him they lay hold upon him, and they
will not leave him; they can never have enough of the chaste fruition of the
glorious Prince Immanuel, and they never want his in-most presence to the full;
they suck the honey and the honeycomb; they drink of the floods of eternal
consolations, and fill all empty desires; and as if the souls of Saints were
without bottom, a fresh they suck again to all eternity. Now (...) is salvation
indeed, the soul that attains this full enjoyment, is saved to the uttermost.

3. In respect of Christ himself that he may be glorified. Now in two things
more especially will he be glorified at that day. 1. In his justice. 2. In his
mercy, or free grace.

1. His justice will be glorified, especially in punishing the wicked here on
Earth, little justice is done on most offenders; though some public crimes are
sometimes punished, yet the actions of closets and chambers, the designs and
thoughts of men; the businesses of retirements, and of the night, escape the
hand of justice; and therefore God has so ordained it, that there shall be a
day of doom, wherein all that are let alone by men, shall be questioned by God;
Shall not the judge of all the world do right! Genesis 18.25.
then all thoughts shall be examined, and secret actions viewed on each side,
and the infinite number of those sins which escaped here, shall be blazoned
there; all shall have justice; and the justice of the judge shall be so exact,
that he will account with men by minutes; and that justice may reign entirely,
God shall open his treasure: I mean the wicked man's treasure, and tell the
sums, and weigh the grains and scruples. Deuteronomy. 32.34.
Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? I will
restore it in the day of vengeance says the Lord. Oh how will God glorify his
justice at that day? surely his justice shall shine, and be eminently glorious
in every passage.

2. His mercy, or free grace will be glorified in rewarding the Saints. And
this is the main, the supreme end of his coming to judgment, 2 These. 1.10.
He shall come (says the Apostle) to be glorified in his Saints; not but that
the Angels shall glorify the riches of his grace, as well as Saints; but
because the Angels never sinned, (they have now kept their Robes of innocence,
their cloth of Gold above five thousand years, without one spark of dirt, or
change of color:) therefore the glory of his grace is more especially fastened
on Saints, that sometimes were sinners. Oh what stories will be told at this
day of graces acts? I was a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
and a persecutor, and an injurious person (said Paul) but I obtained mercy;
(...), but I was be-mercied, as if he had been dipped in a River, in a Sea of
mercy; it may be he will make the same acknowledgment at the day of judgment; I
was a sinner, but the grace of the Lord Jesus to me was abundant,
superabundant; I obtained as much grace as would have saved a world. Certainly
free grace shall then be discovered in some purpose; Romans 5.20.
then it shall be known, That where sin abounded, grace far more; it
over-abounded, or more than over-bounded: (...), It is a word borrowed from
Fountains, and Rivers, which have over-flowed with Waters ever since the
Creation; then all the Saints shall exalt, and magnify, and with loud voices
praise the glory of his grace; they shall look on their debts written in graces
book, and then shall they sing and say, O the mystery of grace! O the
gold-mines, and the depts of Christ's free love! why this was the great design
of our salvation: at the first, when God was willing to communicate himself out
of his aloneness everlasting, he laid this plot, that all he would do should be
to the praise of the glory of his grace; Ephesians. 1.6.
and now at his second coming, having done all he will do, the Saints for whom
he has done all, admire, esteem, honor, and sound forth the praises of his
grace. Is not this their everlasting song which they begin at this day? Glory
to the Lamb, and glory to his grace, that sits on the Throne for ever more?
not but that they glorify him in his wisdom, power, holiness, and his other
attributes, ay but especially in this, it is his Grace in which he most
delights; even as virtuous Kings affect, above all their other Virtues, to be
had in honor for their Clemency, and Bounty; so Jesus Christ the King of Kings
affects, above all, the glory of his grace. And to this purpose Heaven it self
is an house full of broken men, who have borrowed millions from Christ, but can
never repay more than to read, and sing the praises of Free Grace; Glory to the
Lamb, and glory to the riches of his grace for evermore.

Thus for directions; one word of Application, or a few motives to work Faith
in you in this respect,

1. Christ in his word invites you to believe; these are his Letters from
Heaven, Come all to the marriage-supper of the Lamb; Ho every one that thirsts
come in; Heaven-gate is open to all that knock, but fools, foolish Virgins,
foolish souls, which have no Faith, nor will have any, to render them fit for
Heaven. This meets with some that scruple, what? will Christ come again to
receive me to himself? shall I enter with him into glory? alas no unclean thing
shall enter into that holy City, and shall such a sinner as I am be admitted?
Oh believe, believe thy part in this coming of Christ, to receive thee to
himself; and no sin, that thou feel a burden, shall keep thee out of
Heaven. There is Rahab the Harlot; and Manasseh the Murderer, and Mary that
had so many Devils; a man that has many Devils may come where there is not
one; Luke. 14.22.
Lame, and Blind, and Halt may enter into Heaven, and yet still there is room;
there is a great variety of guests above, and yet one Table large enough for
all; no crouding, and yet thousands, and thousands of thousands sitting
together; Ah poor soul why do thou make ecceptions, where God makes none? why
should thou exclude thy self out of these golden gates, when God does not?
believe, only believe in the Lord Jesus, and the promise is sure, and without
all controversy, thou shall be saved.

2. Christ by his Ministry entreats you to believe; come, say they, we beseech
you believe in your judge; it may be you startle at this, what? to believe in
him who is a coming to be your judge? but if your judge be Jesus, if the same
person who dyed for you, shall come to judge you, why should you fear? indeed
if your judge were your enemy, you might fear; but if he who is your Lord, and
who loves your souls shall judge you, there is no such cause; will a man fear
to be judged by his dearest friends? a brother by a brother? a child by a
father? or a wife by her husband? consider! is not he your Judge who came down
from Heaven, and who being on earth was judged, condemned, and executed in your
stead? and yet are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Oh what an unreasonable
sin is unbelief! nay, say the scrupulous, if I were assured of this; if I knew
that my judge were my friend, I should not fear; but is he not my enemy; have
not I provoked him to enmity against my soul? do I not stand it out in arms
against my judge? am not I daily sinning against him, who justly may condemn me
for my sin? give this for granted, that this and no other, no better is my
case, and what say you then? if it be so, hark then to the voice of our
ministry. We poor Ministers that love your souls (say what you will of us)
would fain have all this enmity against God, and against Christ done away; and
to this purpose we not only appear many and many a time upon our knees to God
for you, but (mangre all your opposition against us) we could be content to
come upon our knees from God to you, to beseech you not to provoke your Judge
against your souls: what, is Christ and you at odds? is the difference wide
betwixt your judge and you? I do now in my Masters Name, in the Name of God,
and in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, beseech you to believe; I beseech you
in Christ's Name; in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God. Is not this the
Apostles word? Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead? Christ's
Ministers are not only God's Legates, but Christ's Surrogates; to make this
plain to you, when a Prince sends a messenger to another Prince, that messenger
is only an Ambassador, the Prince being not bound to carry the message himself
in Person; but now Jesus Christ, he is the Father's Ambassador, and Christ is
thereby bound to bring the message of peace himself, but being necessarily
employed elsewhere (in the same design of grace) he constitutes us his
officers; so that we do not come only in the Name of God, but in the place of
Christ to do that work which is primarily his; As the Father has sent me,
John. 20.21. Gal. 4.14.
even so send I you; and this was the commendation of the Galathians, that they
received the Apostle Paul even as Jesus Christ. Now weigh our desire, we
beseech you to believe; we beseech you to sign the articles of agreement
betwixt Christ and you; what? shall some base inconsiderable lust stand in
competition with Jesus Christ? will you not make your peace with your judge
whilst you are in a way, and before he sit in the Throne? behold we give you
warning, the Judge is at the door, now believe and be saved. Oh how fain would
we tempt you (as it were) with glory? we tender Christ, and we offer peace, we
come in the judges name to beseech you to make ready for him, and for Heaven;
we bring salvation to your very doors, to your very ears, and there we are
sounding, knocking, Will ye go to Heaven, sinners? will ye go to Heaven? Oh
believe in him that will judge you, and he will save you.

3. Christ by his Spirit moves, excites, and provokes you to believe. Sometimes
in reading, and sometimes in hearing, and sometimes in meditating you may feel
him stir; have you felt no gale of the spirit all this while? John 16.8.
It is the spirit that convinces the world of sin, especially of that great
sin of unbelief; and then of righteousness, which Christ procures by going to
his Father; observe here, it is the work of the spirit thus to convince, so
that all moral philosophy, and the wisest directions of the most Civil men will
leave you in a wilderness; yea ten thousands of Sermons may be preached to you
to believe, and yet you never shall, till you are over-powred by Gods Spirit:
it is the Spirit that enlightens, and directs you, as occasion is, saying this
is the way, walk in it. Isa. 30.21.
It is the spirit that rouzeth, and awakeneth you by effectual motions, Arise
my love, Cant. 2.10.
my fair one, and come away. He stands at the door and knocks; he stretches out
his hand with Heaven in it, and he does so all the day long; Romans 10.21.
all the day long have I stretched out my hand; and that you may find his yoke
easy, and his burden light; it is the Spirit that draws the yoke with you;
and by secret animations, and sweet inspirations heartens, and enables you to
do the work with ease; and in this respect the Saints are said to be led by the
spirit; even as a mother leads her child that is weak, and enables it to go the
better, so the spirit leads the Saints (as it were) by the hand, and
strengthens them to believe yet more and more. I speak now to Saints, if whiles
I press you to believe in Jesus, you feel the spirit in his stirrings, and
impetuous acts, Romans 8.24.
surely it concerns you to believe, it concerns you to be obsequious and
yielding to the breathings of God's Spirit, it concerns you to cooperate with
the spirit, and to answer his wind-blowing. As you are to take Christ at his
word, so you are to take Christ's spirit at his work: if now he knocks, do you
knock with him; if now his fingers make a stirring upon the handles of the bar,
let your hearts make a stirring with his fingers also; O reach in your hearts
under the stirrings of free grace; obey dispositions of grace as God himself;
if now you feel your hearts as hot as Iron, it is good then to smite with the
hammer; if now you feel your spirits docile, say then with him in the Gospel, I
believe, Lord help my unbelief; I believe, what? I believe when Jesus comes
again, he will receive me to himself, and that I shall be for ever with the
Lord, Amen, Amen.

SECT. VI. Of Loving Jesus in that respect.
6. LET us love Jesus, as carrying on the great Work of our Salvation for us in
his second coming. In prosecution of this, I must first set down Christ's love
to us, and then our love to Christ; that is the cause, and this effect; that is
the spring, and this the stream; in vain should we persuade our hearts to love
the Lord, if in the first place we were not sensible that our Lord loves us,
John 4.19.
We love him (says the Apostle) because he first loved us; it is Christ's way
of winning hearts, he draws a lump of love out of his own heart, and casts it
into the sinner's heart, and so he loves him. Come then let us first take a
view of Christ's love to us, and see if from thence any sparks of love will
fall on our hearts to love him again. Should I make a Table of Christ's acts of
love and free grace to us, I might begin with that eternity of his love before
the beginning, and never end till I draw it down to that eternity of his love
without all ending: his love is as his mercy, from everlasting to everlasting;
he loved us before time, in the beginning of time, in the fullness of time, at
this time the flames of his love are as hot in his breast as they were at first,
and when time shall be no more he will love us still; this fire of Heaven is
everlasting; there is in the breast of Christ an eternal coal of burning love,
that never, never shall be quenched. But I have in some measure already
discovered all those acts of his grace and love, till his second coming: and
therefore I begin there.

1. Christ will come; is not this love? as his departure was a rich testimony
of his love. John 14.18.
It is expedient for you that I go away; so is his returning, I will not leave
you comfortless, I will come unto you; Oh how can we think of Christ's
returning, and not meditate on the greatness of his love? might he not send his
Angels, but he must come himself? is it not state and majesty enough to have
the Angels come for us, but that he himself must come with his Angels, to meet
us more than half the way? what King on Earth would adopt a beggar, and after
his adoption would himself go in person, to fetch him from the dunghill to his
Throne? we are filthy lazars, from the crown of our heads to the soles of our
feet we are full of sores, and yet the King of Heaven puts on his best attire,
and comes in person with all his retinue of glory, to fetch us from our graves,
to his own Court of Heaven. Oh the loves of Christ in this one act, he will
come again, he is but gone for a while, but he will come again in his own person.

2. Christ will welcome all his Saints into his presence; and is not this love?
after he is come down from Heaven; he stays for them a while in the Clouds, and
commanding his Angels to bring them thither, anon they come; and oh how his
heart springs within him at their coming! what throbs and pangs of love are in
his heart at the first view of them? as they draw near, and fall down at his
feet, and worship him; so he draws near, and falls upon their necks, and
welcomes them. Methinks I hear him say, Come blessed souls, you are my
purchase, for whom I Covenanted with my Father from eternity; O you are dearly
welcome to your Lord, in that now I have you in my arms; I feel the fruit of my
death, the acceptance of my Sacrifice, the return of my prayers; for this I
was born and dyed, for this I rose again and ascended into Heaven, for this I
have interceded a Priest in Heaven these many years; and now I have the end and
design of all my actings and sufferings for you, how is my joy fulled? look as
at the meeting of two lovers there is great joy, especially if the distance
has been great, and the desires of enjoying one another vehement; so is the
meeting of Christ with his Saints; the joy is so great that it runs over, and
wets the fair brows, and beauteous locks of Cherubims and Seraphims; and all
the Angels have a part of this banquet at this day.

3. Christ will sentence his Saints for eternal life; here is love indeed,
every word of the sentence is full of love; it contains the reward of his
Saints, a reward beyond their work, and beyond their wages, and beyond the
promise, and beyond their thoughts, and beyond their understanding; it is a
participation of the joys of God, and of the inheritance of the Judge himself:
Come enter into your Masters joy, inherit the Kingdom. Oh but if all the Saints
have only one Kingdom, where is my room? fear not O my soul, thou shall have
room enough; though but one Kingdom, yet all the Inhabitants there are Kings;
whole Heaven is such a Kingdom, as is entirely, and fully enjoyed by one
glorified Saint, all and every one has the whole Kingdom at his own will;
every one is filled with God, as if there were no fellows there to share ^ith
him Oh that I may come under this blessed sentence! never was more love
expressed in words, than Christ expresses in this sentence, Come ye blessed,
etc.

4. Christ will take up all his Saints with him into glory; where he will
present them to his Father; and then be their all in all to all eternity. This
is the heig^t of Christ's love; this is the immediate love that comes out from
the precious heart and bowels of Jesus Christ; this is that Zenith of love,
when sensibly and feelingly it burns at hottest; it is true, that Christ's love
breaks out in all those precedaneous acts, we have already spoken; Oh but what
loves will he cast out from himself in glory? the more excellent the Soil is,
and the nearer the Sun is, the more of Summer, and the more of day; the more
delicious must be the Apples, the Pomgranates, the Roses, the Lillies that grow
there; surely Christ in glory is a blessed soil; Roses, and Lillies, and Apples
of love, that are eternally Summer-green and sweet, grow out of him; the honey
of Heaven is more than honey; the honey of love that is pure, and unmixt, and
glorious in Christ, must needs be incomparable. I cannot say, but that Christ's
love, like himself, is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; there is
no intension, 1 John 4.8.
or remission of his love as in it self; for God is love, he is essentially
love; and therefore admits of no degrees; yet in respect of the sense, or
manifestation of this love of Christ, there must needs be a difference; thus if
he loved his spouse on earth, how much more will he love her when his Bride in
Heaven? If he loves us while sinners, and enemies to his holiness, how much
more will he love us, when we are sons, and perfected Saints in glory; he that
could spread his arms, and open his heart on the Cross, will he not then open
arms, and heart, and all to them that reign with him in his Kingdom? if in this
life such is loves puissance, that we usually say of Christ, Though the head be
in heaven, yet he has left his heart on earth with sinners; what shall we say
of Christ in glory, where love like the Sun ever stands in the Zenith? Deuteronomy.
33.27.
where the eternal God is the souls everlasti^g refuge, and underneath are his
everlasting arms?

5. And if Christ love thus; how should we love again for such a love? Lord,
what a sum of love are we indebted to thee? is it possible that ever we should
pay the debt? can we love as high, as deep, as broad, as long as love it self,
or as Christ himself? no, no; all we can do is but to love a little; and Oh
that in the consideration of his love we could love a little in sincerity! Oh
that we were but able feelingly to say, Why Lord I love thee, I feel I love
thee, even as I feel I love my friend, or as I feel I love my self. Such
arguments of love have been laid before us, as that now I know no more; we have
seen whole Christ cap-a-pe; we have heard of the loves of Christ from eternity
to eternity; we have had a view of the everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ,
wherein his love is represented to us as hot as death, or as the flames of God;
and do we not yet love him? has Christ all this while opened his breast and
heart to us, saying, Friends, Doves, come in, and dwell in the holes of this
rock? And do we scratch his breast? do we turn our backs upon him, and requite
his love with hatred? surely this is more than sin; for what is sin but a
transgression of the law? but this sin is both a transgression of Law and
Gospel. What? to spurn against the warm bowels of love? to spit on grace? to
disdain him who is the white and ruddy, the fairest of Heaven? Oh the
aggravation of this sin! 'its an heart of flint and adamant that spits at
Evangelick love: Law-love, is love, but Evangelick love is more than love; its
the gold, the flower of Christ's wheat, and of his finest love. Oh the many
Gospel-passages of love that we have heard! Oh the sweet streams of love that
we have followed, till now that we are come to a Sea of love, to an heaven of
love, to an infinite, eternal, everlasting love in heaven! I want words to
express this love of Jesus; a Sea of love is nothing, it has a bottom; an
Heaven of love is nothing, it has a brim; but infinite, eternal, everlasting
love has no bottom, no brim, no bounds, and do we not yet love him? do we not
yet feel the fire of love break forth? if not, it is time to turn our Preaching
into Praying; O thou who art the Element or Sun of love, come with thy power,
let out ^ne beam, one ray, one gleam of love upon my soul, shine hot upon my
heart, cast my soul into a love-transe, remember thy promise to circumcise my
heart, Deuteronomy 30.6
that I may love the Lord my God with all my heart, and with all my soul.
Surely the great Marriage of the Lamb is coming on, he will come, and welcome
all his Saints into his presence; he will bid them inherit the Kingdom, and
put them in a possession of the inheritance; and then we cannot choose but love
our Jesus with all our hearts, and with all our souls; only begin we it here;
let us now be sick of love, that we may then be well with love? let us now rub
and chase our hearts (our dead cold hearts) before this fire, till we say with
Peter, Why Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.

SECT. VII. Of joying in Jesus in that respect.
7. LET us joy in Jesus, as carrying on the great work of our salvation for us
in his second coming. Christ delights to have his People look upon him with
delight; for a soul to be always under a spirit of bondage, and so to look upon
Christ as a Judge, a Lion, or an offended God, it does not please God; the Lord
Jesus is tender of the joy of his Saints, Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, says
Christ; rejoice evermore, -- rejoice in the Lord always; Mat. 5.12. 1 These.
5.16. Phil. 4.4. Psalm. 68.3.
and again, I say rejoice. Let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice before
God, yea let them exceedingly rejoice. All that Christ does to his Saints tends
to this joy, as the upshot or end of all; if he cast down, it is but to raise
them up; if he humble, it is but to exalt; if he kill, it is but to make alive;
in every dispensation still he has a tender care to preserve their joy. This
is the Benjamin, about which Christ's bowels beat; Let my Children suffer any
thing, but nothing in their joy; I would have all that love my Name to be
joyfall in me.

Oh, say some, but Christ's day is a terrible day; when Christ appears, he will
make the Heavens, and Earth, and Hell to shake and tremble. Our God shall come,
and shall not keep silence; Psalm. 50.3.
a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about
him. True! but what is all this terror but an argument of my Father's power, and
justice against sinners? if thou art Christ's, and have thy part in him, not
one jot of all this terror belongs to thee, The Lord knows how to deliver the
godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to
be punished. 2 Pet. 2.9.
He knows how to make the same day a terror to his foes, and a joy to his
people; he ever intended it for the great distinguishing and separating day,
wherein both joy and sorrow should be manifested to the highest. O then let the
heavens rejoice, the sea, the earth, the floods, the hills, for the Lord comes
to Judge the earth: Psalm. 97.7, 8, 9.
with righteousness shall he judge the World, and the people with equity. If
you find it an hard thing to joy in Jesus, as in reference to his second
coming, think of these motives --

1. Christ's coming is the Christians encouragement; so Christ himself lays it
down, You shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great
glory; and when these things begin to come to pass, Luke 21.27, 28.
then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. The
signs of his coming are the hopes of your approaching introduction into glory,
and what should you do then but prepare for your approaching with exceeding
joy? many evils do now surround you every where; Satan has his snares, and the
World his baits, and your own hearts are apt to betray you into your enemies
hands; but when Christ comes, you shall have full deliverance, and perfect
redemption; and therefore look up, and lift up your heads. The Apostle speaks
the very same encouragement. 1 These. 4.16, 71, 18.
The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first;
then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, -- wherefore comfort one another with
these words. Christ's coming is a comfortable doctrine to all believers; and
therefore all the Elect that hear these words, should be comforted by them.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people.

2. Christ our Savior must be our Judge; the same Jesus that was born for us,
and lived for us, and dyed for us, and does now pray for us, will come at last
to judge us; is not this comfortable? you that have heard all his transactions,
can you ever foget the unweariness of Christ's love, in his constant and
continual actings for your souls? how long has he been interceding for his
Saints? how long has he been knocking at their hearts for entrance? it is now
above a thousand six hundred years that he has been praying, and knocking, and
he resolves not to give over till all be his, till all the Tribes in ones and
twos be over Jordan, and up with him in the heavenly Canaan. And if this be he
that must be our Judge; if he that loves our souls must Judge our souls; if he
that has a great interest and increase of joy in our salvation, must pass our
sentence, will not this work us into a rejoicing frame.

3. Christ's sentence is the Christian's acquittance; (I may call it his
general acquittance from the beginning of the World to the end thereof.) Hence
some call this the day of the believers full justification; they were before
made just, and esteemed just, but now by a lively sentence they shall be
pronounced just by Christ himself; now is the complete acquittance, or the full
absolution from all sin; now will Christ pardon, and speak out his pardon once
for all; now will he take his book (wherein all our sins, as so many debts or
trespasses are written) and he will cancel all; Acts 3.19.
Your sins shall be blotted out (says Peter) when the time of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord. And is not this enough to cause our joy?
when the spirit witnessing with our spirits, does but in part assure us of sins
pardon, is it not exceeding sweet? Oh but how sweet will be that sentence,
which will fully resolve the question, and leave no room of doubting any more
for ever? consider O my soul, the day is a coming, when the Judge of Heaven and
Earth will acquit thee of all thy sins before all the World; it is a part of
his business at that day to glorify his Justice and free grace in thy
absolution. O Christians! how may we comfort one another with these words?

4. Christ in the issue will lead us into glory. As the Bridegroom after
nuptials, leads his Bride to his own home, that there they may live together,
and dwell together; so Christ our royal Bridegroom will lead us into the Palace
of his glory. And is not this joy of our Lord enough to cause our Joy; Oh what
embraces of love, what shaking of hands, what welcomes shall we have into this
City? there shall we see Christ in his garden, there shall we be set as a seal
on Christ's arm, and as a seal upon his heart; there shall we be filled with
his love, enlightened with his light, encircled in his arms, following his
steps, and praising his Name, and admiring his glory; there shall we joy
indeed, For in thy presence there is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and at thy right hand there are pleasures evermore. There is joy, and full
joy, and fullness of joy; there are pleasures, and pleasures evermore, and
pleasures evermore at God's right hand. O the music of the sanctuary! O the
sinless and well-tuned Psalms! O the Songs of the high Temple, without either
Temple or Ordinances, as we have them here! can we choose to joy at the thought
of this joy above? if God would so dispense, that even now we might stand at
the utmost door of Heaven, and that God would strike up a window, and give us a
spiritual eye, and an heavenly heart, so that we could look in, and behold the
Throne, and the Lamb, and the troops of glorified ones clothed in white; would
not this cheer up our hearts, and fill them with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory? certainly this day will come, when Christ will bring us not only to the
door, but through the gates into the City; and then we shall see all these
sights, and hear all the music made in heaven: how then should we but joy in
the hope of the glory of God? O methinks raised thoughts of our mansion in
glory, should make us swim through the deepest Sea of troubles, and
afflictions, and never fear. Come then, O my drowzy soul, and harken to these
motives; if yet thou see not the Son it self appear, methinks the twilight of
a promise should revive thee; it is but a little while, And he that shall come,
will come, and he will not tarry. It may be thou art reviled, and persecuted
here on Earth; and what then? has not Christ bid thee to rejoice in
afflictions? is it not his word, that in this very case thou should rejoice,
Matthew. 5.12. 1 Pet. 4.12.
and be exceeding glad? -- is it not his command, Think it not strange
concerning the fiery trials, but rather rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers
of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad
also with exceeding joy. We must rejoice now, that we may rejoice then; indeed
our present joy is a taste of our future joy, and God would have us to begin
our Heaven here on Earth. Come then, come forth, O my dull conjealed heart!
thou that spendest thy days in sorrow, and thy breath in sighing, that minglest
thy bread with tears, and drinkest the tears which thou weepest; thou that
prayest for joy, and waitest for joy, and longest for joy, and complainest for
want of joy; O the times a coming, when thou shall have fullness of joy; the
times a coming when the Angels shall bring thee to Christ, and when Christ
shall take thee by the hand, and lead thee into his purchased joy, and present
thee unspotted before his Father, and give thee thy place about his Throne; and
do thou not rejoice in this: art thou not exceedingly raised in such a
Meditation as this? surely if one drop of lively faith were but mixed with
these motives, thou might carry an Heaven within thee, and go on ever
singing to thy grave; say then, do thou believe? or do thou not believe? if
thy faith be firm, how should thou but rejoice? if thou rollest thy self on
Christ, and on that promise, I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you; how should thou but rejoice,
and be exceeding glad? if thou look upon the holy Ghost as designed by the
Father and the Son to bring joy and delight into thy soul? how should thou
but be filled with the water of life, with the oil of gladness, and with the
new wine of the Kingdom of God? O the blessed workings of faith on such a
subject as this! if once we are but justified by faith, and that we can act our
faith on Christ's glorious coming, then it will follow, Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
that we shall have peace with God, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of
God; and not only so, but we shall glory in tribulation also.

SECT. VIII. Of calling on Jesus in that respect.
8. LEt us call on Jesus, as carrying on our souls salvation at his second
coming; this contains prayer and praise.

1. Let us pray for the coming of Christ; this was the constant prayer of the
Church, Come Lord Jesu, come quickly. The spirit and the Bride say, come. Well
knows the Bride that the day of Christ's coming is her wedding day, Rev. 22.17.
her coronation day, the day of presenting her unto his Father, and therefore
no wonder if she pray for the hastening of it; Make have my beloved, and be
thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart; thy Kingdom come. Cant. 8.14.
Many prayers are in the bowels of this, as that Christ, when he comes, may bid
us welcome, and give us a place on his Throne, on his right hand, and pronounce
us blessed, and take us to himself, to live with himself in eternal glory, etc.
But I mention only this general, and let each soul expatiate on the rest.

2. Let us praise him for his coming, and for all his actings at his coming.
Our engagement to Christ even for this transaction is so great, that we can
never enough extol his Name; at that day the books shall be opened, and why not
the book of our engagements to Jesus Christ? if it must be opened, I can surely
tell you it is written full; the page and margent, both within and without, is
written full; it is an huge book of many volumes. O then let our hearts be full
of praises! let us join with those blessed Elders that fell down before the
Lamb, and sung, Worthy it the Lamb that was slain to receive power, Rev. 5.12.
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.
Yea, let us join with all those creatures in heaven, and on earth, and under
the earth, and in the Sea; whom John heard, saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory,
and Power be unto him that sits on the throne, Ver. 13.
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Amen.

SECT. IX. Of conforming to Jesus in that respect.
9. LET us conform to Jesus, as coming again to judge the World. Looking to
Jesus contains this; when the Apostle would persuade Christians to patience
under the cross, he lays down first the cloud of witnesses, all the Martyrs of
the Church of Christ; and secondly Jesus Christ himself, as of more virtue and
power than all the rest; the Martyrs suffered much, but Christ endured more
than they all; and therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 12.2.
look unto Jesus; surely he is the best exemplar, the chief pattern to whom in
all his transactions, we may in some way or other conform.

But how should we conform to Christ in this respect? I Answer --

1. Christ will in his time prepare for judgment; Oh let us at all times
prepare for his judging of us; does it not concern us to prepare for him, as
well as it concerns him to prepare for us? if Christ come, and find us
careless, negligent, unprepared, what will become of us? the very thought of
Christ's sudden coming to judgment might well put us into a waiting, watching
posture, that we might be still in readiness; it cannot be long, and alas, what
is a little time when it is gone; how quickly shall we be in another World, and
our souls receive their particular judgments; and so wait till our bodies be
raised, and judged to the same condition, or salvation? it is not an hundred
years in all likelihood, till every soul of us shall be in heaven or hell; it
may be within a year, or two, or ten, or thereabouts, the greatest part of this
congregation will be in Heaven or Hell; and I beseech you what is a year, or
two, or ten? what is an hundred, or a thousand years to the days of eternity?
how speedily is this gone? and how endless is that time, or eternity that is
come? is it not high time then to prepare our lamps, to trim our souls, to
watch, and fast, and pray, and meditate, and to remember that for all our
deeds, good or evil, God will bring us to Judgment? herein is our Conformity
to Christ's coming; before he comes he prepares for us, oh let us against his
coming prepare for him.

2. Christ at his coming will summon all his Saints to arise, to ascend, and to
come to him in the clouds; O let us summon our souls to arise, to ascend, and
to go to Christ in the Heavens. What Christ will do really at that day, let us
do spiritually on this day. It was the prodigal's saying, I will arise, and go
to my Father, and say unto him. Luke 15.18.
We are naturally sluggish, we lie in a bed of sin, and security; and we are
loath to arise, to ascend, and to go to God. Oh then let us call upon our own
souls! Awake, awake Deborah! why art thou so heavy O my soul? let us stir up
our spirits, consciences, wills, affections every day; let us wind them up, as
a man does his Watch, that it may be in a continual motion. Alas! alas! we had
need to be continually stirring up the gifts and graces that are in us; it is
the Lords pleasure that we should daily come to him, he would have us on the
wing of Prayer, and on the wing of Meditation, and on the wing of Faith; he
would have us to be still arising, ascending and mounting up in divine
contemplation to his Majesty. And is it not our duty, and the Saints
disposition to be thus? Whethersoever the dead carcass is, thither will the
Eagles resort: Matthew. 24.28.
if Christ be in Heaven, where should we be but in Heaven with him? For where
your Treasure is, there will your hearts be also. Oh that every morning, and
every evening, at least, our hearts would arise, ascend, and go to Christ in
the Heavens.

3. Christ will at last judge all our souls, and judge all the wicked to
eternal flames; oh let us judge our selves, that we may not be judged of the
Lord in that sad Judgment. If we would judge our selves (says the Apostle) we
should not be judged. 1 Cor. 11.31.
Good reason we have to conform to Christ in this point, or otherwise how
should we escape the judgment of Christ at the last day? but in what manner
should we judge our selves? I answer -- 1. We must search out our sins. 2. We
must confess them before the Lord. 3. We must condemn our selves, or pass a
sentence against our own souls. 4. We must plead pardon, and cry mightily to
God in Christ for the remission of all those sins whereof we have judged our
selves, and condemned our selves.

1. We must search out our sins. Winnow your selves O people, not worthy to be
beloved. Zeph. 2.1.
There should be a strict scrutiny to find out all the profaneness of our hearts
and lives, all our sins against light, and love, and checks, and vows; winnow
your selves. If you will not, I pronounce to you from the eternal God, that ere
long the Lord will come in the Clouds, and then will he open the black Book
wherein all your sins are written; he will search Jerusalem with candles, he
will come with a Sword in his hand to search out all secure sinners every
where, and then will all your sins be discovered to all the World. O that we
would prevent this by our search and scrutining a forehand.

2. We must confess our sins before the Lord; we must spread them before the
Lord as Hezekiah did his letter; only in our confessions observe these rules;
As --

1. Our confession must be full of sorrow, Psalm. 38.18.
I will declare my iniquity (says David) I will be sorry for my sin. His
confessions were dolorous confessions; he felt sin, and it wrought upon him as
an heavy burden, They were two heavy for me. Ver. 4.
There Is nothing in the World can make an heart more heavy, than when it feels
the weight and heaviness of sin.

2. Our confession must be a full confession, we must pour it out. Thus David
styles one of his Psalms, A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed,
Psalm 102. Preface.
and pours out his complaint before the Lord. We must pour out our
complaints, as a man pours water out of a Vessel. Arise, cry out in the
night, in the beginning of the watches, pour out thine heart like water before
the face of the Lord. Water runs all out of a Vessel, Lam. 2.19.
when you turn the mouth downward, never a spoon-ful will then stay behind; so
should we pour out our hearts before God, (and if it were possible) leave not a
sin unconfessed, at least for the kinds, if not for the particular sins.

3. Our confession must be with full aggravation; we should aggravate our sins
by all the circumstances, that may show them odious. Thus Peter when he had
denied Christ, it is said that he thought thereon, and he wept. He thought
thereon, Matthew. 14 72.
or he cast in his thoughts one thing upon another; q. d. Jesus Christ was my
Master and yet I denied him, he told me of this beforehand, that I might take
heed of it, and yet I denied him; I professed to him that I would never do it,
I would never forsake him, and yet I denied him; yea, this very night, and no
longer since, I said it again and again that I would not deny him, and yet I
denied him; yea, I failed, Although others deny thee, yet will not I; and yet
worse than all others, I denied him with a witness, for I affirmed desperately
that I knew not the man; nay, I swear desperately that I knew not the man; nay
more than so, I swear, and I cursed too, If I knew the man, let Gods curse fall
upon me; and all this I did within a few strides of my Lord; at that very time
when I should have stood for my Lord, in that all the World forsook him; why,
these were the circumstances of Peter's sin, and meditating on them, He went out
and wept bitterly. And thus we should aggravate our sins in our confessions; O
my sins were out of measure sinful. O they were sins against knowledge, and
light, against many mercies received, against many judgments threatened, against
many checks of conscience, against many vows and promises; thus often, and in
this place, and at that time, and in that manner, I committed these and these
sins; but of all the aggravations, let us be sure to remember how we sinned
against the goodness, and patience, and love, and mercy of God; surely these
circumstances will make our sins out of measure sinful. The Angel that reproved
the Children of Israel at Bochim, after the repetition of his mercies toward
them, Judges. 2.2.
and of their sins against him, he questions them in these words, Oh why have
ye done this? q. d. The Lord has done thus and thus mercifully unto you, oh
why have ye done thus unthankfully toward him? why was his mercy abused, his
goodness slighted, his patience despised? do ye thus requite the Lord O foolish
people and unwise? in like manner should we confess and aggravate our sins, O
my God, thou art my Father; was I ever in want, and thou did not relieve me?
was I ever in weakness, and thou did not strengthen me? was I ever in
straits, and thou did not deliver me? was I ever in sickness, and thou did
not cure me? was I ever in misery, and thou did not succor me? have thou not
been a gracious God to me? all my bones can say, who is like unto thee; Lord,
who is like unto thee? and shall I thus and thus reward the Lord for all his
mercies toward me? hear O Heavens, and hearken O Earth; Sun stand thou still,
and thou Moon be thou amazed at this! hear Angels, and hear Devils; hear
Heaven, and hear Hell, and be you avenged on such a sin as this is! O the
sinfulness of my sin in regard of these many circumstances.

3. We must condemn our selves, or pass sentence against our own souls; Lord,
the worst place in Hell is too good for me; Lord here is my soul, thou may if
thou please send Satan for it, and give me a portion among the damned. This
self-judging, or self-condemning is exemplified to this life in Ezra; for --

Ezra. 9.5.
1. He fell on his knees, he did not bow down his knees, but like a man
astonished he fell on his knees; he had before rent his garment, and mantle,
and plucked off the hair of his head and off his beard, and sat down
astonished; and now at the evening sacrifice he falls on his knees, and on the
ground in great amazement.

Ver. 5.
2. He spread out his hands unto the Lord; q. d. here is my breast, and here is
my heart-blood, I spread my arms, and lay all open, that thou may set the
naked point of thy sword of justice at my very heart.

Ver. 10.
3. He is dum, and speechless (as it were) before the Lord; And now our God,
what shall we say after all this? for we have forsaken thy commandments; q. d.
shall I excuse the matter? alas! it is inexcusable? what shall we say after all
this? shall we call for thy patience? we have had it, but how did we abuse it?
should we call for mercy? indeed we had it, but our stubborn hearts would never
come down: O our God what shall we say? I know not what to say, for we have
sinned against thee.

4. He lays down his soul, and all the Peoples souls at God's feet, q. d. here
we are, Ver. 15.
thou may damn us if thou will, Behold we are all here before thee in our
trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee, because of this. Behold here we
are, rebels we are; here are our heads and throats before the naked point of
thy vengeance, if now thou should take us from our knees, and throw us into
Hell, if we must go from our prayers to damnation, we cannot but say that thou
art just and righteous; Oh its mercy, its mercy indeed that we have been
spared, its just and righteous with God that we should be damned.

In this more especially lies self-condemnation; it makes a man to trample upon
his own self, it makes a man freely to accept of damnation; Levit. 26.41, 42.
They shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity, and then will I
remember my covenant with Jacob; they save God (as it were) a labor, judging
themselves, that they may not be judged.

4. We must plead pardon, and cry mightily to God in Christ, for the remission
of all our sins. This is the way of judging our selves, we see nothing but Hell
and damnation in our selves, but then we fling down our selves at God's gate of
mercy; we despair not in God, though in our selves; God in Christ is gracious
and merciful, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; and hence we make
bold to entreat the Lord for Christ's sake to be merciful to us; surely herein
lies the difference betwixt nature and grace; the natural man may see his sins,
and confess his sins, and judge himself for his sins; thus Saul did, and thus
Judas did, but then they despaired in God, and were damned indeed; now the
gracious man has a conscience within, that represents to him his damned
estate, but withal, it represents to him the free grace of God in Jesus Christ,
and so he only despairs in himself, and not in his God; now thus far good:
come Christians! do we despair in our selves? do we fling off all our own
hopes, and our own dependencies, hangings, holdings on duties, purposes,
graces, performances? and do we go to God in Christ, and tell him, We hang upon
nothing but the mere mercy, the free grace of God in Christ; and therefore Lord
pardon, Lord forgive for thy Names sake, promise sake, mercies sake, and for
the Lord Jesus sake: O let free grace have his work; Lord glorify thy Name,
and glorify the riches of thy grace in saving us: Why, this is the best hold
in the World, though the World cannot abide it; surely if we thus judge our
selves, we should not be judged.

4. Christ at his coming will be glorified in his Saints; not only in himself,
but in his Saints also; whose glory as it comes from him, so it will redound to
him: Oh let him now be glorified in us, let us now in some high way conform to
the image of his glory, let us look on Christ till we are like Christ, not
only in grace, but in glory; and this glory as it comes from him, so let it
redound to him. I will not say, that the Kingdom of Heaven and glory is in this
life, I leave this opinion to the dreamers of this time, I mean to the
Familists, Quakers, and such like; but this I say, that even in this life the
Saints of God enjoy a begun and imperfect conformity to Christ's glory; and
this is that I would now press upon us; let us so behold the glory of the Lord
in the glass of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.18.
as that we may be changed into the same image from glory to glory; from a
lesser measure to an higher measure of glory. The day is a coming that Christ
will be glorified in himself, and he will be glorified in his Saints, O the
glories that will then be accumulated and heaped upon Jesus Christ! come now,
let us behold this glory of Christ till we are changed in some high measure
into the same glory with Christ; Christ's glory rightly viewed is a changing
glory: And herein the views of Christ surpass all creature-views, if we behold
the Sun, we cannot possibly be changed into another Sun, but if with the eye of
knowledge and faith we behold Jesus Christ, we shall be changed into the
glorious image of Jesus Christ; if the Sun of righteousness cast forth his
golden beams upon us, and we enjoy this light; why then, Cant. 6.10.
Who is she that looks forth as the morning (as Aurora, the first birth of
the day) fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun.

I know this glorious change is but a growing change by degrees, from glory to
glory; and yet who can deny but there is some conformity to Christ's glory,
even in this life? do not these very Texts speak the self same thing? These
things have I spoken to you, John 15.11. 1 John 1.4. John 16.24. Isa. 66.10, 11.
that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. And these
things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. And ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full. And rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her all ye that love her, -- that ye may suck and be satisfied with the
breasts of her consolations, that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the
abundance of her glory. Romans 5.13.
And the God of all hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing. Surely
all joy, and peace, are synechdochically put for all other inchoations of
glorification. But how is a Saint in this life filled with all joy? I answer,
1. In regard of the object, God and Christ. 2. In regard of the degrees; though
not absolutely, yet so far forth, as the measure of joy is in this life
attainable; I might instance in the joy of Mr. Peacock, Mrs Brettergh, and of
some Martyrs, who sung in the fires. 3. In regard of duration, rejoice always,
Phil. 4.4.
not only in the calm of peace, but in the storm of violent opposition. A
Saint may have his troubles, but these troubles can never totally or finally
extinguish his joy, John 16.22.
your joy no man takes from you. He rejoices always.

O that something of the glory of Christ might rest upon us! oh that having
this glory of Christ in our thoughts, we could now feel a change from glory to
glory! Is it so that the Lord Jesus will be glorified in all his Saints? and
shall we have in-glorious souls; base and unworthy affections and
conversations? or shall we content our selves with a little measure of grace? O
be we holy, even as he is holy; let our conversations be heavenly, let us
purify our selves even as he is pure; let us resemble him in some high measure
of grace. And lastly, let us glorify him in bodies and spirits; all our glory
is from him; and therefore let all our glory redound to him; let us now begin
that Gospel-tune of the eternal song of free grace, which one day we shall more
perfectly chant in glory; Allelujah! and again Allelujah! and Amen Allelujah!
salvation, and glory, and power, and praise, and thanksgiving, and obedience,
be unto him that sits on the throne, the Lamb blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

The Conclusion.
And now (my brethren) I have done the errand which Christ sent me on, I verily
believe, I have now delivered this work of the everlasting Gospel, or of
Christ's carrying on the great work of man's salvation, has been somewhat long
in speaking, but oh how long in acting! may I give you a short view of what I
have said; and of what has been acted from eternity, and will yet be acted to
eternity; you may remember, that God in his eternity laid a plot or design to
glorify the riches of his grace in saving sinners; and to that purpose first
he decreed a Christ. 2. Presently after the fall, he promised the Christ he had
decreed. 3. In fullness of time he exhibited the Christ that he had promised;
then it was that the same Christ took upon him out nature, and joined it to his
Godhead to be one person; and in that person he was born, and lived, and died,
and rose again, and ascended into Heaven; there now he has been sitting,
sending down the Holy Ghost, and interceding for his Saints for above one
thousand six hundred years: And in this last work he will continue till the end
of the World, and then he will come again to judge the World, and to receive
his Saints to himself, that where he is, they may be with him, to see and enjoy
him to all eternity. This is the epitome of all I have said; only in every
particular I have set down Christ's actings toward us, and our actings toward
Christ; in various forms, and outgoings of his love he has acted toward us;
and in various forms, and outgoings of our souls we have been taught fitly
and suitably to act toward him.

Now in all these actings, How does the free grace of God in Christ appear? Ye
are saved by grace, Ephesians. 2.5.
says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.5. the decree, the means, the end of our salvation
is grace, and only grace. The decree is grace, and therefore it is called the
election of grace; Romans 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 3.24. Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 1.7. Ephesians.
2.7.
the means are of grace, and therefore we are called according to his grace;
and we are justified freely by his grace. And the end is of grace, for eternal
life is the gift of God, both beginning, and progress, and execution is all of
grace. This is the riches of his grace, the exceeding, the hyperbolical riches
of his grace; the conclusion of all is this, God's free grace which was first
designed, will at last be manifested, and eternally praised by Saints and
Angels; the same free grace which from the beginning of the age of God, from
everlasting drove on the saving plot, and sweet design of our salvation, will
at last be glorified to purpose; when Heavens inhabitants will be ever digging
into this golden-mine; ever rolling this soul-delighting and precious stone;
ever beholding, viewing, enquiring, and searching into the excellency of this
same Christ, and this free grace. Now all is done, shall I speak a word for
Christ, or rather for our selves in relation to Christ; and so an end? if I had
but one word more to speak in the World, it should be this; Oh let all our
spirits be taken up with Christ! let us not busy our selves too much with
toys, or trifles, with ordinary and low things, but look unto Jesus. Surely
Christ is enough to fill all our thoughts, desires, hopes, loves, joys, or
whatever is within us, or without us; Christ alone comprehends all the
circumference of all our happiness; Christ is the pearl hid in the large field
of God's Word; Christ is the scope of all the Scriptures; all things and
persons in the old World were Tipes of him; all the Prophets foretold him, all
God's love runs through him, all the gifts and graces of the Spirit flow from
him, the whole eye of God is upon him, and all his designs both in Heaven and
Earth meet in him; Ephesians. 1.10.
the great design of God is this, That he might gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in
him. All things are summed up in one Jesus Christ; if we look on the creation,
the whole world was made by Christ, if we look on providence, all things
subsist in Christ, they have their being, and their well-being in him. Where
may we find God but in Christ? where may we see God but in this essential and
eternal glass? 2 Cor. 4.6. Heb. 1.3.
Christ is the face of God, the brightness of his glory, the express image of
his Fathers person; the Father is as it were all Sun, and all Pearl; and Jesus
Christ is the substantial rays, the eternal and essential irradiation of this
Sun of glory: Christ outs God as the seal does the stamp; Christ reveals God,
as the face of a man does reveal the man; so Christ to Philip, He that has
seen me, has seen the Father; q. d. I am as like the Father, John 14.9.
as God is like himself; there is a perfect indivisible unity between the
Father and me, I and the Father are one; one very God, he the begetter, and I
the begotten; Christ is the substantial Rose that grew out of the Father from
eternity; Christ is the essential wisdom of God; Christ is the substantial Word
of God, the intellectual birth of the Lord's infinite understanding. Oh the
worth of Christ! compare we other things with Christ, and they will bear no
weight at all; cast into the balance with him Angels, they are wise, but he is
wisdom; cast into the balance with him men, they are liars, lighter than
vanity, but Christ is the Amen, the faithful witness; cast into the scales
Kings, and all Kings, and all their glory, why he is King of Kings; cast into
the scale millions of tallents-weight of glory; cast in two Worlds, and add to
the weight, millions of Heavens of Heavens, and the balance cannot down, the
scales are unequal, Christ out-weighs all. Shall I yet come nearer home? what
is Heaven but to be with Christ; what is life eternal but to believe in God,
and in his Son Jesus Christ? where may we find peace with God, and
reconciliation with God, but only in Christ; God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself? 2 Cor. 5.19.
where may we find compassion, mercy, and gentleness to sinners, but only in
Christ? it is Christ that takes off infinite wrath, and satisfies justice, and
so God is a most lovely, compassionate, desirable God in Jesus; all the
goodness of God comes out of God through this golden pipe the Lord Jesus
Christ: It is true, those essential attributes of love, grace, mercy, goodness,
are only in God, and they abide in God, yet the Mediatory manifestation of
love, grace, mercy, and goodness, is only in Christ; Christ alone is the
Treasury, Storehouse, Magazene of the free goodness and mercy of the Godhead.
In him we are Elected, Adopted, Redeemed, Justified, Sanctified, Saved; he is
the ladder, and every step of it betwixt Heaven and Earth; he is the way, the
truth, and the life; he is honor, riches, beauty, health, peace, and
salvation; he is a suitable and rich portion to every man's soul; that which
some of the Jews observe of the Mannah, that it was in taste according to every
man's palate, it is really true of Christ, that he is to the Soul whatsoever
the soul would have him to be. All the spiritual blessings wherewith we are
enriched, are in and by Christ: God hears our prayers by Christ; God forgives
our iniquities through Christ; all we have, and all we expect to have, hangs
only on Christ; he is the golden hinge, upon which all our salvation turns.

Oh how should all hearts be taken with this Christ? Christians, turn your eyes
upon the Lord; Look, and look again unto Jesus: Why stand ye gazing on the
toys of this World, when such a Christ is offered to you in the Gospel? can
the World dye for you? can the World reconcile you to the Father? can the World
advance you to the Kingdom of Heaven? As Christ is all in all, so let him be
the full and complete subject of our desire, and hope, and faith, and love, and
joy; let him be in your thoughts the first in the morning, and the last at
night. Shall I speak one word more to thee that believe? Oh apply in
particular all the transactions of Jesus Christ to thy very self; remember how
he came out of his Fathers bosom for thee, wept for thee, bled for thee, poured
out his life for thee, is now risen for thee, gone to Heaven for thee, sits at
God's right hand, and rules all the World for thee; makes intercession for
thee, and at the end of the World will come again for thee, and receive thee to
himself, to live with him for ever and ever. Surely if thus thou believe, and
live; thy life is comfortable, and thy death will be sweet; if there be any
Heaven upon Earth, thou will find it in the practice, and exercise of this
Gospel-duty, in Looking unto Jesus.

A Poem of Mr. George Herbert in his Temple. JESV.
JESV is in my heart, his sacred Name
Is deeply carved there; but the other week,
A great affliction broke the little frame,
Even all to pieces; which I went to seek:
And first I found the corner, where was J,
After, where ES, and next where V was graved.
When I had got these parcels, instantly
I sat me down to spell them, and perceived,
That to my broken heart he was I ease you,
and to my whole is JESV.
FINIS.

