PRIMA, THE FIRST THINGS, In reference to The Middle and Last Things: Or, The
Doctrine of REGENERATION, THE NEW BIRTH, The very beginning of a godly life.
Delivered by ISAAC AMBROSE, Minister of the Gospel at PRESTON in Amounderness
in Lancashire.

1 COR. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: Old things are
passed away, behold all things are become new. LONDON: Printed by J.F. for I.A.
and are to be sold by Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard. MDCL.

To the Worshipful, The MAYOR, ALDERMEN, And other INHABITANTS IN The Town of
Preston in Amounderness.
THe Apostle Peter knowing (as he says) that shortly he was to put off that
his tabernacle of the flesh, 2 Pet. 1.14, 15
as our Lord Jesus Christ had showed him; he therefore endeavored that Gods
people, after his decease, might have those things he taught them always in
remembrance: And thus it came to pass, that to this day we have that portion of
holy Writ which he then left in writing. If Peter's practice be imitable in this
kind, I suppose the same duty lies on Si M. T. Ciceroni tanta fuit cura de sua
republica, ut scripsit in lib. de Amicitia. -- Mihi autem non minori curae est
qualis resp. post mortem meam futura sit, quam qualis hodie est: Multo magis
incumbat mihi cura de animarum salute ut been cedat illis postquam ego e vivis
exiero, aeque ut jam ante obitum meum.
me. Revelation I have none, but many stitches and infirmities, which I take to
be forerunners of my departure hence. Some things, and amongst the rest, these
First Things, I have taught you; what remains now, but that after my decease
you might have these things always in remembrance? To that purpose, the same I
delivered once to your ears, I now present to your eyes; as you were then
pleased to hear them, so I trust you will now peruse them: Only one thing you
may please to observe through this Treatise, That whereas in the Name of Christ
I often Beseech, Exhort, Command the unregenerate to believe, to be reconciled
to God, to pray, to fall on this or that duty, it is not as if they could do
any thing of their own strength or power; but because Jesus Christ, in
Exhorting, Entreating, Commanding, puts forth his own power, and his own
strength to enable them. While Paul exhorted the Jailer to believe in the Lord
Jesus, that he might be saved, God enabled the Goalor to believe. Life and
power is conveyed to the soul, in Gospel-Commands and Exhortations. While
Ezekiel prophesied over dead bones, breath came into them, and they lived: so
while the Prophets of the Lord do preach over sinful impenitent hearers, who
are like to the Prophets dry bones, the breath of Heaven, the Spirit of the
Most High in the Ministry of the Gospel, enters into them, and so they are
made new creatures, and see the Kingdom of God. I have no more to say, only I
beseech God you may receive a Blessing by these poor labors upon your poor
souls: it is the hearty Prayer of

Yours to be commanded in all Christian Services, Isaac Ambrose.

To his worthily much esteemed Friend, Mr. Isaac Ambrose.
SIR,
I Have perused your hearty Travel in this happy Birth; and therein (I dare
say) as your industry and skill, so your interest and birthright, your Labor
either way. This subject could not be so well handled, if not felt; he must
himself be subject, as well as Author, that does it so well. No man can be here
Eloquent, unless Experient; Propriety of Title, can only here give Propriety
of Language: How like the motion, the language of a Puppet in a Play is the
best Pulpit-Pageant in this Theme of the uninteressed man? My Prayer is that
of the Apostle, That all of us Ministers may be (herein) able to comfort
others, 2 Cor. 1.4.
by the same comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God: And what
comfort like this, that makes us, with the woman, John 16.21.
forget all our sorrows, for joy that the child is born? What is it
(otherwise) to be born to learn, if we learn not thus to be born? Eccles. 7.11.
Wisdom (says Solomon) is good with an Inheritance; how good is this wisdom
then, that by this New Birth not only preserves, but intitles to that
Inheritance of the Saints in light? Col. 1.12.
Wherein, that this your birth of that Birth may be to many Generations
fruitful, is the Prayer of

Your true Friend, CHARLES HERLE.

THE CONTENTS of PRIMA, OR The First Things.
THe necessity of Regeneration, Page 2 The generality and subject of
Regeneration, Page 7 The manner of Regeneration, Page 22 The issue and effects
of Regeneration, Page 42
An Appendix, containing a more particular method of Regeneration: Wherein
Chap. 1. THe occasion and method of this Treatise, Page 49. Chap. 2. Sect. 1.
The first means to get into the New Birth, 50 Sect. 2, etc. Sins against the
first Commandment to the last, 51
Chap. 3. The second means to get into the New Birth, 59 Chap. 4. Sect. 1. The
third means to get into the New Birth, 60 Sect. 2, etc. The first, second and
third reason for sorrow, 61
Chap. 5. Sect. 1. The means to be delivered out of the pangs of the New Birth,
63 Sect. 2. The Promises procuring a sight of Christ, 64 Sect. 3. The Promises
procuring a desire after Christ, 65 Sect. 4. The Promises procuring a relying
on Christ, 66 Sect. 5. The Promises procuring obedience to Christ, 67 Sect. 6.
The Promises procuring comfort in Christ, 68 Sect. 7. The means to apply the
said Promises, 70 Sect. 8. The Conclusion, 71

To the Reverend AUTHOR, on his learned TREATISES, Entitled, Prima, Media and
Vltima, THE First, Middle and Last Things.
THe First, and Last, and Middle Things: What more?
Thus the well-furnish'd Scribe out of his store
Brings new and old. The First Things lay the Ground,
The Middle Build thereon; By the Last All Is crowned.
By the First Things Christians begin to live;
The Middle Things a further progress give
In Spiritual life; by the Last they live for ever:
Those things that God has joined, let no man sever.
The First Things wrought in me (Lord!) let me find,
And to the Middle so direct my mind,
That when the First and Middle Things are past,
I may enjoy my hopes; The Best at Last.
T.W.

The new Birth.
JOH. 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
WE read in the former Chapter, John 2.23. Ioh. 2.23. Nicodemus ex his erat qui
crediderant in nomine ejus, videntes signa and prodigia quae faciobat. Aug.
Tract. in Joan. Ioh. 7.48.
When Jesus was at Jerusalem, at the feast of the Passover, many believed in
his name when they saw the miracles which he did: Amongst those many, here is
one of them (says St. Austin;) what one? of all men the most unlikely is a
Jew, of all Jews a Ruler, of all Rulers a Pharisee; Have any of the Rulers, or
the Pharisees believed on him? But howsoever it seem thus unlikely unto us, the
Spirit of God blows where it lists; here is amongst many believers one
Nicodemus, and he is a man of the Pharisees, a Ruler of the Jews; Luke 3.8.
God is able even of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham; yea, we
see here (be they never so stony) our Savior melts one of them with a miracle,
and by a new birth he will make him a son of Abraham indeed. A miracle brings
him to Christ, and Christ brings him to a new birth: The first Nicodemus
confesses, Rabbi (faith he to our Savior) we know that thou art a Teacher come
from God, for no man can do these miracles that thou do, except God be with
him. The second our Savior affirms, as if he had answered, to say, I am sent
from God, and not to be born again, will never help thee to Heaven; thy
confession is right, that I am sent from God, but thy conversation is wrong,
that art not born again: thou come to me with confession of thy faith, but
here is a further Catechism, another lesson; and therefore (as thou call me
Rabbi) if thou will be a Scholar in my School, thou must learn these
principles, these rudiments, these first things, this text, this A, B, C, of
Christian an Religion, Except a man be born again, he cannst see the Kingdom of
God.

In prosecution of which words (all tending to this one point of the new birth)
we shall follow the order set down by the Holy Ghost, where is,

1. The necessity of it, no going to heaven without it, Except.

2. The generality of it, every man is bound to it, a man.

3. The manner of it, how a man is wrought in it, he must be born again.

4. The issue of it, what effects are annexed to it, the Kingdom of God, and
sight of that Kingdom; a man that is born again shall see the Kingdom of God;
and, Except a man be born again, he shall not see the Kingdom of God.

These be the branches, and of every of them (by Gods assistance) we shall
gather some fruit for the food of your souls. The first branch is the first
word, Except. Except]
THis Except is without exception, for unless we are new born, there is no
going to Heaven: before we live here we are born, and before we live there we
are new born; as no man comes into this world, but by the first birth, so
impossible it is that any should go to Heaven in another world, but by the
second birth: And this gives us the necessity of Regeneration.

Except a man be new born, he can never be saved. It is our Saviors speech, and
he confirms it with a double asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto thee.
Twice verily, which we find not any where but in S. John's Gospel, Rupert. in
loc.
and no where in the Gospel so often as on this argument: how then should we
disbelieve this truth, where we have such a witness as Christ, such a testimony
as his Verily, verily, I say unto thee?

Again, God the Father thus counsels, not only Nicodemus, but all the Jews of
the old Church, Ezekiel. 18.31.
saying, Make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will you dye, O house
of Israel? Ezekiel. 18.31. Notwithstanding all their privileges (for they are
Israelites, Romans 9.4.
to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the
giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises, Romans 9.4.) Yet
here is one thing necessary, Vuum necessarium.
that must crown all the rest; they must have a new heart, and a new spirit,
that is to say, they must be new born, or there is no way but death; from which
death see how the Lord pulls them with his cords of love, alluring, wooing,
questioning, Why will ye dye, O house of Israel?

And yet again, not only the Son and the Father, Revel. 2.17.
but the Holy Ghost too will avouch this truth; He that has an ear, Rev.
3.12.13.
let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches; Mos erat antiquis niveis
atrisque lapillis his damnare reos, illis absolvere paena. Metamorphos. l. 15.

Hunc macrine diem numera meliore lapillo. Pers. Sat: s^cunda.

Aretius in loc. 1 Cor. 5.17.


And what is that? To him that overcomes -- will I give a white stone, and in
the stone a new name written: yea, I will write upon him New Jerusalem, and I
will write upon him my new name, Revel. 2.17. and 3.12. The meaning is, he that
is new born, and so overcomes sin Gods Spirit will give him his grace, the
white stone, and his Kingdom, the new Jerusalem, and a new name, the name of
filiation (says a Modern) whereby truly he is called the new born Son of God.
See here how old things being done away, all things are become new; by a new
birth man has got a new name, a new inheritance: and therefore as the Spirit,
so the new birth is called a fire, that purges away dross, and makes souls
bright and new, so that we must pass through this fire, or no passage into
Paradise.

Nor is this Doctrine without reason or ground.

For, Except by the second birth, man is first unholy, Heb. 12.14.
and therefore most unfit to enter into Heaven: Without holiness no man shall
see God, Heb. 12.14. And what is man before he is new born? if we look upon his
soul, we may see it deformed with sin, defiled with lust, outraged with
passions, overcarried with affections, pining with envy, burdened with
gluttony, boiling with revenge, transported with rage, and thus is that Image
of God transformed to the ugly shape of the Devil: Or should we take a more
particular view, every faculty of the soul is full of iniquity; the
understanding understands nothing of the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. the will
wills nothing that is good, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 6.20. Gal. 5.17.
Romans 6.20. the affections affect nothing of the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. In a word,
the understanding is darkened, the will enthralled, the affections disordered,
the memory defiled, the conscience benumbed, all the inner man is full of sin,
and there is no part that is good, no not one. But what say we of the body?
sure that is nothing better, it is a rotten carrion, altogether unprofitable,
and good for nothing; should we view it in every part and member of it? the
head contrives mischief, the eyes behold vanity, the ears let in sin, the
tongue sends out oaths: Come we lower, the heart lodges lusts, the hands
commit murder, the feet run to evil, all the senses are but so many matches to
give fire to lusts, deceits, envies, and what not? How needful now is a new
birth to a man in this case? Can he enter into heaven, that savours all of
earth? Will those precious gates of gold and pearls open to a sinner? No, he
must first be new molded, and sanctified, or he is excepted; Except a man be
new born.

Secondly, Except] This, and man, is Gods enemy; no greater opposition than
betwixt God and a sinner: Consider we him in his essence, or in his attributes?
in his essence he is called Jehovah, both in respect of his being, and of his
promises; in respect of his being, and so God is contrary to sin; for sin is
ataxy, disorder, confusion, a not-being; and God is order, perfection,
holiness, an absolute and a simple being: in respect likewise of his promises,
wherein there is a main opposition to sin; for howsoever he promises a reward
to the regenerate, and so the name Jehovah is a golden pledge unto us, Psalm.
11.6.
that if we repent, he will forgive us; yet withal he promises storms and
tempest, fire and perdition to the unregenerate: and thus his name and nature
is altogether opposite to sin and sinners. But view we those attributes of God,
I mean his Justice, truth, patience, holiness, anger, power: his Justice, in
punishing the impenitent according to his deserts, his truth effecting those
plagues which he has spoken in his time, his patience forbearing sins
destruction, till they are grown full ripe, his holiness abhorring all
impurities, He cannot behold iniquity, his anger stirring up revenge against
all offered injuries, his power mustring up his forces, yea all his creatures
against his enemies; and what can we say, but if all these attributes are at
enmity with sinful man, woe worth to man because of offenses! better he had
never been born, then not to be new born; alas! what shall become of him? Can
he that is Gods enemy see God in his glory? no, there is no way but one, Except
he repent, Except] he be born again.

Thirdly, Ephesians. 2.12. 1 Cor. 5.17.
Except] by a new birth, man is without Christ; for If any man be in Christ, he
is a new creature: And if he be not in Christ, what hopes of that man? It is
only Christ that opens Heaven, it is only Christ that is the Way to Heaven;
besides him there is no Way, no Truth, no Life; and if we be in him, as the
branch in the vine, it is of necessity that we bring forth good fruit: Upon
these terms his death is effectual, if we become new creatures; or otherwise,
all his Merits (his blood that was shed, his body that was crucified, his soul
that was agonized) they are nothing unto us, we nothing bettered by them: he
dyed for all, but his death is not applied, his Kingdom is not opened, save
only unto them that have learned and practiced this rule of Exception: Except]
a man be born again.

Fourthly, Except before Excepted, a man is a very limb of Satan, a child of
darkness, and one of the Family of Hell. Consider this, ye that are out of the
state of Grace, in what miserable thraldom is your souls? Should any call you
servants, or slaves of Satan, you would take it highly in disdain; but take it
as you please, if you are not regenerate, you are in no better case. Paul
appeals to your own knowledge, Romans 6.16, 23.
Know you not that to whomsoever you give your selves as servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey? Romans 6.16, 23. If then ye obey the Devils
suggestions (which you do being unborn) what are you but the Devils servants?
And if he be your Master, what is you wages? You may see it in the last verse,
The wages of sin is death; death of the body, and death of the soul, death
here, and death hereafter in Hell fire. Alas, that Satan should have this power
on man! that he who is the enemy, and means nothing to a sinner but death and
damnation, should be his Lord, and Tyrannize it over him at his own will and
pleasure! Would any man be hired to serve Lions and Tigers? 1 Pet. 5.8.
And is not the Devil a roaring Lion, walking about, and seeking whom he may
devour? To serve him that would devour his servant, is a most miserable
bondage; and what pay can one expect from Devils, but roaring and devouring,
and tearing souls? In this plight are the servants of Corruption, slaves of
Satan, so I rightly call them; for, Of whomsoever a man is overcome, 2 Pet.
2.19.
even unto the same is he in bondage, 2 Peter 2.19. To wind up this point;
Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest in thy Holy Mountain?
If we believe David, Not he that slandereth with his tongue, or does evil to
his Neighbor, Psa. 15.1, 3, 5.
-- Or gives his money upon Usury, or takes a reward against the innocent:
No, such are servants of Satan, and here is matter of Exception against them;
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

The sum of all: Without Regeneration no Kingdom; for, whether we consider man
in regard of himself, or of God, or of Christ, or of Satan, he is (Except he be
new born) unholy, Gods enemy, out of Christ, in Satan. And if the New Birth be
thus necessary; Thus is the language of God; I said, Behold me, to a nation
that was not called by my Name, Isa. 65.1.
labor to be born again? I mean not as Nicodemus, to enter into our mothers
womb again, and be born; It is not the seed of man in the womb of our Mother,
but the seed of Grace in the womb of the Church, that makes us blessed: and if
we are thus born by Grace, then are we sanctified, made Sons of God, Heirs with
Christ, over whom Satan can have no power at all. Now then, as you tender your
souls, and desire Heaven at your ends, Thus whilst the Minister speaks its
Christ comes with power in the word, Eze. 18.31.
endeavor to attain this one thing necessary: Pray, because God bids you pray,
it may be he will come in when you pray. When Simon Magus was in the gall of
bitterness, Peter bid him pray Act^ 8 22.
Lift up your hearts unto God, that you may be washed, justified; sanctified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus; and that by the Spirit of God you may walk in new
ways, talk with new tongues, as being new creatures, created unto good works.
Thus would you Not that we can wait by a power of our own, but he that says,
Therefore will the Lord wait, that be may be gracious to you, Isa. 30.18. He
draws, and gives a power to wait on him, and he comes in when he has waited
the fittest time.
wait on God in his way, I trust the Lord in mercy would remember you, and his
Spirit would blow upon you. and then you would find and feel such a change
within you, as that you would bless God for ever, that you were thus born
again: Otherwise, how woeful are you, considering this bar in heavens door, to
keep out the unregenerate. Except] Except a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God.

Thus far of the Exception; we now come to the Person, that is a Nisi prius in
the front, Except: This is the party that must prosecute the cause, a man.

A man]
ANd this man] is every man, and every part of man: It implies all men, for all
are bound to it, and all man; for all the parts of his body, and all the powers
of his soul are to be renewed, or he cannot be saved: The word then is general,
whether we respect genera singulorum, the kinds, all men; or singula generum,
the Individuums, all man, or all the parts of man, body and soul.

We will first begin with the kinds: All men (or all mankind) must be
regenerated before they be saved; not one of all the sons of Adam that shall
ever go to heaven, except he be born again: may your contemplations (guided by
Gods word) go into that Paradise above, there walk the streets, behold the
towers, view the subjects, from the one end of heaven to another, and whom
find you there? Not one that lives and dies in sin; there is not in it, nor
shall enter into it any thing that defiles, Rev. 21.27.
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, Revel. 21.27. yet if
such repent them of their sins, the gates shall not be shut against them, all
the Saints that now walk in the light of it, were sinners; but first they were
purged by the Lamb, and sanctified by the Spirit; first they were regenerated,
and so they were saved.

You may object, If all men that go to heaven must be new born, what shall
become of infants, that dye ere they be born? Can a man enter the second time
into his mothers womb, and be born? (said Nicodemus) But can a man enter into
the second birth in his mothers womb (say you) and be born again, before he is
once born?

I answer [to be born again] supposes to be once born indeed; therefore
according to the letter, our Savior speaks of a man already born into the
world, that he must be born again: But if we seek out the sense [to be born
again] (as our Savior interprets) is to be born of water and of the Spirit; and
so may Infants not born into the world be born again. Ierem. 1.5.
Thus we read of Jeremy, The word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Before I
formed thee in the belly, I knew thee, and before thou came forth out of the
womb, I sanctified thee, Jer. 1.5. And thus we read of John the Baptist, the
Angel of the Lord saying of him, that He should be filled with the Holy Ghost,
Luke 1.15.
even from his mothers womb, Luke 1.15. By these examples we see what the Lord
can do; yea, what he does indeed, although we know not how, nor can it be
observed by us.

You may yet object, [to be born again] is (says our Savior) [to be born of
water and of the Spirit:] now water is the outward Baptism, and the Spirit is
the inward grace (thus Quindecem patres proposuit Bellarminus. Tomo secundo
lib. 2. de effectu Sacramentorum. cap. 3. Hook. Eccles. Polit. l. 5. sect. 59.
all Ancients have construed this text, says Hooker) but children not born
(howsoever they are sanctified by the Spirit) they cannot be baptized with
water, and therefore they cannot see the Kingdom of God.

I answer: In cases of extremity, or impossibility, if actual Baptism be
wanting, vocal is enough, and thus far some of our adversaries grant us; Aquin.
3. part. quaest. 68. art. 2.
Though it be wanting indeed (says Aquinas) yet Baptism in desire is
sufficient to salvation: And to this end he cites Austin, saying,
Sanctification may be without Baptism, and Baptism without Sanctification; if
Sanctification be, though Baptism be not, it avails to salvation; but if
Baptism be, and Sanctification be not, it avails nothing at all. Our conclusion
is this, All men (or all mankind) young men and maidens, old men and children,
Psalm. 148.12.
all must be regenerated, or they can never see the Kingdom of God.

Secondly, men, so all man] all the members of his body, all the faculties of
his soul. Sanctification (if saving) must be perfect and entire, though not in
respect of degrees, yet in respect of parts; every part and power of body and
soul must have its part of sanctification, though no part his full perfection,
before the dissolution of our earthly tabernacles: Hence (say Divines) there is
a regeneration or sanctification (it is all one) inchoata and consummata;
inchoata, begun in this life, consummata, perfected in that other: and of this
says our Savior, Matthew. 19.28. Verily I say unto you, Matthew. 19.28.
that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall
sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel: we speak not of this Regeneration, but of that
which brings to this, for we must be regenerated here, or have no part there
with God in his glory.

And should we consider man in his parts, every part must bear a part in this
birth; his body must be regenerated, his soul must be renewed: we will begin
with the body; As you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to
iniquity unto iniquity, Romans 6.19.
even so now yield your members servants to righteousness, unto holiness, Romans
6.19. As every member of the old man is full of sin, so every member of the new
born man is to be renewed by grace: To instance in some of them; The heart,
Matthew. 15.19.
that in the old man is full of evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies; in the new man it is the
member that must first be renewed, here grace first seats it self, and after is
dispersed over all; as in natural generation the heart is first framed, so in
spiritual regeneration the heart is first reformed. Some call it the first
mover of all men's actions, for as the first mover carries all the sphaeres of
heaven with it, so does the heart carry all the members of the body with it:
and therefore it is, that the new man begins first with his heart; for if that
fountain be right, all the streams of his desires, purposes, affections,
speeches, actions, conversations, run sweet, and clear, and pleasant. Again,
the eye that in the old man is the Broaker, that goes between the heart and the
object, to make up the sinful bargain, Matt. 6.23. 2 Pet. 1.14. Job. 31.1.
that which our Savior calls an evil eye, S. Peter, an adulterous eye; in the
new man it must be exercised on other objects, I made a covenant with mine eye
(says Job) why then should I think upon a maid? I will lift up mine eyes unto
the hills (says David) from whence comes mine help. Again, the ear, Psalm.
121.1. Psalm. 58.5.
that in the old man is stopped against the voice of the Charmer, charm he
never so wisely; or if it be open, like Deaths Porter, it lets in sin and Satan
at every occasion; in the new man it must be the gate of life, or the door of
faith; therefore there is not a member that the devil more envieth than the
ear, as we see in the man possessed with a deaf Devil, Mark 9.25. Mar 9.25.
who possessed that sense, as the most excellent, to hinder him from hearing.
Again, the tongue, Iam. 3.6.
that in the old man is a world of iniquity, that defiles the whole body, that
sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire on hell; Psalm. 45.1.
in the new man it must be the trumpet of divine praise, or (as David calls it)
the pen of a ready writer, uttering only those things which the heart enditeth
in sincerity and truth. To sum up all in one, the heart is it, where grace
begins first, and is felt last; and therefore says God, Son, give me thy
heart, Prove. 23.26. Psalm. 51.10.
Prove. 23.26. and therefore prays David, Create in me a new heart, Psalm. 51.10.
and therefore wills Solomon, Prove. 4.23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life, Prove.
4.23. Would any man that is regenerate encounter sin in his heart, it were
impossible to break out into action; would the heart of any man that is born
again, but meet sin with this Dilemma, If I commit this sin, I must either
repent, or not repent for it; if I do repent, it will cost me more heart-break,
and spiritual smart, then the sensual pleasure can be worth; If I never repent,
it will be the death and damnation of my soul: sure this thought conceived, and
rightly followed in the heart of the regenerate, would be enough to crush sin
at the first rising of it; and so it is, for if he be regenerate, he does not
sin, whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, 1 Ioh. 3.9.
Consuetudinaliter, delectabiliter, serviliter, and illuctabiliter 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. Romans 12.1.
1 John 3.9. He is molded anew, and all the members of his body are conformed
to the sovereignty and rule of grace, yea his body is preserved blameless,
holy, acceptable unto God; it is a member of Christ, the temple of the Holy
Ghost: Happy man that is blessed with this body! Sure a man thus born again, he
shall see the kingdom of God.

Secondly, as the body, so the soul of this man is to be renewed by grace; 1
Cor. 6.15, 19. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, (says St. Paul, 1
Cor. 6.20.) the body and the spirit must both glorify God; and as all the
parts of the body, so all the powers of the soul.

First, Ephesians. 4.18.
the understanding, that in the old man is blind and ignorant about heavenly
things, or howsoever it may know many things, Revel. 3.18.
yet never can attain to saving knowledge; in the new man it must be anointed
with the eye salve of the Spirit, inspired with the knowledge of Divine truths,
especially with those sacred and saving mysteries which concern the kingdom of
God. Again, the will that in the old man affects nothing but vile and vain
things, is froward and perverse in the ways of godliness; Romans 12.2.
in the new man it must prove and approve what is the good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God; yea, it must attend and be subordinate to the grace of
God, Phil. 5.13.
since God indeed, and God only works in us both the will and the deed, Phil.
2.13. Again, the memory that in the old man is slippery in the things of God,
or if naturally good, yet not spiritually useful, in the new man it must be
sanctified to good performances; and although it cannot increase to a greater
natural perfection (for grace does not this) yet the perfections it has must
be straight, and right, and guided to Godward, Remember the Lord thy God,
says Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.18. Again, Deuteronomy. 8.18.
the conscience that in the old man sleeps and slumbers, or if it be awake,
tears and roars, as if a legion of Devils now possessed it; in the new man it
must be calm and quiet, and yet not sleep or slumber, but rather in a friendly
loving manner check and control wheresoever sin is, yea never be quiet, till
with kind and yet earnest expostulations, it draw the sinner before God to
confess his fault, and to seek pardon for it. Again, the affections that in the
old man are sensual, inordinate, bewitched, and set on wrong objects; in the
new man they must be turned another way. Mary Magdalene (you know) was given to
unclean lusts, but the Lord diverted this sinful passion, and so she became
penitent, and thirsted after grace: To sum up all, all must be renewed, the
undestanding, will, memory, conscience, affections.

But to feel more of their sweetness, I will pound these spices, and dwell a
while on them. Now then for your better acquaintance with the regenerate man,
and that you may know his difference from the man unregenerate, observe (I
pray) these passages: First, I say, Col. 3.10.
in the new man the understanding must be renewed; so the Apostle, The new man
is renewed in knowledge, Col. 3.10. and this knowledge implies two habits, Col.
1.9. Sapientiam and Prudentiam.
Wisdom and Prudence, Col. 1.9. First, Wisdom, and that is speculative:
Secondly, Prudence, and that is practical: By the one the child of God having
the eyes of his mind opened and illightned, does see the mysteries of
salvation, the secrets of the Kingdom, the whole Council, and the wonders of
the Law of God; by the other he is enabled with a judicious sincerity, to
deliberate and determine in cases of conscience, in the practice of piety, and
the experimental passages of a Christian man: Sapientiam.
If we consider the first (Wisdom) how is it possible that a man unregenerate
should know the mysteries of salvation? It may be he may go as far as the power
of natural discourse, and light of Reason can bear sway, he may be furnished
with store of rare and excellent learning, and yet for all this want the true
knowledge of spiritual wisdom: Why so? Because all his knowledge, like the
light of the Moon, is discharged upon others, but never returns and reflects
upon his own soul; he should know, but knows not the darkness of his own
understanding, the disorder of his own affections, the slumber of his own
conscience, the deadness of his own heart; but the man regenerate (know he
never so little) he has the saving-knowl^dge, and in this he exceeds the
greatest Rabbis, the profoundest Clerks; he only knows God with a steadfast
apprehension, he only knows himself a most mean, base and contemptible thing;
his new birth has learned him how wicked a creature he naturally is, and
therefore in that respect is he odious to himself, and loathsome in his own
eyes: Or if we consider the second (Prudence) How is it possible that a man
unregenerate, Prudentiam.
should experimentally know the practice of piety in a Christian course? Should
we instance in this mystery of Regeneration; Here is one Nicodemus, a ruler of
the Jews, and a teacher of Israel; yet, as learned as he was, if he confer with
Christ about the salvation of his soul, he is strangely childish, and a mere
infant; tell him of the new birth, and he thinks it as impossible, as for an
old man to return into his mothers womb, and be born again: The natural man
cannot discern the operations of grace, he knows not that dark and fearful
passage, which leads from the state of nature (through strange terrors and
torments of soul) into the rich and glorious happiness of the kingdom of
Christ; whereas on the contrary, the regenerate man (that has had the
experience of the power of godliness upon his own soul) he can see and judge of
the light of grace, he can taste and relish of the fruits of the Spirit; and
hence it is, that many a silly one (man and woman) whom the worldly-wise pass
by with scorn and contempt, are often in spiritual affairs more wise and
learned then the learned Doctors.

Secondly, Rectitudinem Promptitudinem.
the Will must be renewed; and this will of the regenerate contains two things,
Rightness and Readiness: It is first rectified, when it is conformed to the
will of God. Secondly, it is so inflamed with the love of goodness, that
willingly he pursues it with alacrity of spirit. If we consider the first (the
Rectitude of the will) we see by experience the will of the unregenerate is all
out of course, Rectitudinem.
he wills nothing but that which is evil: How should he, considering his want
of Gods image, his blindeness of heart, his proneness to evil, together with
the vehemence of his affections, which draw the will after them, and trouble
the judgment? But in the man that is regenerate, the will being moved, it
afterward moves it self, Gods grace that concurs with it, quickens it, and
revives it; so that now his will is nothing but Gods will: if it may appear
that God bids him, or forbids him to do this, or that he chooses above all to
follow his commands, whatsoever becomes of him; why, this is the very heart and
marrow of regeneration; you may be sure, the man that chooses above all to
please God, Promptitudinem.
is the only man of God, and shall be rewarded by God. Or if we consider the
second (the Readiness of the will to God) alas, the will of the unregenerate
has no pleasure in goodness, he understands not the sweetness of it, Job 21.14.
and therefore nothing is more irksom to him then the ways of godliness:
whereas on the contrary, the will of the regenerate is willing, and this
willingness indeed is the perfection of his will; yea (if we can say more) it
is the highest degree of his perfection in this life, to be willing to do good.

Thirdly, the memory must be renewed; and this memory reflects occasionally on
a double object, on God, Deum and Dei verbum.
and the things of God: First, on God, by remembrance of his presence every
where: Secondly, on the things of God, by calling them to mind at useful
times. If we consider the first object, God, the unregenerate has no mind on
God, Deum. Psalm. 10.4.
God is net in all his thoughts, like the hood-winkt fool, that seeing no body,
thinks no body sees him; so has he said in his heart, Job 22.13, 14.
How does God know? can he judge through the dark cloud? Thick clouds are a
covering to him that sees not, and he walks in the circuit of heaven. But
contrariwise, the regenerare man, Eccles 12.1.
he remembers his Creator in the days of his youth. And though God, as being a
Spirit, is (in some sort) absent from his senses, yet by virtue of his
sanctified memory (that makes things absent as present) his eye is on God, and
he considers God as an eyewitness of all his thoughts, and words, and doings,
and dealings; he knows nothing can be hid from that all-seeing eye, though sin
tempt him with the fairest opportunities of night and darkness, yet still he
remembers, if his eye sees nothing, all those eyes of heaven (of God and of his
Angels) are ever about him: and therefore he answers the Tempter, How dare I
sin to his face, that looks on me what I am doing? if I dare not do this folly
before men, how dare I do it before those heaven-spectators, God and his
Angels? Or if we consider the second object (the Word of God) the unregenerate
never burdens his memory with such blessed thoughts; Dei verbum.
if sometimes he falls upon it, it is either by constraint, or by accident,
never with any settled resolution to dwell on it, or to follow it: Luke 2.51.
Psalm. 119.11.
but the soul that is regenerate, with Mary, keeps all these things in his
heart; or with David, gives it out, Thy word have I hid in my heart, Psalm.
119.11. Whatsoever lessons he learns, like so many jewels in a casket, he lays
them up safe, and then as need serves, he remembers his store, and makes all
the good use of them he may: I will not deny, but any man (good or evil) may
retain good things according to that strength of retainment, which nature
affords him, but the regenerate (whose memory only is sanctified) whatsoever
he retains, he has it opportunely at hand; in tentation or affliction he
remembers and applies, and so remembering to apply, and applying that he
remembers, he is thereby enabled to resist evil, or to follow those good things
which the Lord has commanded.

Fourthly, the conscience must be renewed, and that two ways; Ad bonum, or a
malo.
either by drawing the soul to good, or from evil: first, to good, by inclining
and encouraging; and secondly, from evil, by restraining and bridling. If we
consider its first office (in that it draws and leads the soul to good) I
confess the unregenerate is not of that conscience, Ad bonum.
for the most part his conscience lies dead in his bosom, or if it stir
sometimes, he labors all he can to smother it in his waking: to such an one
should men and Angels preach, yet so far is he bewitched with sin, that he has
no mind of goodness, or if ever he do any good act (which is a rare thing with
him) it is not out of conscience to do good, but for some sinister end or
respect. It is otherwise with the regenerate, his conscience incites him to
good, and he does good out of conscience; he stands not upon terms of pleasure
or profit, but his conscience being guided by the rule and square of Gods holy
truth, he submits to it merely out of his obedience to God: hence it is, that
come what will come, weal or woe, his eye is fixed on God, and if man oppose
where God commands, he is quickly resolved out of that in Isaiah 51.12. Isa.
51.12.
I, even I am he that comfort you; who art thou, that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the son of man that shall be made as
grass? and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that has stretched forth the
heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth? Or if we consider the second
office of conscience (in drawing the soul from evil) the unregenerate either
hears not, A malo.
or heeds not his reclaiming conscience: if it speak, he first goes about to
lull it asleep again, or if it cry out, and will not peace, then (in spite of
goodness) he runs out of one sin into another, and usually from presumption to
despair. On the other side, the regenerate has a conscience that draws him
from, and keeps him out of evil: it is known especially by these two properties,
Remorse and Tenderness: remorse has an eye of all sins past, and tenderness
has an eye on all sins to come; by remorse is bred sorrow for sin, and
loathing of sin; no sooner he considers how by his manifold sins he has
offended God, crucified Christ, grieved the holy Spirit, but his heart bleeds
and breaks that he has done so wickedly against so gracious a God: this sorrow
for sin brings with it a loathing of sin; he cannot but hate it, that has
caused his heart break, yea he hates it, and hates the very thought of it;
every look-back is a new addition of detestation, and every meditation makes
the wound of his remorse to bleed again and again: by tenderness of conscience
is bred a care and watchfulness to avoid sin to come, for no sooner is sin
presented to his conscience, but he startles at its sight, and thinks on its
vanity, and meditates on that strict and general account he must one day make
for it; which thoughts and sin put together in the balance, he dares not do
wickedly for a world of gain: and you may observe it, this tenderness (or
easiness to bleed at the apprehension of sin) is proper and peculiar to that
conscience alone that is illightned, and sanctified, and purged by Christ.

Fifthly, the affections must be renewed, and that is done by setting them upon
right objects. I shall instance in some of them, as love, hatred, hope, fear,
joy, sorrow. Love I place first, which in the unregenerate man is fastened
inordinately upon the creature; and as one sin begets another, so on whatsoever
object it fall, it begets some sin: thus the love of honor breeds ambition,
love of riches breeds covetousness, love of beauty breeds lust, love of
pleasure breeds sensuality: whatsoever he loves (the object being earthly) it
brings with it some sin, and thereby (the worst of all) he wickedly prefers
earth before heaven, a dunghill before paradise, a few bitter-sweet pleasures
for an inch of time, before unmixed and immeasurable joys world without end:
But the regenerate man settles his love upon other objects; as he that is
carnal, minds things carnal, so he that is spiritual, loves things spiritual;
no sooner is he turned (by a sound and universal change of the whole man) from
darkness to light, Acts 26.18.
and from the power of Satan unto God, but he presently begins to settle with
some sweet contentment, upon the flowers of paradise, heavenly glimpses, saving
graces, and his infinite love runs higher and higher, till it embrace him that
dwells in the highest, God Almighty; and how sweet is that love that casts it
self wholly into the bosom of his Maker? how blessed is that man, that yearns,
and melts, and cleaves, and sticks unto his gracious God? why, this is right
love, and for this is the Church commended, Cant. 1.4.
Cant. 1.4. The righteous love thee, or as others translate, amat in
rectitudinibus, she loves thee righteously, her love is set upon the right
object, Psalm 119 165. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
God: not that the regenerate loves nothing else, for he loves the Law, the
Ministers, and all the ordinances of God appointed for his good, but whatsoever
he loves, it reflects upon God, he loves all for God, and God for himself.

The second affection is hatred, which in the unregenerate is so inordinate,
Romans 1.30.
that he is an hater of God, Romans 1.30. not that he hates God in himself (for
God is universally good, and cannot be hated) but in some particular respect,
because he restrains him from his pleasure, or punishes him for his sin, or
crosses his lewd appetites by his holy commands: And as he hates God, so
likewise his brother, 1 John 2.11.
1 John 2.11. Hence arise those envies, emulations, jars, contentions amongst
those that profess themselves Christians; 1 Cor. 6.6.
of which St. Paul could say, A brother goes to law with a brother, 1 Cor.
6.6. But of all brethren he hates them most, of whom our Savior is the
firstborn: Gods faithful ones ever were, Romans 8.29. Isa. 8.18.
and ever will be signs, and wonders, and monsters unto many; a scorn, reproach
and derision to them that are round about them: Psalm. 71.7. Psalm 79.4.
But he that is regenerate hates sin, and in whomsoever sin rules or reigns, he
cannot but hate them, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? (says David)
and, Am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? Psalm. 139.21.
Not that David, or any Saint of God, hates the person of any one, but sin in
the person, or he is said to hate them for sins sake that is in them; in this
respect he bids them defiance in the verse ensuing, I hate them with a perfect
hatred, Verse. 22.
I count them mine enemies, Psalm. 139.22. I know there is a perpetual combat
in the regenerate, betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, and therefore we must
understand this hatred, which David calls a perfect hatred, according to the
perfection in parts, but not in degrees: Intensive, non extensive.
never any but Christ hated sin to the full, with all his strength, and with
all his might, but in some measure his servants hatred is perfect, which makes
him always hate sin in others, and often in himself, when after the commission
of any evil, he begins to repent him, Job 42.6.
and to abhor himself (as Job did) in dust and ashes, Job 42.6.

The third affection is Hope (this I rather name then desire, because
whatsoever we Hope for, we cannot but desire it, and so it is employed in it)
now this Hope in the unregenerate is fastened on this world, and the things of
this world, he hopes for preferment, riches, or the like; as for his hope of
Heaven, it is but a waking man's dream; a dream, said I? Yes, Somnium
vigilantium.
as dreams in the night fill us with illusions and vain forms (you know a
Beggar may dream he is a King) so hope abusing the imagination of the
unregenerate, fills their souls many a time with vain or empty contentments;
but the hope of the regenerate both enjoys the right object, and right means;
his eye is fixed on future good, and he endeavors to pursue it, till he get the
possession; if in the pursuit he meet with crosses, losses, griefs, disgraces,
sicknesses, or any other calamities, his hope is able to sweeten the bitterest
misery that can possibly befall him; the afflictions of this life bid him look
for a better, a cross here minds him of the glory above; and howsoever this
Hope may have many difficulties and wrastlings in him (therefore it is compared
to an anchor, which holds the ship in a storm, Heb. 6.19.) yet it holds and
sticks so firm in God and his promises, that he is confident, that after this
life an heavenly crown shall be set on his head, by the hands of God and his
Angels.

The fourth affection is fear, which in the unregenerate is either worldly or
servile: If it fasten on the world, then he fears the loss of his credit, or of
his profit, and because he and the world must part at last, he fears this
separation above all fears: O death (says the wiseman) how bitter is the
remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, unto the
man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all things?
Ecclus. Ecclus. 41.1.
41.1. O these thoughts of the grisly forms, and ugly face of death, of the
parting from all worldly pleasures for ever, of his rotting in the grave,
dragging to the Tribunal and Terror of the last day, they cannot but make his
heart to shrug together for horror, and (many time) to quake and tremble like
an Aspine-leaf; or if his fear reflect on God, then is it a servile fear; for
as the servant or hireling works not for love of his master, but only for fear
of punishment; or as the adulterous woman is afraid of her husband, not out of
love or affection, but lest he reward her to her foul demerits; so he fears God
for fear of punishment due unto him from God: It is otherwise with the man that
is born again, his fear is either initial or filial in pangs of the new birth,
Weems.
or in the new born babe it is called initial, because then he casts away sin
both out of Gods love, to which he has partly attained, and out of the woeful
effects of sin, which he has thoroughly considered; with the right eye he
beholds God, and with the left eye he beholds punishment; so that this fear is
a middle (as it were) betwixt servile and filial fear, and as the needle
draws in the thread, so this fear draws in charity, and makes way for
filial fear; to which, if by growth in grace he be fully ripened, then he fears
God out of love to God, as the Prophet Isaiah proclaims, Isa. 33.6.
The fear of the Lord is his treasure, Isa. 33.6. Never was treasure more dear
to the worldings, then is Gods fear to him, his love of God, his desire to
please God, and his fear of being separated from God, keeps him in such awe,
that though no punishment, no death, no hell were at all, yet he would not sin
wickedly, wilfully and maliciously, for a world of treasures.

The fifth affection is joy, which in the unregenerate is merely sensual and
brutish; it has no better objects then gold, or greatness, or offices, or
honors, or the like: and what are all these but a shadow, a ship, a bird, an
arrow, a post that passes by? or rather, as crackling of thorns under a pot,
as flashes of lightning before everlasting fire? But the joy of the regenerate
is a spiritual joy, and the matter of it is the light of Gods countenance, or
the robe of Christ's righteousness, or the promises of Gods word; or above all,
God Almighty, blessed evermore: Thus David, Whom have I in heaven but thee?
Psalm. 73.25.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. Why,
this is that joy which no man can concieve, but he that enjoyes it; this is
that white stone, Rev. 2.17. Revel. 2.17.
whose splendour shines only upon heavenly hearts; this is that glimpse of
heavens glory, which springing up in a sanctified heart, out of the wells of
salvation, and carried along with addition of fresh comforts (from the Word and
Sacraments) through a fruitful current and course of man's life, it is at last
entertained into the boundless and bottomless Ocean of the joys of Heaven. I
will not say, but sometimes it may be assaulted, and stopped with some doubts,
or distrusts, or weaknesses of degree, yet in respect of its creation, or
essence, Boltons walking with God.
or blissful issue, it is (says one) a very glimpse of heaven, a pure taste of
the rivers of life, and first fruits (as he calls it) of everlasting joys.

The sixth affection is sorrow, which in the unregenerate is a worldly sorrow,
and the effects of it are death; so the Apostle, The sorrow of the world
works death, 2 Cor. 7.10. 2 Cor. 7.10.
In this kind how endless are the sorrows of men for their losses, or crosses,
that sometimes may befall them? And howsoever some may endeavor to comfort them
in Christ, they are so dead-hearted that nothing can persuade, nothing relish
with them that concerns heaven, or salvation. But in the regenerate, sorrow
looks up to Godwards, not that the beholding of God in himself can bring sorrow
to a man, for he is a most comfortable object, which made David say, The light
of thy countenance -- is gladness to my heart: Psalm. 4.6, 7.
but the beholding of sin, which hinders from the clear sight of that object,
this is it which breeds sorrow, and this the Apostle calls godly sorrow,
working repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. It is not
every sorrow, but godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10. V. 9.
I rejoice (says the Apostle) not that ye were made sorry, but that ye
sorrowed to repentance: And would you know who sorrows to repentance? it is he,
and only he that groans and sighs under the heavy weight and burden of his
sins, that is of a broken and contrite heart, that trembles at Gods word, that
is grieved at his enormities, that forsakes all sins, and that resigns up
himself in all holy obedience to Gods blessed will; this sorrow is a blessed
sorrow that brings forth joy and immortality: Therefore comfort ye, comfort ye
all that mourn in Sion, what though for a night (in pangs of the new birth) you
lie sorrowing and weeping for your sins? mark a while, and the day will dawn,
ride on, because of the word of truth, and a day star will arise in your hearts
that will never set; nay weep and weep again, till you can say with David,
Psalm. 6.6.
All the night make I my bed to swim with my tears, and presently the Sun of
righteousness will appear, and he will dry away your tears, and shine upon you
with everlasting light. Certainly thus is it with every regenerate man, he
loves, and hates, and hopes, and fears, and joys, and sorrows, and all these
passions are renewed in him: To give instance in one, David for all the
regenerate, his love appears Psalm. Psalm. 119.47.130.22.62 5.
119.47. My delight shall be in thy commandments which I have loved: his hatred
appears Psalm. 130.22. I hate thy enemies with a perfect hatred. His hope
appears Psalm. 62.5. My soul wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is
from him. 119 120.119.16.162.
His fear appears Psalm. 119.120. His Judgments are terrible, I tremble and
quake. His joy appears Psalm. 119.16. Thy Testimonies are my delight, I rejoice
in them as one that finds great spoils. 119.136.
His sorrow appears Psalm. 119.136. Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water.
Here is Love, and Hatred, and Hope, and Fear, and Joy, and Sorrow, and all are
set upon their right spiritual objects.

You see now a pourtraiture of the new man, which should be the case of all
men; my text says indefinitely A man] implying every man, and every part of
man; every man should be regenerated, every part of man should be renewed; and
whereas man consists on two parts, the body and soul, all the members of his
body, the Heart, the Eye, the Ear, the Tongue in especial; all the powers of
his soul, the Understanding, the Will, the Memory, the Conscience, the
Affections in general, all must be renewed, and the whole man] born again. And
yet (beloved) I mean not so, a continual fight betwixt the flesh and the
spirit, each of which striveth to make his part strong against the other, and
sometimes Amalek prevails, and sometimes Israel prevails; sometimes his heart
falls a lusting, his eyes a wandering, his ears a tickling, his tongue a
cursing; sometimes his understanding errs, his will rebels, his memory fails,
his conscience sleeps, and his affections turn the stream after sensual
objects; but (that which differs him from the unregenerate man) if he sin, it
is with a gracious reluctation, he resists it to the uttermost of his
abilities, and if at last he commit sin through the violence of tentation,
subduing the infirmity of the flesh, he is presently abashed, and then begins
he to set repentance a work in all the parts and powers of his body and soul;
then begins his conscience to trouble him within, and will never be at quiet
until the cistern of his heart (being overcharged) has caused his eyes, the
floodgates, with moist sinful humors, to overflow the cheeks with tears of
contrition, and thus he is washed, justified, sanctified, and restored to his
former integrity again. 1 Cor. 6.9.
Examine then your selves, you that desire heaven at your ends, would you
inherit the Kingdom? would you live with Angels? would you save your souls?
examine and try whether your bodies and souls be sanctified throughout, and if
you have no sense or feeling of the new birth (for it is a mystery to the
unregenerate) then never look to see (in that state) the kingdom of God; but if
you perceive the working of saving grace effectually in you, (and you cannot
but perceive it if you have it) if you feel the power of godliness first
seizing the heart, and after dispersing it self over all the parts and powers
of body and soul: (or yet more in particular) if your hearts be softened by the
Spirit, if your eyes wait upon God, if your ears listen to his word, if your
tongues show forth his praise, if your understanding attain to saving
knowledge, if your wills conform to the will of God, if your memories be stored
with heavenly doctrine, if your consciences be tender and sensible of the least
sin whatsoever, if you love that which is good, if you hate that which is evil,
if you hope for the blessings above, if you fear him that can destroy both body
and soul; in a word, if you joy in goodness, if you sorrow for sin, then are
you born again. Happy man in this case that ever he was born, and thus every
man must be, or he cannot be happy: Except a man] (every man, every part of
man) be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Thus far of the subject, man] we come now to the act, or deed to be done, he
must be born again.]

Be born again.]
THe children are brought to the birth, and lest the saying be true of us,
there is no strength to bring forth: I shall now (by Gods assistance) proceed
to the birth it self. 2 King. 19.3.
Here we have the manner of it, and we may observe a double manner,

First, of the words containing the new birth.

Secondly, of the new birth contained in the words.

The manner of the words apears in the original (...)] two words, and either of
them has its diverse reading. (...), Valla would rather have to be genitus,
begotten; Except a man be begotten.] Others usually say natus, born; Except a
man be born.] And as (...), so (...), some would have to be (...), above, or
from heaven; Except a man be born from above.] Others usually (...), again;
Except a man be born again.] Chrysostom cites both these, and of each reading
we shall gather something for our own instruction.

Except a man be regenerated, Erasm. annot. in loc.
or begotten (says Valla) As man that is born of a woman is begotten of a man,
so he that is born again, must have a begetting too: and therefore sometimes it
is called renascentia, a new birth, and sometimes regeneratio, a new begetting,
or regeneration. If you ask of whom is the new man begotten? Saint James tells
you, Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth: Iam. 1.18.
The former words note the impulsive cause, these latter the instrument, it was
God that begat us, and with the seed of the word.

First, God begat us, and so are we called Gods sons, born not of blood, John.
1.13.
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13.
Regeneration is the work of God, and because it is a work external, it is
therefore communicable to each Person in the Trinity: Ye are sanctified (says
the Apostle) in the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.11.
and by the spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
all sanctify, all work the same work: but as in the Godhead there is but one
Essence, and yet three manners of being of the same one Essence; so in Gods
outward operations, all the Persons work rem eandem, one thing, but all work
not eodem modo, after one manner: For instance, the works of Creation,
Redemption, and Sanctification, are the common works of God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost, yet every one of these works common to all three,
are terminated in some one of them: So the 1 Cor. 8.6.
Father is said to create, the John 1.10.
Son is said to create, the Job 26.13.
Holy Ghost is said to create; so the Father is said to redeem, the Son is said
to redeem, the Holy Ghost is said to redeem; so the Father is said to
sanctify, the Son is said to sanctify, the Holy Ghost is said to sanctify:
Thus all three concur to every one of these works, and yet every one of these
works, is terminated, specified, and formed (as it were) in the very last act
by one of these three: The work of the Creation is determinated immediately in
God the Father, the work of Redemption is determinated immediately in God the
Son, the work of Regeneration is determinated immediately in God the Holy
Ghost. And it is memorable, that as the community of these works (ad extra)
depends on the unity of Gods Essence, so the diversity of their determinations
depends on the diverse manners of Gods existence, or subsisting: the Father is
of himself, neither made nor begotten, and therefore it best agrees with him to
make all things of nothing, which is the work of Creation; the Son is of the
Father alone by reflection of his intellect, and so called the representation
of his Fathers Image, and therefore it best agrees with him to represent his
Fathers mercies to mankind, by saving them from death and hell, which is the
work of Redemption; the Holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son, proceeding
(and as it were breathed) from them both by the act of the will, and therefore
it best agrees with him (that blows where he lists) to blow on our wills,
and by his breath to purge and purify us, which is the work of Regeneration.
To sum up all in a word, this work of Regeneration (or Sanctification, or
whatever else you will call it) in respect of the work, it is of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, but in respect of the last act, it is of the Holy Ghost,
John 3.6, 8.
and not of the Father, nor the Son; and thus our Savior concludes, Joh. 3.8.
That which is born of the spirit, is spirit, and so is every man that is born
of the spirit.

Secondly, as Gods Spirit is the principal, so Gods Word is the instrumental
cause of our Regeneration. Ye are born again (says Saint Peter) not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible by the word of God, 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 John
1.1. Romans 10.17. Romans 11.10.
which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. this word St. John calls the
word of life, St. Paul the producer of faith, and the power of God unto
salvation; yea this word is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart,
Heb. Heb. 4.12.
4.12. they that are born again, cannot but remember how quick, and powerful,
and sharp, Gods word was at their Regeneration: first, like an hammer it beat
on their hearts till it broke them all to pieces, and then like a sword, by a
terrible, cutting, piercing power, it struck a shaking and trembling into the
very center of their souls; last of all like oil (when, as the man in the
Gospel, Luke 10.30.
they were wounded indeed) it began to supple those wounds, and to heal the
bruises, and to refresh the weak and tender heart with all the promises of God
revealed in Christ.

And thus a man being begotten of the Spirit with the word of truth, he comes
at last to the birth: So we read, Except a man be born.] And this I suppose to
be fuller then the other, because a begetting may be, and no birth follow, as
many that are stifled in the womb, are begotten, not born; but if the birth be,
it does presuppose a begetting, Except a man be born, that is, except a man be
begotten and born, he cannot see Gods kingdom. If you ask of whom born? I
answer, as God is Father, so the Church is the Mother of every child of God:
to this purpose says the Apostle, Jerusalem which is above is free, which is
the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26.
Gal. 4.26. what is Jerusalem but the Church? Psalm. 122.5.
for as that City was the seat of David, Psalm. 122.5. so is this Church the
throne of Christ, figured by the kingdom of David, Rev. 3.7.
Revel. 3.7. and therefore of both these God thus proclaims, Here shall be my
rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight herein, Psalm. 132.14.
Psalm. 132.14. And rightly is the Church called our mother, first because she
is the spouse of our Father, betroathed, Hos. 2.19. Cant. 6.3.
Hosea 2.19. coupled and made one, Cant. 6.3. I am my welbeloveds, and my
welbeloved is mine; and secondly, because we are children born of her; this
teaches us to honor our mother, and like little children to hang at her
breasts for our sustenance; Suck, Isaiah 66.11.
and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, milk out, and be
delighted with the abundance of her glory. It is the Church that brings forth
children to God by the ministry of his word, and if we are children of this
mother, we must feed on that milk which flows from her two breasts, the Old and
New Testament; As new born babes (says the Apostle) desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. In a word, 1 Pet. 2.2.
out of the Church there is no salvation: who have not the Church their mother,
cannot have God their Father, was the saying of old; and good reason, for out
of the Church there is no means of Salvation, no word to teach, no sacraments
to confirm, but all these, and all other means are in the womb of the Church:
it is here, and here only, where the spirit of immortal seed begets grace in
the heart, and so a man is born again.

This (...)] some read (...), from heaven, Except a man be born from above]
From above it is that every good and perfect gift comes: Aman can receive
nothing, John. 3.27.
except it be given him from heaven, Joh. 3.27. But how then says our Savior
of the wind (to which he compares every one that is born of the Spirit) that
we know not whence it comes, and whither it goes? I answer, [whence] respects
more the cause then place, we know the wind comes from the South, or North, or
East, or West, but why so and so, we cannot tell; we know the Spirit is above,
and the new birth or regeneration comes from the Spirit: But (...) why it is
so, or what moves the Spirit to do so, besides his (...), the good pleasure of
his will, we cannot tell.

Or if we read (...), as others do, Beda, and Erasm. paraph. in loc.
the words then run thus, Except a man be born again.] To this Nicodemus's
reply seems more direct, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the
second time into his mothers womb? No question he took Christ's (...) pro (...),
only thus he mistook, that the second birth should be after the manner of the
first birth, and therefore he says, Can a man that is old (such as he himself
was) be born again? No, says our Savior, that which is born of the flesh is
flesh, and there is but one birth after this manner; but to be born again] is to
be born after the Spirit, and this is that second birth: A man is first born of
the flesh, and he must be again born of the Spirit.

Hence appears the difference of the first and second birth; the first birth is
of the earth, earthy; the second birth is of the Lord from heaven, heavenly;
the first birth is of nature, full of sin; the second is of grace, full of
sanctity: the first birth is originally of flesh and blood, the second birth is
originally of the Spirit and water: In a word, the first birth kills, the
second gives life; generation lost us, it must be regeneration that recovers
us: O blessed birth, without which no birth is happy, in comparison of which
(though it were to be born heir of the whole world) all is but misery! Heb.
11.24.
this was Moses praise, that he esteemed the reproach of Christ above all the
treasures in Egypt, rather would he be the son of God, then to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11.24. No question it is a great dignity to be
called the son in Law to a King, 1 Samuel 18.23 Polan Syntag. l. 6. c. 37. Act.
8.37. Acts 10.47. Acts 16.14. Titus 2.5.
but nothing in comparison of being the Son of God: this sonship is that
degree, above which there needs no aspiring, and under which there is no
happiness, no heaven, no kingdom: Except a man be born again] he cannot see the
kingdom of God.

Thus far of the manner of the words, which containing the new birth, it appears
in them, the father of it is God, the seed of it the Word, the mother of it the
Church, the place of it, whence? from Heaven: the time of it, when? after a man
is once born, then he must be again born: Except a man be born again.]
Secondly, as you see the manner of the words containing the new birth, so now
see the manner of the new birth contained in the words. I know it is not wrought
in all after one manner, nor is the manner known to us, but only so far forth as
it is sensible in us, and therefore we must consider man before baptism, in
baptism, after baptism.

In some is the new birth wrought before baptism, as in the eunuch, under
Candace Queen of the Aethiopians, Acts 8.37. and in the Captain Cornelius,
together with his kinsmen and and near friends, Acts 10.47. and in Lydia, Acts
16.14. and so our charity tells us, that every Infant dying before baptism, is
renewed by the Spirit: but the manner of this working we know not, for it is one
of the secrets of the Spirit of God.

In others is the new birth wrought in Baptism, which indeed is the Sacrament
of the new birth, and seal of Regeneration; but howsoever in Paedo-Baptism we
see the outward seal, yet we see not, we feel not the manner of the inward
working; for this also is the secret of the Bellar. Tom. 2. de Sacram. Baptism.
c 10. habent fidem habitualem. See Dr. Field concerning the Author of the
grounds of the old and new Religion. S. 2. Fides est in infantibus potentia and
inclinatione. Ursinus part secunda Catechis. quest. 74. Spiritus operatur in
potentiis animae ipsorum ut Bellar: habeut spiritum fidei. Zanch. in cap. 2. ad
Ephesians.
spirit of God.

In others is the new birth wrought after Baptism; so Polanus: but whether
after Baptism, or in Baptism, we will not dispute, only (as the case stands
with us) this I affirm, That there is no manifestation of the new birth, until
after Baptism. But when after Baptism? I answer, whenever men receive Christ
by faith, which though it be many years after, yet then do they feel the power
of God regenerate them, and to work all things in them, which he offered in
Baptism. Now the manner of this feeling (or of Gods Spirit working) proceeds
usually thus:

There be certain steps of degrees (say Divines) by which it passes, and
howsoever in those whom God has blessed with that great favor of holy and
Christian education (the Spirit of God dropping grace into their hearts, even
very betimes) these steps, or degrees, are not so easily perceived: Yet in
those men who have lived long in sin, whose sins have been gross, and great and
grievous, no sooner come they to a new birth, but they can feel grace work in
them step after step, and these steps we shall reckon to the number of eight.

The first is a sight of sin, and this our Savior reckons for the first work of
the Spirit, When he is come, John 16.8.
he will reprove the world of sin, John 16.8. Of sin? how? why thus: no sooner
begins this blessed change from nature to grace, but the conscience (wrought on
by Gods word) opens its book, and presents to the soul a bed-roll of those
many, mighty, heinous sins, committed against God and man, there he may read in
bloody burning lines the abominations of his youth, the sins of all his life;
and to bring them into method, the Commandments of God stand as a remembrancer
before his eyes: the first tells him of his loving somewhat above God: the
second, of his worshipping a false God, or the true God after a false manner:
the third, of his dishonoring the great and mighty name of God: the fourth, of
his breaking the Lords days, either in doing the works of the flesh, or leaving
undone the works of the Spirit; nor is this all: as against God, so against his
neighbor has he sinned: the fifth tells him of his stubbornness and
disobedience: the sixth, of his passions, and desire of revenge: the seventh,
of his lewdness and lustful courses: the eighth, of his robberies and covetous
thefts: the ninth, of his lies and and slanders, back-bitings and rash
judgments: the tenth, of his covetous thoughts, and motions of the heart to
all manner of evil. Good Lord! what a number of evils, yea, what innumerable
swarms of lawless thoughts, and words, and actions does he read in his
conscience? But above all, his darling-delight, his beloved sin is writ in
greatest characters, this he finds to have bewitched him most, and to have
domineered above all the rest in his wasted conscience; this sin in some is
worldliness, wantonness, usury, pride, revenge, or the like; in others it is
drunkenness, gluttony, gaming, scurril jesting, symony, or the like; whatsoever
it is, the conscience tells him of it again and again; where that he may read
it together with his other sins, the Spirit of God now opens the eyes of his
mind, and lets him see the very mud and filth of his soul, that lay at the
bottom before unseen, and undiscerned. Thus is the first working of the new
life, to wit, a feeling of the old death of his soul in sins and trespasses;
and here the axiom is true, no generation without corruption, a man must first
feel this death, before he is born again.]

The second step is, Sense of divine wrath, which begets in him fear; Romans 8.15.
so the Apostle, The spirit of bondage begets fear, Romans 8.15. and thus it
works: no sooner has the man a sight and feeling of his sin, but then Gods
Spirit (now called the spirit of bondage) presents to him the armory of Gods
flaming wrath, and fiery indignation; this makes him to feel (as if he were
pricked with the stroke of an arrow, or point of a sword, or sting of an Adder)
that he is a most cursed and damnable creature, justly deserving all the
miseries of this life, and all the fiery torments of hell in that life to come;
yea, this makes him tremble, and stand, and look, as if he were thoroughly
frighted with the angry countenance of God Almighty: Would you view him in this
case? his conscience has now awaked him out of his dead sensual sleep, by the
Trumpet of the Law, his heart is now scorched with the secret sense of Gods
angry face, his soul is now full sorely crushed under the most grievous burden
of innumerable sins, his thoughts are now full of fear and astonishment, as if
no less then very hell and horror were ready to seize upon his body and soul. I
say not what measure of this wrath is poured on all men in their conversion;
for I suppose some feel more, and some have less of it; but I verily believe,
some there are that (in these pangs of the new birth) have been scorched (as it
were) with the very flames of hell, insomuch that they might truly say with
David, Gods wrath lies hard upon me, Psalm 88.7.
and he has afflicted me with all his waves, Psalm. 88.7. And no wonder, for
this is the time of fear; now it is that Satan strives busily to stifle the new
man in the womb, and therefore he that before diminished his sins, and made
them appear little or nothing in his eyes, when he once sees the man smitten
down into the place of dragons, and covered with the shadow of death, Psalm.
44.19.
then he puts into his mind his innumerable sins, and (that which immediately
follows) the curse of the Law, and the wrath of God, which he yet makes more
grisly and fierce, with a purpose to plunge him into the bottomless pit of
horror and despair. By this means he persuaded Cain to cry out (when he was in
this case) My punishment is greater then I can bear; or, Genesis 4.13.
as others translate, Mine iniquity is greater then can be forgiven, Genesis 4.13.
And therefore thus far the unregenerate goes with the man born again, both have
a sight of sin, and sense of wrath, but here they part; for the man
unregenerate either sinks under it, or labors to allay it with worldly
comforts, or some counterfeit calm: but the man born again, is only humbled by
it, and seeks the right way to cure it, and at last (by the help of Gods
Spirit) he passes quite through it, I mean, through this hell upon earth, into
the spiritual pleasures of the Kingdom of grace, which is to be born again.]

The third step is Sorrow for sin, and this is more peculiar to Gods child;
there is a sorrow which is a common work of grace, which an hypocrite may have;
and there is a sorrow which is a work of special grace, and this likewise
precedes the exercise of faith.

But some object, Christ must work this sorrow, or it is good for nothing; now
if Christ be in the soul working sorrow, then there is faith, therefore faith
must go before sorrow.

I answer, although it is true that Christ cannot be in the soul, but in the
same instant there is the habit of faith; yet it follows not that faith is
before sorrow, for the habits of these graces are both together, and at once in
the soul; or howsoever, it follows not that the soul is enabled by an act of
faith to apply Christ to it self as soon as Christ is in the soul, or as soon
as the habit of faith is infused into the soul: The question is, whether the
soul in respect of us (who can only judge of the habit by the act) cannot be
said to have sorrow or repentance before faith? the question is not, which the
soul has first in respect of Gods gift, but which it acts first for our
apprehension? Surely to us it first sorrows for sin, and then it acts or
exercises faith by coming to Christ, and relying upon Christ for Salvation,
etc. he grieves not only because he fears he must be damned (so Cain and Judas
might) but because he knows he has deserved to be damned: this is the more
especial object of his sorrow, in that he is so wicked, so sinful, so
rebellious, so contrary to God: this sin, I say, is it (wherein he was
conceived, and born, wherein he has lived, and continued) that makes him sob,
and sigh, and sorrow, and mourn; and yet this sorrow is sometimes taken largely
for the whole work of conversion; sometimes strictly for conviction,
contrition, and humiliation; in like manner repentance is taken sometimes
largely, and sometimes strictly: By this distinction it may easily appear how
sorrow goes before repentance, and how repentance goes before faith. Indeed,
for the latter is the great controversy, but some reconcile it thus:
Repentance has two parts, the aversion of the soul from Sin, and the
conversion of the soul to God; the latter part of it is only an effect of
faith, the former part of it, viz. the turning of the soul from Sin is also an
effect, but not only an effect; for it is begun before faith, though it be not
ended till our life end. Some object, that God works repentance and faith
together: But we dispute not how God works them, but how the soul acts them;
not which is in the soul first, but which appears out of the soul first:
neither is it any new thing in Philosophy to say, Those causes which produce an
effect, though they be in time together, yet are mutually before one another in
order of nature, in diverse respects to their several causalities. Thus a man
must have repentance before he have saving and justifying faith; and yet a man
must have faith before the work of repentance be perfect in the soul. As we
maintain repentance to be a precedent work; so we deny it not to be a
subsequent effect: Sorrow is before the birth too, as the Apostle intimates, 2
Cor. 2 Cor. 7.10.
7.10. Godly sorrow works repentance, that is, sorrow prepares a man for
repentance, it goes before it, and prepares for it. And now it is, that Gods
spirit begins to renew his heart, as God himself proclaims, I will put a new
spirit within them, and I will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and
will give them an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. Ezekiel. 11.19.
his heart that before was hard as flint, now begins to relent, and soften, and
break in pieces: Acts 2.37.
How so? it is Gods Spirit that pricks the heart, and this pricking softens it,
Dum pungit, ungit, says Jorom, Hieronym.
Compunction softens and supples the heart, so that be it never so stony,
presently it becomes an heart of flesh; you know those that are apt to weep, or
yern, or sorrow, we call them tenderhearted; you may be sure then he that is
pricked, till his heart bleed inwardly, he that weeps blood (which every heart
does that is pricked on this manner) sure his heart is tender indeed; I say,
tender, for as the very word imports, ((...)) his heart weeps, why? his heart
is broken: David joins these together, A broken and a contrite heart, O God,
thou will not despise, Psalm 51.17. Psalm. 51.17.
And no wonder if an heart that is broken, and rent, and wounded, and pricked,
falls a weeping blood; well might David say when he was broken, Psalm. 38.8. (I
have wept; Psalm. 38.8.
nay more) I have roared for the very grief (or disquietness) of my heart: and
again, My soul (or my heart) melts (or droppeth) for very heaviness. Not that
his heart dropped indeed, Psalm. 119.28.
but because the tears which he shed, were not drops of water running only
from his eyes (an onion may cause so much) but issuing from his heart; which
heart being grieved, and sore grieved, it is said to be wounded; and so his
tears coming from it, they may be called no less then very blood, drops of
blood issuing from a wounded heart. Thus it is with the man now laboring in his
new birth, his heart grieves, his eye weeps, whence the Proverb, The way to
heaven is by weeping cross; the way to Gods kingdom is to cry like children
coming into the world, the way to be new born is to feel throws (as a woman
laboring of child) and so is Christ formed in us. Can a man be born again
without bitterness of soul? no, if ever he come to a sight of sin, and that
Gods sanctifying Spirit work in him sorrow for sin, his soul will mourn till he
may say with Jeremy, Mine eye droppeth without stay -- mine eye breaks my
heart, because of all the daughters of my City, because of all the sins of my
soul, Lament. 3.51. True it is, Lam. 3.49, 51.
as some infants are born with more pain to the mother, and some with less, so
may the new man be regenerated in some with more, in some with less anxiety of
travel; but more or less, it cannot be so little, but the man that labors in
these pangs shall mourn, and mourn, There shall be a great mourning, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, Zach. 12.11. What else?
Zach. 12.11.
He cannot look on a Saint, that sailed not first through the Ocean of tears,
and therefore he falls on his face with Abraham, Genesis 17.17. Genesis 32.24. Job 3.
1 Samuel 1.15. Psalm. 119.136. Isa. 38.14.
he wrestles with God like Jacob, he roars out his grief with Job, he pours out
his soul with Hanna, he weeps rivers of tears with David, he mourns as a dove
with Hezekiah, yea, like a crane, or a swallow, so does he chatter, Isa. 38.14.
O the bitter pangs and sore travel of a man, when he must be born again.

The fourth step is, Seeking rightly for comfort: He runs not to the world, or
flesh, or Devil, miserable comforters all, but to Scripture, to Prayer, or to
the Ministry of Gods word; if he find comfort in Scriptures, he meets with it
in the Lex ostendit peccatum, at Solum Evangelium peccati remedium. Aug. tract.
17. in Joh.
Gospel; not the Law, but the Gospel (says the Apostle) is the power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. The Law is indeed the
ministry of death and damnation, 2 Cor. 3.7. but the Gospel is the glad
tidings of salvation, Luke 2.10. The Law shows a man his wretched estate, but
shows him no remedy, and yet we abolish not the Law, in ascribing this comfort
to the Gospel only; Romans 1.16. 2 Cor. 3.7. Luke 2.10.
though it be no cause of it, yet is it the occasion of it: those doleful
terrors, and fears of conscience begotten by the Law, may be in their own
nature the very gates and downfall to the pit of hell; yet I cannot deny, but
they are certain occasions of receiving grace; and if it please God that the
man, now laboring in his pangs of the new birth, do but rightly settle his
thoughts on the Gospel of Christ, no doubt but thence he may suck the sweetest
comforts and delights that ever were revealed to man. Or if he find comfort in
prayer (to which he ever and anon repairs in every of these steps) then is it
by Christ, in whose name only he approaches to that heavenly throne of grace:
no sooner had the King of Niniveh humbled himself, but his proclamation runs,
Jonah 3.8, 9.
Let man and beast be covered with sack cloth, and cry mightily unto God, --
Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger,
that we perish not? and thus the man now wrestling with the grievous
afflictions and terrors of his conscience, Who can tell (says he) if God will
turn away his fierce anger? let me then cry mightily unto the Lord of heaven,
let me cry, and continue crying, until the Lord of mercy do in mercy look upon
me; and if for all this God give him a repulse, for reasons best known to
himself, if at the first, second, third, fourth, or at many more times, he seem
to have cried in vain, at last he flies to the ministry of the Word, and if he
may have his will, he would hit upon the most skilful, experienced, searching,
and sound-dealing man amongst all Gods Messengers: thus was it with Peter's
hearers, whose hearts being pricked, and rent with legal terrors, then could
they begin to cry it out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Act. 2.37. Act.
2.37.
Thus was it with the Jailer, who after his trembling and falling down to the
ground in an humble abasement, could then begin to say, Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? Act. 16.30. Act. 16.30.
And thus the man now ready to be born again, if he find no means to assuage
the rage and terrors of his guilty conscience, at last he comes to Gods
Minister with a What shall I do, what must I do to be saved? Alas! now I feel
the wounded conscience, the broken heart, the spiritual blindness, the
captivity and poverty of which often you have told me; if then there be any
instruction, direction or duty, which may tend to my good, or free me from this
evil, now open those lips that should preserve knowledge, now direct me in Gods
fear, and I will willingly follow it with my utmost endeavors.

And now (and not till now) has Gods Minister a strong and seasonable calling
to amplify and magnify the soul-saving sufficiency of Christ's death and
passion; were the blood of Christ, and promise of Salvation proffered to an
unwounded conscience, what were it, but like the pouring of a most sovereign
balsam upon a sound member of man? It is the only, right, everlasting method,
first to wound by the Law, and then to heal by the Gospel; first to cause smart
for sin, and then to lay to a plaster of Christ's blood; and therefore when the
heart is broken, then has the man of God his warrant to bind it up again,
then may he magnify Gods mercy, then may he set out to the height the heavenly
beauty of Christ's passion and person, and thus playing the Midwife by his high
and holy art of comforting the afflicted, at last the child of God (prepared
for his birth) becomes a man born again.

The fifth step is a clear (I say not a general sight, which he had before) but
The clear sight of Christ laid open to the eye of Faith; no sooner is the poor
wounded soul informed thoroughly in the mystery and mercy of the Gospel, but he
then looks on his Savior as the Jews on the brazen serpent, and seeing him
lifted up on the cross, he cannot but see in him an infinite treasury of mercy
and love, a boundless and bottomless sea of tender-heartedness and pity, a
whole heaven of sweetness, happiness, peace and pleasures; After the spirit of
bondage, enters the Spirit of adoption; the terrors of the Law leads him to the
comforts of the Gospel, his sorrow for sin brings him to the clear light of his
Savior; and then as a man in deaths-pangs, that lifts up his eyes to heaven
whence comes his help, so he in births-pangs lifts up his eyes to Christ, who
must either help him, or he sinks under his sin to the bottomless bottom of
hell. And I must tell you, this sight of Christ Jesus to an humbled sinner
(together with those glorious privileges which he brings with him, as
Reconciliation to God, forgiveness of sins, adoption, justification,
righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, Matthew. 6.29.
redemption, it is a most pleasant, ravishing, heavenly sight: Not Solomon in
all his royalty, no, nor the lillies of the field arrayed better then Solomon;
not all the curious sights on earth, nor all those glittering spangles in
heaven, can possibly afford such pleasure or delight to the eye of man, as does
this one object (Christ bleeding on the cross) to the soul of a sinner. Imagine
that you saw some malefactor (whose trial and doom were past) to be led to the
doleful place of execution; imagine that you heard him wail and weep for his
misspent time, for his bloody acts, for his heinous crimes; yea imagine his
wailings and weepings so bitter, that they were able to force tears from
others, and to make all eyes shoot and water that but looked upon him; if this
man in this case should suddenly see his King running and riding toward him
with his pardon in his hand, what a sight would this be? sure there is none to
this. Thus, thus it is with the man sorrowing for sin, whilst he is weeping
his case, and confessing what a little step there is betwixt him and damnation
(as if he were now at hells mouth, the very place of execution) in a maze he
looks upon Christ, whom he sees with a spear in his side, with thorns in his
head, with nails in his feet, with a pardon in his hands, offering it to all
men that will but receive it by faith. O here is a sight indeed, able to revive
the wickedst man upon earth, dead in sins and trespasses. And now there is
hopes of the birth, if it once come to this, there is more then probability of
an happy delivery, we may call it the stirrings of Gods child, or the first
feelings of life, before he is born again.]

The sixth step is, An hungring desire after Christ and his merits, and to this
step blessed are they that arrive; Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be filled, Matthew. Matthew. 5.6.
5.6. Filled? how? I will give unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of the
water of life freely, Revel. 21.6. Rev. 21.6.
this is the step (as if it were in Jacobs ladder) that raises him on high
toward heaven; it is such a token of true faith, that he who has it, needs no
more doubt that he believes, then he that breaths needs to doubt that he
lives; and why? his thirst of worldly things is cooled, his thirst of heavenly
things inflamed.

Object. But Christ says, He that drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst.

Sol. Non siti miserae indigentiae, sed siti copiosioris fruitionis. No hungry
man did ever with more appetite wish for meat, nor thirsty man for drink, nor
covetous man for money, nor ambitious man for glory, then he now longs to be
reconciled unto God in Christ; in this case, had he the pleasures and profits
of a thousand worlds, willingly would he part with all for the application of
Christ's sufferings, it is that sovereign blood that can only heal his soul, it
is that bitter passion which can only quench his thirst; give him but the
merits of Christ's death (whereby God and he may be at one) and he cares not
though he suffer death and hell again, yea he will venture goods, life, all; or
if that be not it which the Lord requires, he will do whatever behooves him,
even sell all, all that he has, part with all sin that he loves, yea were it
his right hand, or his right eye, nothing shall be dear to him, so that he may
enjoy his Savior. O here is a thirst above all thirsts! it breeds ardent
desires, vehement longings, unutterable groans, mighty gaspings, just like the
dry and thirsty ground, that gasps, and cleaves, and opens for drops of rain.
David, though in the desert of Ziph, a barren and dry land without water, yet
he complains most because of his thirst, My soul thirsts for thee O God,
Psalm. 63.1. Psalm. 63.1.
This is that violent affection that God puts into the hearts of those who seek
him in sincerity and truth; never was Ahab more sick for a vineyard, nor Sisera
for milk, nor Sampson for water, when God was fain to open him a fountain in
the jaw of an ass, Judge. 15 19.
then is a truly humbled soul after Christ, ever thirsting and longing, that he
may hide himself in his righteousness, and bathe himself in that blood which
his Savior shed for him. I have read of a gracious woman, who laboring in these
pangs, and longing after Christ Jesus, cried out, I have born nine children
with as great pain as other women, and yet I would with all my heart bear them
all over again, yea bear them, and bear them all the days of my life, to be
assured of my part in Christ Jesus. One replying; Does not your heart desire
and long after him? Oh! (said she) I have an husband and children, and many
other comforts, I would give them all, and all the good I shall ever see in
this world, or in in the world to come, to have my poor thirsty soul refresht
with that precious blood of my Savior. So eager and earnest is the heart of
each man (parched with the angry countenance of God) after this blood of his; I
thirst, I faint, I languish, I long (says he) for one drop of mercy; my spirit
is melted in me into tears of blood; my heart, because of sin, is so shaken and
shivered; my soul, because of sorrow, is so wasted and parched, that my thirst
is insatiable, my bowels are hot within me, my desire after Christ is extremely
great and greedy. Stay! all these expressions are far short of those longings,
Rev. 2 17.
no man knows them, save he that receives them, save he that is born again.]

The seventh step is, A relying on Christ: no sooner he considers and remembers
those many melting invitations of our Lord and Savior: John 7.31. Isaiah 55.1.
Matthew. 11.28.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me: Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye
to the waters: Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden with sin: but
(resting himself on the impregnable truth of these blessed promises) he throws
himself into the merciful and meritorious arms of his crucified Lord. Come
life, come death, come heaven, come hell, come what come will, Romans 8.35, 38,
39.
here will he stick for ever: Who (says Paul) shall separate us from the love
of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? No: I am persuaded (not these, nor more then
these) neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35, 38, 39. Thus it is with the man laboring in this
birth: what (says he) does Christ call the heavy laden? why, Lord, I am heavy
laden with a weight, a mass of sin, and if he may come that is called, Lord, I
come, I come, and now I am come, with thee will I build my tabernacle, with
thee will I rest for ever. Nor is this any wonder, experience tells us, the
hunted beast flies unto his den, the wounded man hyes unto the Surgeon, and so
the poor man broken and bruised with the weight of sin, how should he otherwise
but cast himself willingly into the sweet compassionate inviting arms and
embracements of Christ, whose promises run, I will ease him, I will refresh
him? You may see sometimes a little infant, Matthew. 11.28.
upon apprehension and approach of some sudden danger, how hastily he runs into
his mothers arms: even so a truly wounded soul (pursued by the terrors of the
Law, and frighted with the angry countenance of Almighty God) it flies with
speed into the bosom of its blessed Redeemer, there it clings unto his blessed
wounds, there it rests upon his meritorious death, there it grasps about his
crucified body, there it hides it self in the clefts of this Rock, yea there it
sticks with this full resolution, that should all terrors, all temptations, all
men, all devils, combine together to cast him into hell, they should tear him,
rent him, pull him, hale him from the bleeding wounds, and tender bowels of his
heavenly Savior. This was Jobs case, who in the bitterest of his pangs could
cry it out, saying, Though the Lord slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job
13.15. And I must tell you, this Vrisin. part secunda catech. q. 6. Fides
justificans non est tantum notitia, sed etiam fiducia, quatanquam medium
applicamus nobis meritum Christi, ac in eo acquiescimus. Trelcat. l. 2.
institut. Loquens de natura fidei justificantis, apprehensio ejus 2ex una
cognitionis in intellectu, altera fiduciae in voluntate, utramque includit
fides -- At noluit Bellar. fidem esse in voluntate.
affiance, dependence, adherence, reliance (or whatsoever else we call it) upon
the merits of Christ, is the right justifying faith, whither if a man once
come, there is but one degree more, and he is then born again.]

The last and highest step is, Universal obedience to Christ. No sooner has he
cast himself upon him, but he takes him (not only as a Savior to redeem him
from the miseries of sin, but) as an husband, a Lord, a King, to serve him,
love him, honor him, and obey him: Now will he take his yoke upon him; now will
he bear his cross and follow after him; now will he enter into the narrow way;
now will he walk in the holy path; now will he associate himself to that sect
and brotherhood that is every where spoken against; Act. 28.22.
now will he oppose himself against all sin whatsoever; now will he shake off
his old companions, brethren in iniquity; now will he keep peace and a good
conscience toward God and man; now will he watch over his secret sins, lustful
thoughts, occasions of evil; now will he direct his words to the glorifying of
God, and to give grace to the hearers; now will he conform all his actions to
the sovereignty of grace; now will he delight in the word, the ways, the
Saints, the services of God; now will he never more turn again unto folly, or
to his trade of sin, yea though Satan set upon him with baits and allurements,
to detain him in his bondage, but by one darling-delight, one minion-sin, yet
he resolves to answer him as Moses did Pharaoh, There shall not so much as an
hoof be left behind; for well he knows, one breach in the City exposes it to
the enemy, one leak in a ship will sink it in the sea, one stab in the heart
will speed a man to death, one knot in a thread will stay the needles passage
as well as five hundred, and therefore he will sell all, all that he has, even
all his sins, to the last filthy rag of his minion-delight, his
bewitching-beloved-bosom-sin. And now is the new man born amongst us, will you
view him? Old things are passed away, 1 Cor. 5.17.
behold, all things are become new, 1 Cor. 5.17. His heart, his eye, his ear,
his tongue, his understanding, his will, his memory, his conscience; his love,
his hatred, his hope, his fear, his joy, his sorrow; will you any more? his
thoughts, his words, his actions, his affections, are all new; this conversion
is universal, this change is a through change; now is Christ formed in him, now
is he transformed into a new creature, before he was in making a new man, but
now he is made new, God the Father accepts him for his son, God the Son stamps
on him the Image of his Father, but more immediately God the Holy Ghost has
thus molded and fashioned him, as I have let you see him, and now he is born
again] which except a man be, -- he (shall not) cannot see the kingdom of God.

Lo here those steps that raise up a man to the state of regeneration, A sight
of sin, Sense of misery, Sorrow for sin, Seeking for comfort, A sight of
Christ, Desire after Christ, Relying on Christ, Obedience to Christ: one word
more before we have done. You see how God brings along the man whom he
purposes to make his; if he observe not so distinctly the order of these
steps, and especially in that degree as (you see) we have related; for if in
substance and effect they have been wrought in them, if he have them in truth
(though perhaps not in this degree) I dare pronounce of him, that he is surely
born again. It is one of our worthies has said it, that in our humiliations,
and other preparative dispositions, we do not prescribe precisely just such a
measure and quantity, we do not determine peremptorily upon such or such a
degree and height, we leave that to the wisdom of our great Master in heaven,
the only wise God, who is a most free agent: But sure we are, a man must have
so much, and in that measure, as thoroughly to humble him, and then to bring him
to his Savior; he must be weary of all his sins, and of Satan's bondage wholly,
willing to pluck out his right eye, and cut off his right hand, I mean to part
with his best-beloved bosom lusts, to sell all, and not to leave so much as an
hoof behind; he must see his danger, and so haste to the City of refuge; he
must be sensible of his spiritual misery, that he may heartily thirst for
merry; he must find himself lost and cast away in himself, that Christ may be
all in all unto him; and after must follow an hatred of all false and evil ways
for the time to come, a through-change of former courses, company,
conversation, and setting himself in the way and practice of sobriety, honesty,
and holiness. The sum is, of every soul is required thus much: first, a truly
penitent sight, sense, and hatred of all sin: secondly, a sincere and
unsatiable thirst after Jesus Christ, and righteousness, both imputed and
inherent: thirdly, an unfeigned, and unreserved resolution of an universal new
obedience for the time to come. If any man has had the experience of these
affections and effects in his own soul, whatsoever the measure be (less or
more) he is safe enough, and may go on comfortably in the holy path.

Now then let me advise thee (whomsoever thou art that read) to enter into
thine own soul, born again: Search and see, whether as yet the spirit of
bondage has wrought its effects in thee; that is to say, whether thou have
been illightened, convinced, and terrified with a sensible apprehension, and
particular acknowledgement of thy wretched estate: Search and see, whether as
yet the Spirit of adoption has sealed thee for his own; that is to say,
Whether (after thy heart being broken, thy spirit bruised, thy soul humbled,
thy conscience wounded and awaked) thou have had a sight of Christ, and have
thirsted after him, and have cast thy self on him, and have followed his ways
and Commandments by an universal obedience? If upon search thou can say
(without self-deceit) that so it is with thee, then may thou bless God that
ever thou wast born, certainly (I dare say it) thou art born again. But if thou
have not sense or feeling of these works, if all I have spoken are very
mysteries to thee, what shall I say? but if ever, if ever thou meanest to see
the kingdom of God, strive, struggle, endeavor with thy might and main to
become truly regenerate: thus whilst the Minister speaks, it is Christ that
comes with power in the word, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. thou may say perhaps, it is
not in thy power, thou art only a mere patient, and Gods Spirit the agent, and
who can command the spirit of the Lord, that blows where he lists, at his
own will and pleasure? I answer, It is indeed the Spirit, and not man, that
regenerates or sanctifies: but I answer withal, The doctrine of the Gosp^l is
the ministration of the Spirit, and wheresoever that is preached (as I preach
it now to thee) there is the holy Ghost present, and thither he comes to
regenerate: nay, I can say more, there is a common work of illumination, that
makes way for regeneration; and this common work puts a power into man of doing
that, which when he shall do, the Spirit of God may, nay will in the day of his
power mightily work in him, to his quickening and purging; if then as yet thou
feel not this mighty work of God in thee, and yet fain would feel it, and
gladly do desire it (otherwise I confess it is in vain to speak) follow me in
these passages; I shall lend thee two wings to bear thee, two hands to lead
thee to the foot of this ladder, where if thou ascend these steps aforesaid, I
dare certainly pronounce of thee, thou art the man born again.]

The first wing is Prayer, which first brings thee to Gods throne, and (there,
if thou have thy request) then to the new birth; if I must acquaint thee how to
pray; Hos. 14.2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord; say unto him, take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, -- and then it follows, I will
heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, ver. 4. Jerem. 30.18. I have
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, turn thou me, and I shall be
turned. The soul may object, I may say thus, and be no better: But I answer,
say it, though you be no better, because God bids you say it: Say it, and say
it again; it may be he will come in when you say it, Hosea 14.4. Pray that God
would please to prepare thy heart, to sanctify thy affections, to order thy
will, to preserve thee from sin, to prepare thee for growth unto full holiness
and righteousness: this was the effect of Jeremiahs prayer, Convert me, O Lord,
Ier. 31.18.
and I shall be converted; heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me,
Ier. 17.14.
O Lord, and I shall be saved: Turn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be
turned, Jer. 17.14. and Lament. 5.21. Lam. 5.21.
It is the Lord that converts, and heals, and saves, and turns; and Prayer is
the means to produce this effect in thee: when we are required to pray, to
repent, and believe, we are not to seek strength in our selves, but to search
into the Covenant, and turn the promise into prayer. As the Command is, Repent,
Act. 17.30. Now the Covenant is, Christ shall give repentance, Act. 5.31. and
therefore pray, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. then bow thy
knees, and humbly, heartily, frequently, fervently implore the influence of
Gods blessed spirit: Cry with the Spouse in the Canticles, Awake, O North Wind,
Cant. 4.16.
and come thou Southwind, and blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may
flow forth, Cantic. 4.16. The more rushing and mighty this wind of the Spirit
is, the more will he make thee fructify in his graces and blessings; therefore
cry again and again, O Lord, Psalm. 51.10.
let thy Spirit come upon me: create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit within me. O Lord Jesu, send thy Spirit into me, which may restore
me from this death of sin, unto the life of holiness. Thus would thou ask,
and continue asking; thus would thou cry, and continue crying, then could I
assure thee of the promise which God has made, and cannot deny, he that asks
receives; and, he that seeks finds; and, Matthew 7.8.
to him that knocks (by continuance and perseverance) it shall be opened,
Mat. 7.8.

The second wing, or hand, that bears and leads thee to these steps of the new
birth, is, Constant hearing of the Word: thou must attend the gates of wisdom,
and wait on her posts; thou must come to Gods house, and hearken to the
ministry of the Word: no doubt, but if thou be constant in this duty, God
will stir up some good Samuel, God will use some of his Priests (consecrated to
that office) to beget thee again: Understand this soberly; for if Jesus Christ
himself should preach to the soul every day, and give not out of himself, the
ordinance would be empty to it: it is Christ's coming in to his people in the
ordinances, that only fills the empty soul with good things. To this purpose
are Gods Ministers called Spiritual Fathers, I have begotten you (says Saint
Paul) through the ministration of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15.
1 Cor. 4.15. The Pastors tongue is the Lords Conduit-pipe, and hereby he
drives the sweet and wholesome waters of life into the souls of his chosen; only
do thou frequent the means, and thou shall see at one time or other, God will
remember thee in mercy: It is true, I know not when; and therefore I wish thee
miss no Lord's Day to repair to Gods house, lest the day of thy neglect might
have been the day of thy conversion; certain it is, no man should expect Gods
blessing without his ordinances; no eating of bread without plowing and sowing,
no recovering of health without eating and drinking, no posting on land without
somewhat to ride on, no passage on seas, without somewhat to sail in; so no
blessing, no grace, no regeneration, no new birth at all, without waiting upon
God in his ways, and in his ordinances. Now then, as thou desire heaven, or
(the way to heaven) to be born again, I beseech thee make high account of this
ordinance of God, the preaching of his Word: In preaching of the Gospel, light,
motion, and power goes out to all, which men resist: and some are destroyed,
not because they could not believe, but because they resist, and will not obey,
and so dye, Act. 7.51. Luke 13.34. Ezekiel. 33.11. Hos. 13.9. and yet I wish thee
not only to hear it, but after thou have heard, consider of it, ponder on it,
and lay the threats and reproofs, the precepts and promises, unto thine own
soul: thus if thou hear and meditatest, I doubt not but Gods word will be a
Word of power to thee, and (together with prayer) bring thee toward the new
birth, whither except a man come, he cannot (possibly) see the kingdom of God.

Thus far of the new birth: Genesis 28.12.
you see we have mounted those steps, whose top (like Jacobs ladder) reaches
up to heaven; witness the next word, he that is born again shall see the
kingdom of God, but he that is not born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

He cannot see the kingdom of God.]
THe privileges of the new birth are these two, to see,] and to see the
kingdom of God.]

First, to see,] Which is all one (says a Modern) as to enjoy: Aretius in loc.
yet a man may see that which he does not enjoy; but without regeneration there
is no sight, much less possession of the kingdom of God.

To see then is the lesser happiness, of which the unregenerate are debarred;
but to see, in it self is a great and gracious privilege, to which the
regenerate are admitted: for whether by Gods kingdom be meant the kingdom of
grace, or the kingdom of glory, Happy are the eyes that see these things.

But whose eyes are they? If we examine the unregenerate, he sees no whit into
the awful Majesty of God the Father, he sees no whit of the beauty, mercy, and
pity of his Savior, he sees no whit into that glorious highness of Gods Spirit
in Heaven, nor yet of his nighness to his brethren on earth: Hence it is, that
when he comes into the Temple, among the Congregation of Gods Saints, his soul
is not delighted with their prayers, praises, Psalms, and Service; he sees no
comfort, no pleasure, no content in their actions. But the new man is of better
sight, the graces of the Spirit, and the wardrobe of Gods glory are all
produced to his eye, as if the Lord should say, Come, and see: so Moses, Stand
still, and see the salvation of God: Venite, and videte. Psalm. 46.8. Exodus
14.13. Ephesians. 1.18. Rev^l. 3.18.
so Christ to his Apostles, It is given to your eyes to see these things, to
others but by parables. He that is born again has a spiritual eye, and a
celestial object, The eye of his understanding is enlightened (says St. Paul:)
anointed (says S. John:) To what end? But that he may know what is the hope of
his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance is in the
Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. See a privilege, of which the unregenerate is ever
barred, his mind is dark, even darkness it self, Ephesians. 5.8. And therefore it
is no wonder, Ephesians. 5.8.
what is said by our Savior, that he cannot, cannot see] the kingdom of God.

The second privilege is the object of this sight, here called the kingdom of
God.] By which some understand Heaven, some the way to Heaven; most of the
Ancients say, that by this Kingdom is meant Heaven: Calvin is of mind, that
not heaven, Calvin in loc Aretius in loc. Parum refert.
but a spiritual life is thereby understood: Aretius says (and I am of his
mind) that whether we understand the one or the other, It matters not much:
Sure we are, that both these ( Grace and Glory) are annexed to the new birth,
and both very well may be employed in this word, the kingdom of God.]

First then, if by the kingdom of God is meant the kingdom of Grace (whereof
our Savior speaks, The kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17.21.
Luke 17.21.) See to what a privilege the new man has attained, all the
graces of God, all the fruits of the Spirit are now poured into him: If you ask
what graces? what fruits? St. Gal. 5.22.
Paul tells you, Gal. 5.22. Love, joy, peace, long-sufferings, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: or would you have us to contract them?
St. Paul does it elsewhere, the kingdom of God is -- righteousness, peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost, Romans Romans 14.17.
14.17.

First, Righteousness, and that is either active or passive; holiness of life,
or (the cause of this holiness) our righteousness in Christ: If the first be
meant, no sooner is man born again, but he enters into the holy path, he
declines all evil, and stands at the sword point with his most beloved sin; or
if ever any sin (through the violence of temptation) seize on him again, he is
presently put again into the pangs of the new birth, and so renewing his
sorrow, and repairing repentance, he becomes more resolute and watchful over
all his ways: Romans 12.9.
And as he abhors evil, so he cleaves to that which is good; his faith like the
Sun, sets all those gracious heavenly stars on shining, as hope, and love, and
zeal, and humility, and patience; in a word, universal obedience, and
fruitfulness in all good works: not one, but all good duties of the first and
second Table, begin to be natural and familiar to him, and though he find some
duties more difficult, yet he resolves, and striveth to do what he can, and is
much displeased and grieved, if he do not as he should. Or if by righteousness
is meant passive righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
to wit, our righteousness in Christ, no sooner is a man born again, but he is
clothed with this righteousness; the other (God knows) is but weak and full of
imperfection, Extra nos est justitia, non in nobis: Luther. de instit.
Christiana.
and therefore to speak properly, It is the righteousness in God, that makes us
appear righteous before God: would you have a plain case? as Jacob to procure
the blessing of his father, hid himself into the apparel of his brother, and so
received it to his own commodity, under the person of another: thus the new man
puts on the righteousness of Christ, with which being clad as with a garment,
God accepts him in his stead, his faults being covered with his Saviors
perfection.

Secondly, from this Righteousness arises Peace: no sooner is man righteous,
but he is at peace with man, at peace with God, at peace with himself. He is at
peace with man; Isa. 11.6.
The wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid, says the
Prophet, Isa. 11.6. The meaning is, that in the kingdom of Christ, when a man
is called into the state of grace (howsoever by nature he is a Wolf, or a
Leopard, or a Lion, or a Bear, yet) he shall then lay aside his cruelty, and
live peaceably with all men, with all men, I say, bad and good; for if bad, the
Apostle implies them, As much as in you is, have peace with all men, Romans 12.18.
Romans 12.18. Or if good, then he cannot but have peace with them, yea, although
before his conversion he hated and maligned them, yet now he is ravished with
the delight and love of them, and to this end he labors might and main to
ingratiate himself into their blessed Communion; true, how should he but love
them, and sympathize with them, whom he believes one day to meet in Heaven, and
there to enjoy them, and they him for ever? Nor is this all, he is at peace
with God, he has humbled himself, and confessed his fault, and cried for mercy,
and cast himself upon Christ, and vowed amendment of life; so that now God by
his word has spoke peace to his soul, by the mediation of Christ it is
obtained, and by the testimony of the Spirit he feels it within him. This is
that Peace which passes all understanding, it made the Angels sing; Peace upon
earth, it makes his soul reply, My peace is in heaven: what else? The storm is
past, and the rain is gone away, he that lay for a night in the darkness of
sorrow, and weeping for his sins, now he beholds the Son of righteousness
appear (as the Disciples often did upon the Mount of Olives, signifying peace)
all quiet, and calm, and pleasant. Nor is this all, he is at peace with
himself, I mean his own conscience; that which before stirred up the fire, that
brought him to a sight of sin, and sense of Divine Wrath, that filled him with
fearful terrors, compunction, remorse, and true sorrow for sin, it is now
turned good and quiet. Solomon calls it a continual feast, Prove. 15.15. Prove.
15.15.
who are the attendants but the holy Angels? what is the cheer, but joy in the
Holy Ghost? who is the feast-maker but God himself, and his good Spirit
dwelling in him? Nor is this feast without music, Gods word and his actions
make a blessed harmony, and he endeavors to continue it by keeping peace and a
good conscience toward God and man.

Thirdly, from this peace issues joy in the holy Ghost; no sooner is a man at
peace with man, with God, with himself, but he is filled with joy that no man
can take from him; this joy I take to be those blessed stirrings of the heart,
when the seal of remission of sins is first set unto the soul by the spirit of
Adoption; For thus it is, the soul having newly passed the pangs of the new
birth, it is presently bathed in the blood of Christ, lulled in the bosom of
Gods mercies, secured by the Spirit of its inheritance above; and so ordinarily
follows a Sea of comfort, a sensible taste of everlasting pleasures, as if the
man had already one foot in heaven. But I hear some object, They have felt the
pangs, cast themselves on Christ, resolved against all sin, and yet no comfort
comes. It may be so, though not ordinarily; certain it is, whosoever has this
joy is new born, yet not every one new born has this joy; if any then be in
such case, let him hear what the Spirit of truth says, Since the beginning of
the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye
seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him,
Isaiah 64.4. Isa. 64.4.
Waiting patiently (says a Modern) for the Lords coming to comfort us, either
in temporal or spiritual distresses, is a right pleasing and acceptable duty
and service unto God, which he is wont to crown with multiplied and overflowing
refreshings when he comes. To this end says the Prophet, They that wait upon
the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles,
they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint, Isa. 40.31.
Isa. 40.31. Nay, and should a man dye (says my Author) in this state of
waiting, if his heart in the mean time sincerely hate all sin, heartily thirst
for the mercy of God in Christ, and resolve truly upon new universal obedience
for the time to come, he shall certainly be saved; because the holy Ghost
says, Blessed are all they that wait for him, Isa. 30.18.
Isa. 30.18. Or if this will not satisfy his desire, let his desire quicken
and set on work (with extraordinary fervency) the spirit of prayer, let him
have recourse again and again unto the promises of Scripture toward the poor,
heavy-laden, penitent souls; and when the time is come (if it will come) which
God has appointed, then shall he feel this joy unspeakable, the joy of the
Holy Ghost; and this is the head, the height, the top, the highest step in this
kingdom of grace, the kingdom of God.

Or secondly, if by the kingdom of God is meant the kingdom of glory, see then
what a privilege waits on the new man; no sooner shall his breath and body be
divorced, but his soul mounted on the wings of Angels, shall straight be
carried above the starry firmament, there shall it inherit the kingdom, Luke
12.32. Luke 12.32. Matthew. 7.21. Acts 14.22.
an heavenly kingdom, Matthew. 7.21. the kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. and truly
called so, for it is a kingdom of Gods own making, beautifying and blessing; a
kingdom beseeming the glorious residence of the King of kings; a kingdom
creating all Kings that but inhabit in it. But here my discourse must give way
to your meditations: I cannot speak this privilege, therefore conclude with
Austin, Augustine.
Anima quae amat ascendat frequenter, and currat per plateas caelestis
Jerusalem, visitando Patriarchas, salutando Prophetas, admirando exercitus.
Mount your meditations on the wings of faith, and behold in Heaven those states
of wonder, Patriarchs shining, Prophets praising, Saints admiring, hands
clapping, harps warbling, hearts dancing, the exercise a song, the ditty
Alleluiah, the quiristers Saints, the consorts Angels, etc. See more of this in
my last things.
In this fountain of pleasure let the newborn Christian bathe his soul, for
his it is, and he it is only that shall see it, enjoy it; Except the man born
again, no man shall ever see the kingdom of God.

Thus far of the privileges of the new birth; there waits on it the eye of
faith, and righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; in a word, the
kingdom of grace, and the kingdom of glory. And now (beloved) say, Matthew. 11.30.
and what is Gods service but perfect freedom, the yoke is easy, the burden
is light, but the reward is grace, glory, endless felicity. Bestir then your
selves, and if ever you mean to see the kingdom of God, endeavor to run through
this new birth, and to lead a better life then heretofore you have done. Thus
whilst the Minister speaks, Christ comes with power, and therefore he speaks
and persuades. I conclude with my speeth to thee (whosoever thou art) into
whose hands this Book is fallen: the truth is, the work is weak, and answerable
in that kind to the Author of it: many and many a stitch in my side, many a
pull at my heart, many a gripe in my stomach (besides the pangs of my soul
endeavoring to practice what I have writ) have I suffered and felt since I
first begun it; and yet the comfort I have received my self in this one
necessary thing, has made me (contrary to the desires of my best friends) to
run through this short work, by taking a longer time, as my continual disease
would now and then suffer me. If (when I am gone) thou reapest any spiritual
good by this my surviving pains, it is, next to Gods glory, all my desire; Yet
I live, but to save thy soul I care not how soon I might dye, yea on that
condition I could be willing (if God so pleased) the lines that thou read
were writ with the warmest blood in my heart: willing, said I? yea, I could be
willing and glad (as little blood as I have in my body) to let it run and run,
for thy spiritual good, to the very last drop in my veins. I say no more,
consider what I have said, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God.

An appendix, containing a more particular Method, for the man not yet born
again, to have his part in the second birth.
CHAP. I. The occasion and method of this Treatise.
SOme there are, who hearing the new birth (or first repentance) to be so
necessary to salvation, but never feeling in themselves any such change or
conversion, have therefore desired further helps, though naturally thou art
blind, and wretched, and miserable, and poor, and naked; yet the Lord has not
left thee without means and helps: to this purpose he has set up his
ordinances; not that man of himself can dispose himself unto grace, but that
the Spirit of Christ in the use of the ordinances (without any habitual or
sanctifying grace in man's heart) can dispose of man to the reception of
habitual or sanctifying grace. True it is, I advised them in the former
Treatise to be frequent in prayer, and in hearing of the word: But so we have
done, say they, and yet we feel no conversion: it may be so, for not always the
doing of them, but perseverance in them through Christ obtains the blessing
desired. And yet if they will out of hand settle themselves to the work, It is
the Lord that says, Break up the fallow ground, Jer. 4.3. (i.) seek to the
Lord to break them for thee: Be in the use of the means, and the Lord may come
in, and break thy heart. I shall, for their further satisfaction, give them a
more particular Method, and without a Text taken, take my self more liberty to
put them in the way.

Two things I suppose necessary for them that would have part in the new birth,
1. To get into it. 2. To be delivered of it.
1. The means to get into it, is 1. Examination of themselves. 2. Confession of
their sins. 3. Hearty prayer for the softning of their hearts.
By which three are procured the three first steps, Sight of sin. Sense of
divine wrath. Sorrow for sin.
2. The means to be delivered of it, is by application of the promises, and
these, according to their several objects, produce their several effects; some
A sight of Christ. A desire after Christ. A relying on Christ. An obedience to
Christ. A comfort in Christ, not only sought for, but obtained, if the
promises be rightly applied.



CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. The first means to get into the new birth.
THe means to get into the new birth, is first Examination; and the way to
examine, is to set before men that Crystal glass of the Law for their light
and rule: To this purpose I have here annexed a Catalogue, or Table, to show
them their offenses; not that I can possibly ennumerate all sins, but only the
kinds; and if herein I come short, yet consciences awaked may be occasioned
hereby to bring into their thoughts those others not mentioned.

Now then (whosoever thou art that beginn'st this blessed work) examine thy
self by this Catalogue, but do it warily, and truly, and where thou find'st thy
self guilty, either note it in this book, or transcribe it into some paper,
that so they may be ready for thine eye when thou come to Confession.

Sect. 2. Sins against the first Commandment.
IN every Commandment we must observe both the duties required, and sins
forbidden, for both these are employed in every one of the Commandments; if in
the first thou art guilty, thou must answer negatively; if in the second, thou
must answer affirmatively: now then to proceed.

It is the first Commandment, Thou shall have no other gods but me.

For the duties here required,
Say first, Have thou ever in mind, will, and affections, took the true God in
Christ to be thy God? Secondly, have thou abounded in those graces by which
thou should cleave unto God, as in the warmth of knowledge, and love, and
fear, and joy, and trusting in God? Thirdly, have thou observed Gods mercies,
and promises, and works, and judgments upon thee, and (by a particular
application) took special notice thereof? Fourthly, have thou communicated with
the godly, and joined thy self to Gods people, and delighted chiefly in them?

Or for the sins here forbidden,
Say first, have thou not sometimes been guilty of blasphemy, or idolatry, or
witchcraft, or atheism, or epicurism, or heresy? Secondly, have thou not been
guilty of pride, a sin flatly opposing God, and first committed by devils?
Thirdly, have thou not had inward reasonings that there is no God, or that he
sees not, Psalm. 14.1. Esaias 29.15. Job 21.14. Ier. 17.5.
or knows not, or that there is no profit in his service? Fourthly, have thou
not failed to love God, and fear God, and to put thy whole trust in God?
Fifthly, have thou not trusted in man, or feared man, or loved the world, and
thereby alienated thy heart from God? Sixthly, have thou not resorted to
witches, or in the first place to Physicians, and not to the living God?
Seventhly, have thou not tempted God, and in the matters of God, been either
cold or lukewarm, or preposterously zealous? Eighthly, have thou not a
proneness to sin, yea to rebel against God in thy whole man? Ninthly, have thou
not been careless to perform the inward duties of Gods worship in sincerity and
truth? if in these thou have transgressed, then have thou broken this
Commandment, Thou shall have no gods but me.

Sect. 3. Sins against the second Commandment.
IT is the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image.]

For the duties here required.
Say first, have thou ever worshipped the true God purely according to his
will? Secondly, have thou observed all those outward duties of his worship, as
prayer, and vows, and fasting, and meditating, and the rest? Thirdly, have thou
repaired to Gods house, observed family duties, received the Preachers of the
Gospel?

Or for the sins here forbidden.
Say first, Ier 9.14.
have thou not sometimes walked after the imaginations of thy own heart,
serving God out of custom, or (after the manner of thy forefathers) by
will worship and superstitions? Secondly, have thou not committed idol worship,
conceiving of God in thy mind, or respecting him in thy sense in the likeness
of a creature? Exodus 23.13.
Thirdly, have thou not mentioned the names of other gods, either by way of
swearing, or apology? Fourthly, have thou not made an image to liken God to it,
Esaias 40.18.
or used any gesture of love and reverence to any such images? Fifthly, in a
word, have thou not been careless to worship God, Zach. 14.17. Psalm. 14.4.
Math. 10.14.
to call upon the Lord, to receive Gods Ministers, or to perform any other of
the outward duties of Gods worship? If in any of these thou have transgressed,
then have thou broken this Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven image.

Sect. 4. Sins against the third Commandment.
IT is the third Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God
in vain.]

For the duties required:
Say first, have thou been ever a constant learner, hearer, and doer of Gods
Word and Will? Secondly, have thou prayed with perseverance, understanding, and
power of the Spirit, without doubting or wavering? Thirdly, have thou come
preparedly to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and being come, have thou
discerned the Lords body? Fourthly, have thou used all the titles, and
properties, and works, and ordinances of the Lord with knowledge, faith,
reverence, joy, and sincerity?

Or for the sins here forbidden:
Say first, have thou not sometimes in thy talk dishonored the titles,
attributes, religion, word, people of God, or any thing that has in it the
print of his holiness? Secondly, have thou not sworn or forsworn, or loved
false oaths? Thirdly, Zach 8.17.
have thou not caused the name of religion, or people of God to be evil thought
of by thy ill course of life, or by committing some gross sin? Fourthly, have
thou not rashly, or unpreparedly, or heedlesly read the Word, heard Sermons,
received the Sacraments, or performed any other part of the worship of God?
Fifthly, have thou not thought or spoken blasphemously, or contemptuously of
God, or of any thing whatsoever pertaining to God? If in any of these thou have
transgressed, then have thou broken this Commandment, Thou shall not take the
Name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Sect. 5. Sins against the fourth Commandment.
IT is the fourth Commandment, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

For the duties here required.
Say first, have thou (according to the equity of this Commandment) ever
observed the Lords day, and other days and times set apart for Gods service?
Secondly, have thou on those days rested from the servile works of sin, and
rested and relied upon Christ, for the remission of sins, and led an holy and
religious life, that so thou may enter into that rest of heaven? Heb. 4.11.
Thirdly, have thou always prepared thy heart, before thou wentest into the
house of the Lord, by meditation of Gods Word and Works, by examination and
reformation of thy ways, by prayer, thanksgiving, and holy resolution to carry
thy self as in Gods presence, and to hear and obey whatsoever thou should
learn out of the pure Word of God? Fourthly, have thou repaired to Gods house
in due time, and stayed the whole time of Prayer, reading, preaching of the
Word, singing of Psalms, receiving of the Sacraments? Fifthly, have thou
performed private religious offices upon the Lords day, to wit, In private
prayer and thanksgiving, in acknowledging thy offenses to God, in reconciling
thy self to those thou have offended, or with whom thou art at variance; in
visiting the sick, comforting the afflicted, contributing to the necessity of
the poor, instructing thy Children and servants (and the rest of thy family) in
the fear and nurture of the Lord?

Or for the sins here forbidden:
Say first, have thou not sometime spent the Lords day in idleness, Ezekiel. 46.10.
or in wordly business, in vanities, or in sin? Secondly, have thou not omitted
public duties, or come in too late, or wentest out too soon? Nehem. 10.31.
and 13.15.
Thirdly, have thou not on those days sold wares, carried burdens, brought in
sheaves, or wrought in the harvest? Fourthly, have thou not employed thy
cattle, or servants, or children, or any other, though thou workest not thy
self? Fifthly, have thou not profaned the Lords day, by needless works, words,
or thoughts, about thy calling, or about thy recreation? Sixthly, have not the
strict observance of the duties of that day been tedious unto thee, saying in
thine heart, When will the day be gone? Amos 8.5.
If in any of these thou have transgressed, then have thou broken this
Commandment, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

Sect. 6. Sins against the fifth Commandment.
IT is the fifth Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother.]

For the duties here required, they are either in Family. Commonweal. Church.


First, Ephesians. 5.25. 1 Pet. 3.7.
for the Family: Say, if thou art an husband; 1. Have thou ever loved thy wife,
and dealt with her according to knowledge, giving honor to her as to the weaker
vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers
were not hindered? If thou art a wife: Ephesians 5.22, 24. 1 Pet. 3.4.
2. Have thou submitted to thine own husband, as unto the Lord in every thing?
3. Have thou put on the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price? If thou art a parent: 4. Ephesians. 6.4.
Have thou brought up thy children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord?
5. Have thou corrected them, yet not provoked them by immoderate correction? 6.
Have thou provided for them in their callings, 2 Timothy 5.8. Romans 1.30.
or outward estates? If thou art a child: 7. Have thou obeyed thy parents, and
received correction with submission and reverence? 8. Heb. 12.9.
Have thou relieved them in their wants? 9. Have thou observed their
instructions, and covered their infirmities? If thou art a master: 10. Have
thou entertained Gods servants, Prove. 15.15. Genesis 9.22. Col. 4.1. Tit. 2.9, 10.
and given unto thy servant that which is just and equal? If thou art a
servant: 11. Have thou been obedient to thy master according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ? Not answering
again, not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity?

Secondly, for the Commonweal; if thou art a Magistrate, 12. Have thou
executed just laws? 13. Have thou reformed others abuses, according to the
power that is in thee? If thou art a Subject: 14. Have thou obeyed the higher
Powers in all just commands? 15. Have thou been subject unto them, Romans 13.5.
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake?

Thirdly, for the Church; If thou art a Minister: 16. Have thou taught in
season, and out of season? 17. Has thy light shined before men, that they
might see thy good works? Matthew. 5.16. Gal. 6.6 Heb 13 7, 17, 18.
If thou art a hearer: 18. Have thou communicated to them that teach thee in
all good things? 19. Have thou obeyed them, and prayed for them, and loved
them, and followed them, considering the end of their conversation?

Or for the sins here forbidden,
And first for the Family: Say, if thou art an husband: 1. Prove. 21.19.
Have thou not sometimes abused thy wife, or smitten her, or injured her, in
thought, word, or deed? If thou art a wife: 2. Have thou not been wasteful, or
froward, or idle? If thou art a child: 3. Have thou not despised thy fathers
or mothers instructions? Prove. 15.5. Prove. 30.17. and 20.20.
4. Have thou not mocked them, or despised them, or cursed them, or smitten
them, or shamed them, or grieved them? If thou art a master: 5. Have thou not
governed thy family negligently? 6. Have thou not withheld that which is just
and equal in diet, wages, encouragement? If thou art a servant: 7. Have thou
not been idle, and slothful? 8. Have thou not served grudgingly, and not from
the heart?

Secondly, for the Commonweal: If thou art a Magistrate: 9. Have thou not been
as a Lion, or a Bear, roaring and ranging over the poor people? Prove. 28.15.
Esa. 10.1.
10. Have thou not decreed unrighteous decrees? respecting the persons of the
poor, or honoring the persons of the mighty? If thou art a Subject: 11. Have
thou not reviled the Gods, Levit. 19.15. Exodus 12.28. Romans 13.1, 7.
or cursed the Ruler of thy people? 12. Have thou not disobeyed the higher
Powers, or not denied tribute, or custom, or honor, or fear to whom they are
due?

Thirdly, for the Church; if thou art a Minister: 13. Have thou not been
profane and wicked in thy life and conversation? Ierem. 23.11.
14. Have thou not run before thou wast sent? or being sent, have thou not been
negligent in the gift that is in thee? 1 Timothy 4.14. Ierem. 23.13.
16. Have thou not prophesied in Baal, and caused Gods people to err? 17. Have
thou not committed simony, or sought indirectly for the fleece, not regarding
respectively the flock? 18. Have thou not strengthened the hands of evil doers,
Ierem. 23.14.
in preaching peace to wicked men? 19. Have thou not given heed to fables (or
to some unprofitable matter) rather than to godly edifying, 1 Timothy 1.4.
which is in faith? If thou art an hearer: 20 Have thou not resisted the
Minister, and the Word preached by him? Gal. 6.6. Heb. 13.7, 17, 18.
whatsoever thou art, husband, or wife, or parent, or child, or master, or
servant, or Magistrate, or Subject, or Minister, or hearer, if in any of these
thou have transgressed, then have thou broke this Commandment, Honor thy father
and thy mother.

Sect. 7. Sins against the sixth Commandment.
IT is the sixth Commandment, Thou shall do no murder.

For the duties here required.
Say, 1. Have thou ever desired and studied by all means lawful, to preserve
thine own person, and the person of thy neighbor?

Or for the sins here forbidden.
Say: 1 Have thou not sometimes envied others for their wealth, Gen 26.14.
Numb. 11.29. Genesis 37.11. Job 16 9
or for their gifts, or for their respects with others? 2. Have thou not
offended others in gestures, gnashing on them with thy teeth, or sharpening
thine eyes on them? 3. Have thou not fended others in words, by censuring, or
reviling, 1 Pet. 3.9. Psalm. 37.12.
or rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing? 4. Have thou not offended
others in deeds, plotting against the just, Matthew. 5.22, Amos 2.11.
or doing evil to any man? 5. Have thou not been angry with thy brother without
cause, or continued long in anger, keeping thy wrath (as it were) for ever? 6.
Have thou not rejoiced at others fall, Pro. 24.17. Job 31.30.
or wished a curse to their souls? 7. Have thou not done evil to thy self, by
inordinate fretting, or grieving, or drinking, or surfeiting, Numb. 14.2. Pro.
6.14.
or saying in thy passions, Would God I were dead? 8. Have thou not been a
sower of discord, or some way or other, a just occasion of the discomfort, or
of the death of thy neighbor? If in any of these thou have transgressed, thou
have then broken this Commandment, Thou shall do no murder.

Sect. 8. Sins against the seventh Commandment.
IT is the seventh Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery.

For the duties here required.
Say: Have thou ever kept thy self pure in soul and body, both toward thy self
and others?

Or for the sins here forbidden.
Say: Have thou not sometimes been defiled with buggery, Sodomitry, incest,
whoredom, adultery, Polygamy, Romans 1.26.
self-pollution, or with changing the natural use into that which is against
nature? 2. Have thou not offended in the occasions of uncleanness, as in
idleness, gluttony, drunkenness, wanton company, whorish attire, or perfumes?
3. Pro. 7.16, 17. Col. 3.8.
Have thou not sinned in thy senses, or gestures, or words, by filthy
communication proceeding out of thy mouth? 4. Have thou not harbored in thy
heart burning lusts, impure thoughts, inordinate affections? 5. Matthew. 5.28.
Have thou not behaved thy self immodestly, unsoberly, Col. 3.5.
or shamelesly abusing thy body, or using some manner of dalliance and
wantonness? If in any of these thou have transgressed, then have thou broken
this Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery.

Sect. 9. Sins against the eighth Commandment.
IT is the eighth Commandment, Thou shall not steal.

For the duties here required.
Say, Have thou ever, by all good means, furthered the outward estate of thy
self and of thy neighbor?

Or for the sins here forbidden.
Say: First, Have thou not sometimes got thy living by an unlawful calling?
Secondly, have thou not impoverisht thy self by idleness, luxurious, or
unnecessary expenses? Thirdly, have thou not withheld from thy self, or others,
that which should have been expended? Fourthly, have thou not gotten, or kept
thy neighbors goods by falsehood, or force, and made no restitution? Fifthly,
have thou not stolen by usury, or oppression, or fraud, in buying or selling,
an abomination unto the Lord? Sixthly, have thou not robbed God of his tithes
and offerings by sacrilege or symony? Deuteronomy. 25.16. Malac. 3.8.
Seventhly, have thou not some way or other impaired thy neighbors state? If in
any of these thou have transgressed, then have thou broken this Commandment,
Thou shall not steal.

Sect. 10. Sins against the ninth Commandment.
IT is the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness.

For the duties here required.
Say, Have thou ever by all means sought to maintain thy own and thy neighbors
good name, according to truth and a good conscience?

Or for the sins here forbidden.
Say, Rev. 22.15.
First, have thou not sometimes loved (or made) a lie? Secondly, Ier. 20.10.
Mat. 7.3. Prove. 24.24.
have thou not raised a false report, to the defaming of many? Thirdly, have
thou not censured or judged others, yet never considered the beam that is in
thy own eye? Fourthly, have thou not flattered thy self and others, saying unto
the wicked, Thou art righteous? Fifthly, have thou not condemned some without
witness, or forborne to witness for others when thou knew the truth? Sixthly,
have thou not been uncharitably suspicious, or a despiser of thy neighbor?
Seventhly, have thou not told a lie, whether jestingly, or officiously, or
perniciously? If in any of these thou have transgressed, then have thou broke
this Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness.

Sect. 11. Sins against the last Commandment.
IT is the last Commandment, Thou shall not covet.]

For the duties here required.
Say, First, have thou ever been truly contented with thy own outward
condition? Secondly, have thou rejoiced at others good, and loved thy neighbor
as thy self? Matthew. 19.19.


Or for the sins here forbidden.
Say, First, Matthew. 15.19.
have thou not sometimes conceived evil thoughts in thy heart? Secondly, have
thou not delighted in the inward contemplations of evil? Thirdly, have thou not
been full of discontent with thy own condition and state? Fourthly, have thou
not felt another law of thy members warring against the law of thy mind?
Fifthly, Romans 7.29.
have thou not coveted after something or other that was thy neighbors, either
with will, or by actual concupiscence? If in any of these thou have
transgressed, then have thou broke this Commandment, Thou shall not covet.

CHAP. III. The second means to get into the new birth.
AFter examination (which may well serve thee for one days work or two) the
next duty is Confession. Now then take the Catalogue of those sins (or if thy
awaked conscience can tell thee of any other) which thou know thou have
committed, and noted, either in this book, or on some other paper; and kneeling
on thy knees, spread thy Catalogue before the Lord, I say, spread thy Catalogue
before the Lord, 2 King 19.14
as Hezekiah did his letter; there read thou seriously and particularly,
saying, O Lord, I confess I have committed this sin, and the other sin [as they
are before thee in order] of all these sins I am guilty, especially of those
sins wherein I delighted, my darlings, my minions, my bosom-sins, [take notice
of them, and confess them again] of all these sins I am guilty; And now, O
Lord, standing (as it were) at the bar of thy tribunal, I arraign my self, and
accuse my self, and judge my self worthy of the utmost of thy wrath and
indignation; for one sin thou cast Adam out of paradise, for one sin thou cast
the Angels out of heaven, for one sin thou destroyedst a world of men, and what
then shall become of me, that have committed a world of sins? -- [here pause a
while, and meditate on thy unworthiness.] O that I should be so foolish, so
brutish, so mad to commit these sins, these manifold sins! O that by these
sins I should break so holy a law, provoke so good and great a Majesty! What
shall I do, but remembering my evil ways, Ezekiel. 36.31.
even loath my self in my own sight (yea abhor my self in dust and ashes) for
my iniquities and my abominations? etc. -- For conclusion, thou may imitate
the Publican, who not daring to lift up his eyes, smote his breast, so do thou,
and sigh, Luke 18.13.
and say with him, O God be merciful to me a sinner.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. The third means to get into the new birth.
AFter Confession (which may well serve thee for another days work) the next
duty thou must labor for, is to seek for true sorrow and mourning for thy sins:
Seek thou must, and never leave seeking, till thou feel thy heart melt within
thee. To this purpose read some tracts of death, of judgment, of hell, of
Christ's passion, of the joys of heaven: Last of all (and I take it best of all)
resolve to set every day some time apart to beg it of the Lord: When Daniel set
himself to pray, the Lord came in to him, Dan. 9.3. When Peter had gone apart
to pray; and when Paul had prayed in the Temple, then the Lord came in to them,
Act. 10.6. and 22.17. And why may not I bid thee pray, as well as Peter bid
Simon Magus, yet being in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity? Act.
8.22, 23. and at the time appointed fall down on thy knees, spread thy
Catalogue, confess, accuse, judge, condemn thy self again; which done, beg, beg
of the Lord to give thee that soft heart he promised, Ezekiel. 36.26. Ezekiel. 36.26.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh. Say then to thy self, Is this the Lords promise? O Lord perform it to
my heart; take away my stony heart, give me an heart of flesh, a new heart, a
new spirit, etc. -- [here make thine own prayer, be not careful of words, only
let the words be the true voice of thy heart:] and the more to work softning,
thou may sob, and sigh, and beat thy breast, above all thou must pray, and
call, and cry with vehemence and fervency not to be uttered. When thou have
done, if the Lord do not yet hear thee, pray again the next day, and the next
day, yea put on this resolution, that thou will never leave praying till the
Lord hear thee in mercy, till he make thee to feel thy heart melt within thee,
yea (if it may be) till thou see thy Ut hoc modo confring as capita draconum
tuorum in aquis.
tears trickling down thy cheeks, because of thy offenses. The Lord will
(perhaps) hear thee at the first time, or at the second time; or if he do not,
persist thou, thy suit is just, and importunity will prevail; yea I can say,
thy desire to sorrow being resolute, it is a degree of godly sorrow it self,
and no doubt the Lord will increase it, if thou begst hard a while.

Sect. 2. The first reason for this sorrow.
THis must be done, first because without pangs no birth: Quid sunt dolores
parturientis nisi dolores poenitentis? (says Saint Austin) the pangs of a
penitent man are as the pangs of a woman: Aug. in Psalm. 48.
Now as there can be no birth without pains of travel going before, so neither
true repentance without some terrors of the law, and straits of conscience.
Romans 8.15.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, says the Apostle to
the Romans; and what is that? but to show us, they once did receive it; when?
but in the very first preparation to conversion: then it was that the Spirit of
God in the law did so bear witness unto them of their bondage, that it made
them to fear. And certainly thus it is with every man in his first conversion,
his contrition must be compungent, and vehement, bruising, breaking, renting
the heart, and feeling the throws (as a woman laboring of child) before there
can be a new birth, or the new creature be brought forth.

Sect. 3. The second reason for this sorrow.
AGain, without contrition no Christ; therefore it was that God first opened
the eyes of our first parents, to make them see and be sensible of their sin
and misery, Genesis 3.7, 15. Chrysostom. in c. 3 Matthew. hom. 11.
Genesis 3.7. before he promised Christ, verse. 15. therefore it was that John
Baptist (says Chrysostom) first thoroughly frighted the minds of his hearers
with the terror of judgment, and expectation of torment, and with the name of
an axe, and their rejection, and entertainment of other children, and by
doubling the punishment, to wit, of being hewn down, and cast into the fire;
and when he had thus every way tamed, and taken down their stubbornness, then
at length he makes mention of Christ. Why, then is Christ seasonably revealed
(says Musculus) when the hearts of men being soundly pierced by preaching
repentance, Musc. in Mat. c. 3. Sect. Tunc. accedit Jesus. Calvin in Esaias 61.
are possessed with a desire of his gracious righteousness. Or if you will hear
Calvin, To whom is Christ promised, but to them alone who are humbled and
confounded with the sense of their own sins? Certainly the first thing that
draws to Christ, is to consider our miserable estate without him; No man will
come to Christ except he be hungry; no man will take Christ's yoke upon him,
till he come to know and feel the weight of Satan's yoke; to this end therefore
must every man be broken with threats, and scourges, and lashes of conscience,
that so despairing of himself he may fly unto Christ.

Sect. 4. The third reason for this sorrow.
AGain, Iam. 4.10.
without hearty sorrow no spiritual comfort. We must first be humbled before
the Lord, and then he will lift us up. Christ indeed was anointed to preach
good tidings, but to whom? to the poor, to the brokenhearted, to the captives,
to them that are bound, Esaias 61.11.
to the bruised, Esaias 61.11. God pours not the oil of his mercy save into a
broken vessel, God never comforts thoroughly, save where he finds humiliation
and repentance for sin. Forbes on Revel. c. 14.
The word of God (says one) has three degrees of operation in the hearts of
his chosen: First, it falls to men's ears as the sound of many waters, a
mighty, great, and confused sound, and which commonly brings neither terror
nor joy, but yet a wondering, and acknowledgement of a strange force, and more
then humane power; this is that effect which many felt hearing Christ, when
they were astonished at his doctrine, as teaching with authority; Mar. 1.22,
27. Luke 4.32. John 7.46.
what manner doctrine is this? never man spoke like this man: The next effect is
the voice of thunder, which brings not only wonder, but fear also; not only
fills the ears with sound, and the heart with astonishment, but moreover
shakes and terrifieth the conscience: The third effect is the sound of
harping, while the word not only ravisheth with admiration, and strikes the
conscience with terror, but also lastly fills it with sweet peace and joy.
Now albeit the two first degrees may be without the last, yet none feel the
last, who have not in some degree felt both the first. He says true, in some
degree, though commonly the deeper is the sense of misery, the sweeter is the
sense of mercy. In our dead security before conversion (says another) God is
fain to let the law, sin, conscience, Satan, Boltons instructions for afflicted
consciences.
a deep sense of our abominable and cursed state loose upon us, and to kindle
the very fire of hell in our souls, that so we might be rouzed, and afterward
more sweetly and soundly raised and refreshed; for after the most toylsome
labor is the sweetest sleep, after the greatest tempests the stillest calms;
sanctified troubles and terrors establish the surest peace, and the shaking of
these winds makes the trees of Gods Eden take the better rooting.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. The means to be delivered out of the pangs of the new birth.
ANd now if (by Gods blessing) thou feel this sorrow and melting of heart,
the next thing thou must do is to seek for the remedy, which remedy consists of
these ingredients: First, A sight of Christ; secondly, A desire after Christ;
thirdly, A relying on Christ; fourthly, An obedience to Christ; fifthly, A
comfort in Christ sought for and obtained. Thou will say, these ingredients are
pearls indeed, but how should I procure them? I answer, by application of the
promises; and since every ingredient has its particular promises, I shall let
thee see them in order, only do thou apply them thy self; it is enough for the
Physician to prepare the medicine, thy own body must receive it; so in this
medicine it is, thou must apply it if thou will have soulshealth.

Sect. 2. The promises procuring a sight of Christ.
THe first step or ingredient that brings comfort to thy heavy soul, is the
sight of Christ: and to procure this sight, thou have these promises:

Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins.

Luke 2.10, 11. Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy that shall be to
all people, that is, that unto you is born this day in the city of David a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.

John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the
end that all that believe in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.

John 3.17. God sent not his Son into the world that he should condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved.

Romans 3.25. God has set forth Christ Jesus to be a reconciliation through
faith in his blood.

1 Cor. 1.30. Christ Jesus of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption.

1 Timothy 1.15. This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received,
that Christ Jesus came in^o the world to save sinners.

Heb. 13.12. Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood,
suffered without the gate.

1 John. 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for us
only, but also the sins of the whole world.

Revel. 5.8. Thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

All these tell thee, that as thou art a sinner, so thou have a Savior; only
do thou apply them, and certainly they will procure thee the first step, the
first ingredient of this remedy to thy misery, to wit, the sight of Christ.

Sect. 3. The promises procuring a desire after Christ.
THou may say, I see Christ, and I see that his person, and death, and
bloodshed, are precious and saving; but how may I make him mine? how may I
know that he is my Savior? I answer, thou must hunger and thirst after him;
this desire is the second step: and to provoke thee to this duty, consider of
these promises:

Esaias 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money,
and without price.

Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be filled.

John 7.37, 38. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and
cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; he that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water.

Revel. 21.6. I will give to him that is athirst, of the water of life freely.

Revel. 22.17. Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely.

Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts
for thee, my flesh longs greatly after thee, in a barren and dry land without
water.

Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him.

All these may provoke thee to thirst after Christ, that most sovereign, and
soul saving fountain, opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1.

Sect. 4. The promises procuring a relying on Christ.
YEt thou may say, I thirst indeed, but I dare not drink; I desire, but I
dare not come near, to lay hold on Christ: How so? I am (say thou) a most
vile, unworthy, wicked wretch, and my sins are of a scarlet, crimson die: True
it is; for thee to pretend part in Christ, wallowing yet in thy sins, for thee
to believe that Christ is thy righteousness, purposing yet to go on in the
practice, or allowance of any one known sin, it were a most cursed horrible
presumption indeed; but where all sin is a burden, every promise as a world of
gold, and the heart sincere for a new way, there a man may be bold: A man may?
yes, he must; if thou groanest under sin, if thou longest after Christ, apply
these promises, and they will force thee to lay hold upon the Rock, to take
Christ for thine own, to throw thy sinful soul upon the bleeding wounds of
Jesus, and to cast thy self with confidence into the bosom of his love.

First then, Boltons Instructions for afflicted conscience.
Take notice (says a Modern) that Jesus Christ keeps open house for all hungry
and thirsty souls.

Revel. 22.17. Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely. Or if open house will not fit without invitation,
hear him call;

Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Or if invitation will not fit without proclamation, hear him
proclaim:

Joh. 7.37. Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink: he that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
water. Or least thou should think thou must come to thy cost, and bring
somewhat in thy hand, hear how he doubles and trebbles his cry to the contrary:

Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money,
and without price. And yet lest thou say, I am so far from bringing any thing
in my hand, that I bring a world of wickedness in my heart, and my sins I fear
will hinder my acceptance, no (says he again)

Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts (and this is thy desire, thy case) and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
Or if all this will not do without a more solemn invitation, see then how the
Lord of heaven sends forth his Ambassadors to move thee, and entreat thee to
come in:

2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God. Or if he
cannot woo thee, lo he commands thee:

1 Ioh. 3.23. And this is the Commandment, that we should believe on the name
of his Son Jesus Christ. Or yet to drive thee to Christ, he not only commands,
but threatens:

Heb. 3.18. And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but
to them that believed not?

And what can he do more unto his Vineyard? First (to bid thee welcome) he keeps
open house; secondly, he invites; thirdly, he proclaims; fourthly, he calls
thee sans-fee, without money, or moneyworth; fifthly, he apologizeth; sixthly,
he sends; seventhly, he commands; eighthly, he threatens: Hear what mine
Author concludes from these premises; How cruel then is that man to his own
wounded conscience, who in his extreme spiritual thirst will not be drawn by
this eight-fold merciful cord, to drink his fill of the fountain of the water
of life, to cast himself with confidence and comfort into the arms of the Lord
Jesus? -- Yea, how is it possible, but that all, or some of these, should bring
in every broken heart to believe, and every one that is weary of his sins, to
rely upon the Lord of life for everlasting welfare?

Sect. 5. The promises procuring obedience to Christ.
ANd yet thou may say, I have cast my self on Christ, is this all I must do?
no, there is yet another step, he is not only to be thy Savior, but thy
husband, thou must love him, and serve him, and honor him, and obey him: thou
must endeavor not only for pardon of sin, and salvation from hell, but for
purity, new obedience, ability to do or suffer any thing for Christ. And to
provoke thee to this duty, consider of these texts:

Matthew. 7.21. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.

Matthew. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly
in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Matthew. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him take up his cross and follow
me.

2 Cor. 5.15. He dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them.

2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature, old things
are passed, behold all things are become new.

1 John 1.6, 7. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. But if we walk in the light, as he is
in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

1 John 2.5, 6. He that keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God
perfected, hereby know we that we are in him. He that says, he abides in him,
ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked.

1 John 3.6, 9. Whosoever abides in him, sins not. -- Whosoever is born of
God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God.

1 John 3.24. He that keeps his Commandments, dwells in him, and hereby we
know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.

1 John 5.18. We know that whosoever is born of God sins not, but he that is
begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

All these may invite thee to enter into the holy path, and to fight under
Christ's banner against the world, the flesh, and the Devil, unto thy lives end.

Sect. 6. The promises procuring comfort in Christ.
ONce more thou may say, I have been truly humbled with the sense of sin,
and sense of misery, and sorrow for sin; yea, I have seen, and thirsted, and
relied, and purposed universal obedience to my Savior, and yet no comfort
comes: it may be so, but have thou praised God for this work of wonder, the new
birth wrought in thee? If so, then is there another duty expected from thee,
right precious and pleasing unto God, and that is waiting: yet I could wish
thee address thy self to these precious promises, settle thy soul on them with
fixed meditation and fervent prayer, and where thou perceivest the condition of
the promises to be by Gods grace formed in thee, thou may safely assure thy
soul of so much favor, as is expressly contained in the promises.

Levit. 26.40, 41, 42, 44. If they shall confess their iniquity, -- If their
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, -- Then will I remember my Covenant, -- that I
might be their God, I am the Lord: the condition is to confess and be humbled;
and this if thou do, the Covenant is sure, the Lord is thy God.

Job 33.27, 28. If any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which is right,
and it profited me not; he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and
his life shall see the light. The condition is, If any say, I have sinned, if
thy heart say thus in sincerity and truth, the promise is sure, God will
deliver thy soul from hell, and thou shall see the light of heaven.

Psalm. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. The
condition is, a broken and a contrite heart for sin; and if thy heart be thus,
be sure God will not despise it.

Prove. 28.13. Whosoever confesses, and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy.
The condition is, to confess and forsake sin: and this if thou do, as sure as
God is God, thou shall have mercy.

Isa. 57.17. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones. The condition is, to be of a contrite and
humble spirit; and if thou art thus, God is true who has said it, he dwells in
thee, to revive thy spirit, and to revive thy heart.

Isa. 61.1. The Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he
has sent me to bind up the broken hearted. The condition is, to be meek and
broken hearted; and if this be thy case, then good tidings belong to thee, and
Christ is sent to bind up thy broken heart in the bundle of peace.

Jerem. 31.19, 20. Surely, after that I was turned, I repented (says Ephraim)
and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed; yea,
even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth -- Therefore
(says God) my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him,
says the Lord. The condition is to repent, to be ashamed, confounded for sin,
and if thy case be like Ephraims, God is the same to thee, his bowels yearn for
thee, he will surely have mercy on thee.

Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness. The
condition is, to hunger and thirst after the righteousness of Christ; and this
if thou do, then art thou blessed from the mouth of our Savior.

Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. The condition is to labor, and be heavy laden with sin; and if
thou art thus, Gods Word is sure, thou shall have rest spiritual and eternal.

Revel. 21.6. I will give unto him that is athirst, of the water of life
freely. The condition is to thirst after the heavenly streams of Gods favor,
and Christ's sovereign blood; and this if thou do, then have thou part in the
fountain of the water of life, that proceeds out of the throne of God, Revel.
22.1.
and of the Lamb, Revel. 22.1.

All these are so full of comfort, that if thou but crush them with the hand of
faith, they cannot but yield some juice of sweetness to thy afflicted soul.

Sect. 7. The means to apply the said promises.
I Said before, it was enough for me to prepare the medicine, it is thou must
apply it; yet if thou feel a backwardness to perform thy part, I shall tell
thee of some means to incite thee, and help thee onward to the performance of
this duty.

Take then the promises, and carry them (as thou did the Catalogue of thy
sins) into the presence of the Lord; and, fallen down on thy knees, beseech God
for thy Saviors sake to incline thine heart to believe those promises. If thou
have the repulse, pray again and again, yea resolve never to make prayer, but
to use this petition, that the Lord would please to let thee have some feeling
of the life of those promises; Some soul may object, I have no heart or spirit
to pray, yet use thy endeavor, and in thy endeavors God may come in; and
whenever thou feel any of them to be spirit and life to thee, whenever
thou feel (by a certain taste) the joys of the Holy Ghost to fall upon thee,
O happy man that ever thou wast born! then art thou (to thy own knowledge) new
born indeed: then have thou (without doubt) done this most glorious exercise of
passing through the new birth, and then have thou cause (as thou can not
choose) to sing and praise God day and night, world without end: Matthew. 5.4.
So true is that of Christ, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. Amen.

Sect. 8. The Conclusion.
HEre is an end, and to you to whom I have dedicated this work, my conclusion
is this: The year has now run his round since I first came amongst you, and
how the Lord has wrought by me you your selves know best: for my part, if I
did but know one poor soul amongst you truly converted by such a weak unworthy
instrument, I would ever think my self most happy in that soul, and richly
paid for my pains. I know it, neither Paul, nor Apollo can do this, except God
give the increase: howsoever, I must tell you, with Paul, my desires have been
this way, I have since my coming traveled of you, and traveled again, that
Christ might be formed in you. Gal. 4.19.
And what is the issue? once could the Lord say, Shall I bring to the birth,
Isa. 66.9.
and not cause to bring forth? and (to join issue with you) have I traveled of
you in birth, and not one of you brought forth? the Lord forbid. I confess
(beloved) I have received from you many kindenesses of love; now, for the Lords
sake do me this one kindeness more; give me at least one soul among you, that I
may give it unto God: O what a kindeness would you then do me! not all the
wealth in your Town, nor all the increase of your state, nor all you have, or
ever shall have, would do me so much good in the day of my Lord Jesus, as this
one boon I ask: then could I say, Lord, I have not lost the fruits of my labor
in this Town, see here the soul now shining in glory which I converted by thy
power; see here the soul of such a one, and such a one which through thy grace,
and my ministry were converted unto thee. If this were thus, why then
(beloved) you would bless me for ever, and I should bless you for ever, and we
should all bless God for ever, for this so gracious and so blessed a work. Now
the Lord of his goodness give you a sight of your sins, and a true sorrow for
sin, and if not before now, yet now, this day, the Lord this day set his print
and seal upon you.

The time draws on, and I have but a minute, a little time to speak to you; for
a farewell then, let these last words take a deeper impression in your hearts:
if you would do all I would have you do, I could wish no more, but that to this
humiliation or repentance, you would add charity or love: the first you owe to
God, and the second to your neighbor: by the first you might become new
creatures, by the second true Christians, like them in the Churches infancy, of
one mind, one heart, and one soul; sure it is not possible that we should have
forgiveness of sins, but that we must be of the communion of Saints. A thousand
pities it is to hear of the many factions in our Church, and Kingdoms, and
Towns, and Families, O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love it; and let us pray (as need we have too) for our own peace one with
another: You cannot come to a Communion, but you hear this lesson in the
invitation, You that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and be in
love and charity with your neighbors, etc. Here Is both repentance to God, and
Charity (nay more then charity, as we use the word commonly) even love of your
neighbors. For my part I wish that my very heart-blood could cement the
divisions of Reuben (for which are great thoughts of heart) in this Town, Judge.
5.15.
in this Church, in these Kingdoms. 2 Cor. 13.11.
I will say no more, but conclude with those words of the Apostle, Finally
brethren, fare ye well, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live
in peace, and the God of love and peace be with you for ever and ever.

FINIS.

